CHARTER
PREAMBLE
ARTICLE I INCORPORATION AND POWERS OF THE CITY
ARTICLE II FORM OF GOVERNMENT
ARTICLE III ELECTIVE OFFICES
ARTICLE IV APPOINTIVE OFFICES AND PERSONNEL
ARTICLE V ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS
ARTICLE VI FISCAL ADMINISTRATION
ARTICLE VII ELECTIONS
ARTICLE VIII MISCELLANEOUS

PREAMBLE
 

We, the people of the City of Huntington Beach, State of California believe fiscal responsibility and the prudent stewardship of public funds is essential for confidence in government, that ethics and integrity are the foundation of public trust and that just governance is built upon these values. Through the enactment of this Charter as the fundamental law of the City of Huntington Beach under the Constitution of the State of California, we do hereby exercise the privilege of retaining for ourselves, the benefits of local government, by enacting the laws, rules, regulations and procedures set forth herein pertaining to the governance and operation of our City.

 

It is incumbent upon those who govern and make decisions for and on behalf of the City of Huntington Beach to legally, as well as morally, abide by the provisions of this Charter, in its strictest sense, to ensure the continued success and well-being of our fair City.

ARTICLE I INCORPORATION AND POWERS OF THE CITY
Section 100. NAME.
        The municipal corporation now existing and known as the City of Huntington Beach shall remain and continue to exist as a municipal corporation under its present name of “City of Huntington Beach.”

 

Section 101. SEAL.
        The City shall have an official seal which may be changed from time to time by ordinance. The present official seal shall continue to be the official seal of the City until changed in the manner stated.

 

Section 102. BOUNDARIES.
        The boundaries of the City shall continue as now established until changed in the manner authorized by law.

 

Section 103. POWERS OF CITY.
        The City shall have the power to make and enforce all laws and regulations in respect to municipal affairs, subject only to such restrictions and limitations as may be provided in this Charter or in the Constitution of the State of California.

 

Section 104. CONSTRUCTION.
        The general grant of power to the City under this Charter shall be construed broadly in favor of the City. The specific provisions enumerated in this Charter are intended to be and shall be interpreted as limitations upon the general grant of power and shall be construed narrowly. If any provisions of this Charter, or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the remainder of the Charter and the application of such provision to other persons or circumstances, shall not be affected thereby.

 

Section 105. INTERGOVERNMENTAL RELATIONS.
        The City may exercise any of its powers or perform any of its functions and may participate in the financing thereof, jointly or in cooperation, by contract or otherwise, with any one or more states or civil divisions or agencies thereof, or the United States or any agency thereof.

ARTICLE II FORM OF GOVERNMENT
Section 200. COUNCIL-MANAGER FORM OF GOVERNMENT.
        The municipal government provided by this Charter shall be known as the Council-Manager form of government.

ARTICLE III ELECTIVE OFFICES
Section 300. CITY COUNCIL, ATTORNEY, CLERK AND TREASURER. TERMS.
        The elective officers of the City shall consist of a City Council of seven members, a City Clerk, a City Treasurer and a City Attorney, all to be elected from the City at large at the times and in the manner provided in this Charter and who shall serve for terms of four years and until their respective successors qualify. Subject to the provisions of this Charter, the members of the City Council in office at the time this Charter takes effect shall continue in office until the expiration of their respective terms and until their successors are elected and qualified. Four members of the City Council shall be elected at the general municipal election held in 1966, and each fourth year thereafter. Three members of the City Council shall be elected at the general municipal election held in 1968, and each fourth year thereafter. No person shall be elected as a member of the City Council for more than two consecutive terms and no person who has been a member for more than two years of a term to which some other person was elected a member shall be elected to the City Council more than one further consecutive term. Subject to the provisions of this Charter, the City Clerk, City Treasurer and City Attorney in office at the time this Charter takes effect shall continue in office until the expiration of their respective terms and the qualification of their successors. A City Clerk and City Treasurer shall be elected at the general municipal election held in 1968, and each fourth year thereafter. A City Attorney shall be elected in 1966, and each fourth year thereafter.

 

        The term of each member of the City Council, the City Clerk, the City Treasurer and the City Attorney shall commence on the first Monday following the certification of the election. Ties in voting among candidates for office shall be settled by the casting of lots.

 

        If no candidate meets the qualifications for office of the City Clerk, City Treasurer, or City Attorney, the City Council shall fill that position by appointment until the next municipal general election in which a qualified candidate is elected.

 

Section 301. POWERS VESTED IN CITY COUNCIL.
        All powers of the City shall be vested in the City Council except as otherwise provided in this Charter.

 

Section 302. COMPENSATION.
        The members of the City Council including the Mayor shall receive as compensation for their services as such a monthly salary in the sum of One Hundred Seventy-five Dollars per month. In addition, each member of the City Council shall receive reimbursement on order of the City Council for Council authorized traveling and other expenses when on official duty upon submission of itemized expense accounts therefor. In addition, members shall receive such reasonable and adequate amounts as may be established by ordinance, which amounts shall be deemed to be reimbursement to them of other routine and ordinary expenses, losses and costs imposed upon them by virtue of their serving as City Councilpersons.

 

Section 303. MEETINGS AND LOCATION.
 

        (a)    Regular Meetings. The City Council shall hold regular meetings at least twice each month at such time as it shall fix by ordinance or resolution and may adjourn or re-adjourn any regular meeting to a date and hour certain which shall be specified in the order of adjournment and when so adjourned each adjourned meeting shall be a regular meeting for all purposes. If the hour to which a meeting is adjourned is not stated in the order of adjournment, such meeting shall be held at the hour for holding regular meetings. If at any time any regular meeting falls on a holiday such regular meeting shall be held on the next business day.

 

        (b)    Special Meetings. A special meeting may be called at any time by the Mayor, or by a majority of the members of the City Council, by written notice to each member of the City Council and to each local newspaper of general circulation, radio or television station requesting notice in writing. Such notice must be delivered personally or by mail at least twenty-four hours before the time of such meeting as specified in the notice.

 

        The call and notice shall specify the time and place of the special meeting and the business to be transacted. No other business shall be considered at such meeting. If any person entitled to such written notice files a written waiver of notice with the City Clerk, it may be dispensed with. This notice requirement shall be considered fulfilled as to any person who is actually present at the meeting at the time it convenes. In the event of an emergency affecting the public peace, health or safety, a special meeting may be called as provided in this section with less than twenty-four hours written notice by the Mayor Pro Tem in the Mayor’s absence or by any member of the City Council in the absence of both the Mayor and Mayor Pro Tem provided that the nature of the emergency is set forth in the minutes of the meeting.

 

        (c)    Place of Meetings. All regular meetings shall be held in the Council Chambers of the City or in such place within the City to which any such meeting may be adjourned. If, by reason of fire, flood or other emergency, it shall be unsafe to meet in the place designated, the meetings may be held for the duration of the emergency at such place within the City as is designated by the Mayor, or, if he should fail to act, by a majority of the members of the City Council.

 

        (d)    Open Meetings. All regular and special meetings of the City Council shall be open and public, and all persons shall be permitted to attend such meetings, except that the provisions of this section shall not apply to executive sessions. Subject to the rules governing the conduct of City Council meetings, no person shall be denied the right to be heard by the City Council.

 

        (e)    Dissemination of Information. The City Council shall adopt rules to ensure thorough and timely dissemination of information via current technology by resolution.

 

Section 304. QUORUMS, PROCEEDINGS AND RULES OF ORDER.
 

        (a)    Quorum. A majority of the members of the City Council shall constitute a quorum to do business but a lesser number may adjourn from time to time. In the absence of all the members of the City Council from any regular meeting or adjourned regular meeting, the City Clerk may declare the same adjourned to a stated day and hour. The City Clerk shall cause written notice of a meeting adjourned by less than a quorum or by the City Clerk to be delivered personally or by mail to each Council member at least twenty-four hours before the time to which the meeting is adjourned, or such notice may be dispensed with in the same manner as specified in this Charter for dispensing with notice of special meetings of the City Council.

 

        (b)    Proceedings. The City Council shall judge the qualification of its members as set forth by the Charter. It shall judge all election returns. Each member of the City Council shall have the power to administer oaths and affirmations in any investigation or proceeding pending before the City Council. The City Council shall have the power and authority to compel the attendance of witnesses, to examine them under oath and to compel the production of evidence before it. Subpoenas shall be issued in the name of the City and be attested by the City Clerk. They shall be served and complied with in the same manner as subpoenas in civil actions. Disobedience of such subpoenas, or the refusal to testify (upon other than constitutional grounds), shall constitute a misdemeanor, and shall be punishable in the same manner as violations of this Charter are punishable. The City Council shall have control of all legal business and proceedings and all property of the legal department, and may employ other attorneys to take charge of or may contract for any prosecution, litigation or other legal matter or business.

 

        (c)    Rules of Order. The City Council shall establish rules for the conduct of its proceedings and evict or prosecute any member or other person for disorderly conduct at any of its meetings. Upon adoption of any ordinance, resolution, or order for payment of money, or upon the demand of any member, the City Clerk shall call the roll and shall cause the ayes and noes taken on the question to be entered in the minutes of the meeting.

 

Section 305. PRESIDING OFFICER.
        At the Council meeting at which any Council member is installed following any general or special municipal election, and at any time when there is a vacancy in the office of Mayor, the City Council shall meet and shall elect one of its members as its presiding officer, who shall have the title of Mayor. The Mayor may make and second motions and shall have a voice and vote in all its proceedings. The Mayor shall be the official head of the City for all ceremonial purposes; shall have the primary but not the exclusive responsibility for interpreting the policies, programs and needs of the City government to the people, and as occasion requires, may inform the people of any major change in policy or program; and shall perform such other duties consistent with the office as may be prescribed by this Charter or as may be imposed by the City Council. The Mayor shall serve in such capacity at the pleasure of the City Council.

 

Section 306. MAYOR PRO TEMPORE.
        The City Council shall also designate one of its members as Mayor Pro Tempore, who shall serve in such capacity at the pleasure of the City Council. The Mayor Pro Tempore shall perform the duties of the Mayor during the Mayor’s absence or disability or at the Mayor’s request.

 

Section 307. NON-INTERFERENCE WITH ADMINISTRATION.
        Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, no member of the City Council shall order, directly or indirectly, the appointment by the City Manager, or by any of the department heads in administrative service of the City, of any person to any office or employment, or removal therefrom. Except for the purpose of investigation and inquiry, the members of the City Council shall deal with the administrative service under the jurisdiction of the City Manager solely through the City Manager, and no member of the City Council shall give orders to any subordinate of the City Manager, either publicly or privately.

 

        No elected department head or staff of the Office of the elected department head shall be a member of the management negotiation team for the purposes of negotiations of memorandums of understanding with the employee bargaining units.

 

Section 308. OFFICIAL BONDS.
        The City Council shall fix by ordinance or resolution the amounts and terms of the official bonds of all officials or employees who are required by this Charter or by ordinance to give such bonds. All bonds shall be executed by responsible corporate surety, shall be approved as to form by the City Attorney, and shall be filed with the City Clerk. Premiums on official bonds shall be paid by the City. A blanket bond may be used if it provides the same protection as the required separate bond would provide.

 

        In all cases wherein an employee of the City is required to furnish a faithful performance bond, there shall be no personal liability upon, or any right to recover against, the employee’s superior officer or other officer or employee or the bond of the latter, unless such superior officer, or other officer or employee is a party to the act or omission, or has conspired in the wrongful act directly or indirectly causing the loss.

 

Section 309. CITY ATTORNEY. POWERS AND DUTIES.
        To become and remain eligible for City Attorney the person elected or appointed shall have graduated from a law school accredited by the American Bar Association, be an attorney at law, duly licensed as such under the laws of the State of California, shall have been engaged in the practice of law in this State for at least five years prior to their election or appointment. The City Attorney shall have the power and may be required to:

 

        (a)    Represent and advise the City Council and all City officers in all matters of law pertaining to their offices.

 

        (b)    Prosecute on behalf of the people any or all criminal cases arising from violation of the provisions of this Charter or of City ordinances and such state misdemeanors as the City has the power to prosecute, unless otherwise provided by the City Council.

 

        (c)    Represent and appear for the City in any or all actions or proceedings in which the City is concerned or is a party, and represent and appear for any City officer or employee, or former City officer or employee, in any or all civil actions or proceedings in which such officer or employee is concerned or is a party for any act arising out of their employment or by reason of their official capacity.

 

        (d)    Attend all regular meetings of the City Council, unless excused, and give their advice or opinion orally or in writing whenever requested to do so by the City Council or by any of the boards or officers of the City.

 

        (e)    Approve in writing the form of all contracts made by and all bonds and insurance given to the City.

 

        (f)    Prepare any and all proposed ordinances and City Council resolutions and amendments thereto.

 

        (g)    Devote such time to the duties of their office and at such place as may be specified by the City Council.

 

        (h)    Perform such legal functions and duties incident to the execution of the foregoing powers as may be necessary.

 

        (i)     Surrender to their successor all books, papers, files, and documents pertaining to the City’s affairs.

 

        (j)     Assist and cooperate with the City Manager consistent with Section 403 of the City Charter.

 

        (k)    Provide advice related to compliance with the City Charter to all elected and appointed officials of the City.

 

Section 310. CITY CLERK. POWERS AND DUTIES.
        To become and remain eligible for City Clerk, the person elected or appointed shall have a Bachelor’s Degree in business, public administration, or a related field, and hold a certification as a Municipal Clerk or obtain such certification within the first three years in office. The City Clerk shall have the power and shall be required to:

 

        (a)    Attend all meetings of the City Council, unless excused, and be responsible for the recording and maintaining of a full and true record of all of the proceedings of the City Council in records that shall bear appropriate titles and be devoted to such purpose.

 

        (b)    Maintain separate records, in which shall be recorded respectively all ordinances and resolutions, with the certificate of the Clerk annexed to each thereof stating the same to be the original or a correct copy, and as to an ordinance requiring publication, stating that the same has been published or posted in accordance with this Charter.

 

        (c)    Maintain separate records of all written contracts and official bonds.

 

        (d)    Keep all records in their possession properly indexed and open to public inspection when not in actual use.

        (e)    Be the custodian of the seal of the City.

 

        (f)    Administer oaths or affirmations, take affidavits and depositions pertaining to the affairs and business of the City and certify copies of official records.

 

        (g)    Be ex officio Assessor, unless the City Council, has availed itself, or does in the future avail itself, of the provisions of the general laws of the State relative to the assessment of property and the collection of City taxes by county officers, or unless the City Council by ordinance provides otherwise.

 

        (h)    Have charge of all City elections.

 

        (i)     Perform such other duties consistent with this Charter as may be required by ordinance or resolution of the City Council.

 

        (j)     Assist and cooperate with the City Manager consistent with Section 403 of the City Charter.

 

        The City Clerk may, subject to the approval of the City Council, appoint such deputy or deputies to assist them or act for them, at such salaries or compensation as the Council may by ordinance or resolution prescribe.

 

Section 311. CITY TREASURER. POWERS AND DUTIES.
        To become and remain eligible for City Treasurer, the person elected or appointed shall have a minimum of five years of financial and/or treasury experience, and have either:

 

        A Master’s Degree in accounting, finance, business, or public administration; or

 

        A Bachelor’s Degree in accounting, finance, business, or public administration with certification by the California Municipal Treasurer’s Association, or their successor, within three years of election or appointment.

 

        The City Treasurer shall have the power and shall be required to:

 

        (a)    Receive on behalf of the City all taxes, assessments, license fees and other revenues of the City, or for the collection of which the City is responsible, and receive all taxes or other money receivable by the City from the County, State or Federal governments, or from any court, or from any office, department or agency of the City.

 

        (b)    Have and keep custody of all public funds belonging to or under control of the City or any office, department or agency of the City government and deposit or cause to be deposited all funds coming into their hands in such depository as may be designated by resolution of the City Council, or, if no such resolution be adopted, then in such depository designated in writing by the City Manager, and in compliance with all of the provisions of the State Constitution and laws of the State governing the handling, depositing and securing of public funds.

 

        (c)    Pay out moneys only on proper orders or warrants in the manner provided for in this Charter.

        (d)    Prepare and submit to the Director of Finance monthly written reports of all receipts, disbursements and fund balances, and shall file copies of such reports with the City Manager and City Council.

 

        (e)    Perform such other duties consistent with this Charter as may be required by ordinance or resolution of the City Council.

 

        (f)    Assist and cooperate with the City Manager consistent with Section 403 of the City Charter.

 

        The City Treasurer may, subject to the approval of the City Council, appoint such deputy or deputies to assist them or act for them, at such salaries or compensation as the Council may by ordinance or resolution prescribe.

 

Section 312. VACANCIES, FORFEITURES AND REPLACEMENT.
 

        (a)    Vacancies. A vacancy in the City Council or in any other office designated as elective by this Charter, from whatever cause arising, shall be filled by appointment by the City Council.

 

        (b)    Forfeiture. If a member of the City Council is absent from all regular meetings of the City Council for a period of thirty consecutive days from and after the last regular City Council meeting attended by such member, unless by permission of the City Council expressed in its official minutes, the office shall become vacant. If an elected City officer pleads guilty or no contest to or is convicted of a felony or any crime of moral turpitude, or ceases to be an elector of the City, the office shall become vacant. The City Council shall declare the existence of such vacancy. Any elective officer of the City who shall accept or retain any other elective public office, except as provided in this Charter, shall be deemed thereby to have vacated the office under the City Government.

 

        (c)    Replacement. In the event it shall fail to fill a vacancy by appointment within sixty days after such office shall become vacant, the City Council shall forthwith cause an election to be held to fill such vacancy for the remainder of the unexpired term.

 

Section 313. CONFLICT OF INTEREST, NEPOTISM.
 

        (a)    Conflict of Interest. The City Council shall adopt or approve rules and regulations regulating conflicts of interest and promoting fair dealing in all City business.

 

        (b)    Nepotism. The City Council shall not appoint to a salaried position under the City government any person who is a relative by blood or marriage within the third degree of any one or more of the members of such City Council, nor shall the City Manager or any department head or other officer having appointive power appoint any relative of such person or of any Council member within such degree to any such position.

 

        This provision shall not affect the employment or promotional status of a person who has attained a salaried position with the City prior to the existence of a situation contemplated by this provision; however, Council members or officers with appointive powers in such a situation shall disqualify themselves from all decisions affecting the employment and promotional status of such person.

ARTICLE IV APPOINTIVE OFFICES AND PERSONNEL
Section 400. CITY MANAGER. COMPOSITION, TERM, ELIGIBILITY, REMOVAL.
 

        (a)    Composition. There shall be a City Manager who shall be the chief administrative officer of the City.

 

        (b)    Term. The City Manager shall be appointed by the affirmative vote of at least a majority of the members of the City Council and shall serve at the pleasure of the City Council; provided, however, that the person occupying the office shall not be removed from office except as herein provided.

 

        (c)    Eligibility. The City Manager shall be chosen on the basis of executive and administrative qualifications, with special reference to actual experience in and knowledge of accepted practice as regards the duties of the office as herein set forth. No person shall be eligible to be appointed City Manager or Acting City Manager while serving as a member of the City Council nor within one year following the termination of membership on the City Council.

 

        (d)    Removal. The City Manager shall not be removed from office during or within a period of ninety days next succeeding any municipal election at which a member of the City Council is elected. At any other time the City Manager may be removed only at a regular meeting of the City Council and upon the affirmative vote of a majority of the members of the City Council. At least thirty days prior to the effective date of removal, the City Manager shall be furnished with a written notice stating the Council’s intentions and, if requested by the City Manager, the reasons therefor. Within seven days after receipt of such notice, the City Manager may by written notification to the City Clerk request a public hearing before the City Council, in which event the Council shall fix a time for a public hearing which shall be held at its regular meeting place before the expiration of the thirty-day period above referred to. The City Manager shall appear and be heard at such hearing. After furnishing the City Manager with written notice of the intended removal, the City Council may suspend the City Manager from duty, but his compensation shall continue until removal as herein provided. In removing the City Manager, the City Council shall use its uncontrolled discretion and its action shall be final and shall not depend upon any particular showing or degree of proof at the hearing, the purpose of which is to allow the City Council and the City Manager to present to each other and to the public all pertinent facts prior to the final action of removal.

 

Section 401. POWERS AND DUTIES.
        Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, the City Manager shall be responsible to the City Council for the proper administration of all affairs of the City. Without limiting this general grant of powers and responsibilities, the City Manager shall have the power and be required to:

 

        (a)    Appoint, promote, demote, suspend or remove department heads, officers and employees of the City except elective officers and the Chief of Police. The Chief of Police shall not be appointed or removed until the City Manager shall first have reviewed such appointment or removal with the City Council and have received approval for such appointment or removal by a majority vote of the full City Council.

 

        (b)    Prepare the budget annually, submit it to the City Council, and be responsible for its administration upon adoption.

 

        (c)    Prepare and submit to the City Council as of the end of each fiscal year, a complete report on the finances of the City, and annually or more frequently, a current report of the principal administrative activities of the City.

 

        (d)    Keep the City Council advised of the financial condition and future needs of the City and make such recommendations as may seem desirable.

 

        (e)    Maintain a centralized purchasing system for all City offices, departments and agencies.

 

        (f)    Prepare, administer and enforce rules and regulations recommended to and adopted by the City Council governing the contracting for, purchase, inspection, storage, inventory, distribution and disposal of all supplies, materials and equipment required by any office, department or agency of the City government.

 

        (g)    Be responsible for the compliance by the City with the laws of the State pertaining to the City, the provisions of this Charter and the ordinances, franchises and rights of the City.

 

        Subject to policy established by the City Council, exercise control of all administrative offices and departments of the City and of all appointive officers and employees, and prescribe such general rules and regulations as deemed necessary or proper for the general conduct of the administrative offices and departments of the City under their jurisdiction.

 

        (h)    Perform such other duties consistent with this Charter as may be required by the City Council.

 

Section 402. ACTING CITY MANAGER.
        During any temporary absence or disability of the City Manager, the City Manager shall appoint one of the other officers or department heads of the City to serve as Acting City Manager. In the event the City Manager fails to make such appointment, such appointment may be made by the City Council.

 

Section 403. PERSONNEL.
        In addition to the City Council, a City Clerk, a City Treasurer, a City Attorney and City Manager, the officers and employees of the City shall consist of such other officers, assistants, deputies and employees as the City Council may provide by ordinance or resolution. The City Council shall establish such reasonable compensation and fringe benefits as are appropriate by ordinance or resolution for such offices, officials and employees except as herein provided.

 

        The City Council shall maintain by ordinance a comprehensive personnel system for the City. The City Manager and any officers designated as elective by the Charter shall be exempt. The system shall consist of the establishment of minimum standards of employment and qualifications for the various classes of employment and procedures to be followed in advancement, demotion, suspension and discharge of employees included within the system, as the City Council shall determine to be for the best interest of the public service. The ordinance shall designate the appointive officers and employees who shall be included within the system. By subsequent ordinances the City Council may amend the system or the list of appointive officers and employees included within the system. The system shall comply with all other provisions of this Charter.

 

        It shall be the duty of all department heads, whether appointed or elected, to assist and cooperate with the City Manager in administering the affairs of the City in the most efficient, fiscally responsible, and harmonious manner consistent with the duties as prescribed by law, City Charter, or by ordinance.

 

Section 404. RETIREMENT SYSTEM.
        The City shall participate in a retirement system.

 

Section 405. BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES.
        The City Council shall establish such boards, commissions and committees as are deemed necessary for the orderly functioning of the City. All such boards, commissions and committees shall report directly to the City Council.

ARTICLE V ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS
Section 500. REGULAR ORDINANCES. ENACTMENT, ADOPTION, PUBLICATION, AMENDMENT, WHEN EFFECTIVE AND CODIFICATION.
 

        (a)    Enactment. In addition to such other acts of the City Council as are required by this Charter to be taken by ordinance, every act of the City Council establishing a fine or other penalty, or granting a franchise, shall be by ordinance. The enacting clause of all ordinances shall be substantially as follows: “The City Council of the City of Huntington Beach does ordain as follows:” No order for the payment of money shall be adopted or made at other than a regular or adjourned regular meeting. Upon introduction, an ordinance shall be read by title only. Unless a higher vote is required by other provisions of this Charter, the affirmative vote of at least four of the City Council shall be required for the enactment of any ordinance or for the making or approving of any order for the payment of money. All ordinances shall be signed by the Mayor and attested by the City Clerk.

 

        (b)    Adoption. A regular ordinance shall be adopted only at a regular or adjourned regular meeting held no less than five days after its introduction. In the event that any ordinance is altered after its introduction, it shall be finally adopted only at a regular or adjourned regular meeting held no less than five days after the date it was so altered. The correction of typographical or clerical errors shall not constitute the making of an alteration within the meaning of the foregoing sentence.

 

        (c)    Publication. The City Clerk shall cause each ordinance to be posted in three places designated by the City Council within the City and to be published by title with a brief summary at least once within fifteen days after its adoption in a daily, semiweekly or weekly newspaper, published in the County or the City and circulated in the City, which is selected by the City Council for that purpose. Current technology shall be used to ensure the widest possible dissemination.

 

        (d)    Amendment. The amendment of any section or subsection of an ordinance may be accomplished solely by the re-enactment of such section or subsection at length, as amended.

        (e)    When Effective. Every ordinance shall become effective thirty days from and after the date of its adoption, except the following, which shall take effect upon adoption:

 

(1)    An ordinance calling or otherwise relating to an election;

 

(2)    An improvement proceeding ordinance adopted under some special law or procedural ordinance relating thereto;

 

(3)    An ordinance declaring the amount of money necessary to be raised by taxation, or fixing the rate of property taxation, or levying the annual tax upon property.

 

(4)    An emergency ordinance adopted in the manner provided in this Charter.

 

        (f)    Codification. Detailed regulations pertaining to any subject and comprehensive codifications of valid ordinances may be adopted by reference, with the same effect as an ordinance, in the manner set forth herein; however, such regulations and codifications need not be published in the manner required for other ordinances, but not less than three copies thereof shall be filed for use and examination by the public in the office of the City Clerk prior to adoption. Ordinances codified shall be repealed as of the effective date of the codification. Amendments to the code shall be enacted by ordinance.

 

Section 501. EMERGENCY ORDINANCES.
        Any ordinance declared by the City Council to be necessary as an emergency measure for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health, or safety, and containing a statement of the reasons for its urgency, may be adopted in the manner provided in Section 500 except that such emergency ordinance may be introduced, enacted and adopted at one and the same regular or special meeting and shall take effect immediately upon adoption if passed by at least five affirmative votes. An emergency ordinance shall expire automatically after 120 days.

 

Section 502. RESOLUTIONS.
        The City Council may act by resolution or minute order in all actions not required by this Charter to be taken by ordinance.

 

Section 503. PUBLISHING OF LEGAL NOTICES.
        The City Council shall cause to be published all legal notices and other matters required to be published by law in a daily, semiweekly or weekly newspaper published in the County or the City and circulated in the City which is selected by the City Council for that purpose and using current technology. No defect or irregularity in proceedings taken under this section shall invalidate any publication where it is otherwise in conformity with this Charter or law or ordinance.

ARTICLE VI FISCAL ADMINISTRATION
Section 600. FISCAL YEAR.
        The fiscal year of the City shall be as set forth by resolution of the City Council.

 

Section 601. ANNUAL BUDGET, PREPARATION BY THE CITY MANAGER.
        At such date as the City Manager shall determine, each board or commission and each department head shall furnish to the City Manager, personally, or through the Director of Finance, estimates of the department’s, board’s or commission’s revenue and expenditures for the ensuing fiscal year, detailed in such manner as may be prescribed by the City Manager. In preparing the proposed budget, the City Manager shall review the estimates, hold conferences thereon with the respective department heads, boards or commissions as necessary, and may revise the estimates as may be deemed advisable.

 

Section 602. ANNUAL BUDGET. SUBMISSION TO THE CITY COUNCIL.
        The City Manager shall submit the proposed budget to the City Council at least thirty days prior to the beginning of each fiscal year. After reviewing the proposed budget and making such revisions as it may deem advisable, the City Council shall hold a public hearing thereon at least fifteen days prior to the beginning of each fiscal year and shall cause to be published a notice thereof not less than ten days prior to said hearing. Copies of the proposed budget shall be available for inspection by the public in the office of the City Clerk at least ten days prior to said hearing.

 

Section 603. ANNUAL BUDGET. PUBLIC HEARING.
        At the time so advertised or at any time to which such public hearing shall from time to time be adjourned, the City Council shall hold a public hearing on the proposed budget, at which interested persons desiring to be heard shall be given such opportunity.

 

Section 604. ANNUAL BUDGET. FURTHER CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION.
        At the conclusion of the public hearing the City Council shall further consider the proposed budget and make any revisions thereof that it may deem advisable and on or before the last day of the fiscal year it shall adopt the budget with revisions, if any, by the affirmative vote of at least a majority of the total members of the Council. Upon final adoption, the budget shall be in effect for the ensuing fiscal year. Copies thereof, certified by the City Clerk, shall be filed with the City Manager, Director of Finance, City Treasurer and the person retained by the City Council to perform the post audit function, and a further copy shall be placed, and shall remain on file in the office of the City Clerk where it shall be available for public inspection. The budget so certified shall be reproduced and copies made available for the use of the public and of departments, offices and agencies of the City.

 

Section 605. ANNUAL BUDGET APPROPRIATIONS.
        From the effective date of the budget, the several amounts stated therein as proposed expenditures shall be and become appropriated to the several departments, offices and agencies for the respective objects and purposes therein named; provided, however, that the City Manager may transfer funds from one object or purpose to another within the same department, office or agency. All appropriations shall lapse at the end of the fiscal year to the extent that they shall not have been expended or lawfully encumbered.

 

        At any public meeting after the adoption of the budget, the City Council may amend or supplement the budget by motion adopted by the affirmative vote of at least a majority of the total members of the City Council.

 

Section 606. DETERMINATION OF CITY TAX RATE.
        The City Council shall prescribe by ordinance for the assessment, levy and collection of taxes upon property which is taxable for municipal purposes. If the City Council fails to fix the rate and levy taxes on or before August 31 in any year, the rate for the next preceding fiscal year shall thereupon be automatically adopted and a tax at such rate shall be deemed to have been levied on all taxable property in the City for the current fiscal year.

 

Section 607. TAX LIMITS.
 

        (a)    The City Council shall not levy a property tax for municipal purposes in excess of One Dollar annually on each One Hundred Dollars of the assessed value of taxable property in the City, except as otherwise provided in this section, unless authorized by the affirmative vote of a majority of the electors voting on a proposition to increase such levy at any election at which the question of such additional levy for municipal purposes is submitted to the electors. The number of years that such additional levy is to be made shall be specified in such proposition.

 

        (b)    There shall be levied and collected at the same time and in the same manner as other property taxes for municipal purposes are levied and collected, as additional taxes not subject to the above limitation, if no other provision for payment thereof is made:

 

1.     A tax sufficient to meet all liabilities of the City of principal and interest of all bonds and judgments due and unpaid, or to become due during the ensuing fiscal year, which constitute general obligations of the City; and

 

2.     A tax sufficient to meet all obligations of the City for the retirement system in which the City participates, due and unpaid or to become due during the ensuing fiscal year.

 

        (c)    Special levies, in addition to the above and not subject to the above limitation, may be made annually, based on City Council approved estimates, for the following specific purposes, but not to exceed the following respective limits for those purposes for which limits are herein set forth, to wit: parks and recreation and human services not to exceed $0.20 per One Hundred Dollars; Libraries not to exceed $0.15 per One Hundred Dollars; promotional interests and cultural affairs not to exceed $0.07 per One Hundred Dollars; and civil defense and disaster preparedness not to exceed $0.03 per One Hundred Dollars. The proceeds of any special levy shall be used for no other purpose than that specified.

 

Section 608. VOTE REQUIRED FOR TAX MEASURES.
        No tax, property tax, or other measure whose principal purpose is the raising of revenue, or any increase in the amount thereof, shall be levied, enacted or established except by ordinance adopted by the affirmative vote of at least five (5) members of the City Council; provided, however, that any tax levied or collected pursuant to Section 607(b) of this Charter shall be exempt from the minimum voting requirement of this section.

 

        This section shall not apply to any license, permit, or any other fee or charge whose principal purpose is to pay or reimburse the City for the cost of performing any regulatory function of the City under its police power in connection with the City’s duty to preserve or maintain the public peace, health, safety and welfare.

 

        This section shall not apply to any user or service fee or charge provided such fee or charge is directly related to such use or service, is charged to the user or person receiving such service, and is to pay or reimburse the City for the costs of providing such use or service.

 

        This section shall not apply to any fee or charge relating to any franchise or proprietary function of the City.

 

Section 609. REAL ESTATE TRANSFER TAX.
        The City Council shall not levy a tax on the transfer or conveyance of any interest in real property unless authorized by the affirmative vote of a majority of the electors voting on a proposition submitted to the electors to authorize such tax at a general or special election.

 

Section 610. BONDED DEBT LIMIT.
        The City shall not incur an indebtedness evidenced by general obligation bonds which shall in the aggregate exceed the sum of 12 percent of the total assessed valuation, for purposes of City taxation, of all the real and personal property within the City.

 

        No bonded indebtedness which shall constitute a general obligation of the City may be created unless authorized by the affirmative vote of the majority required by law of the electors voting on such proposition at any election at which the question is submitted to the electors.

 

Section 611. REVENUE BONDS.
        Bonds which are payable only out of such revenues, other than taxes, as may be specified in such bonds, may be issued when the City Council by ordinance shall have established a procedure for the issuance of such bonds. Such bonds, payable only out of revenues, shall not constitute an indebtedness or general obligation of the City. No such bonds payable out of revenues shall be issued without the assent of the majority of the voters voting upon the proposition for issuing the same at an election at which such proposition shall have been duly submitted to the registered voters of the City.

 

        It shall be competent for the City to make contracts and covenants for the benefit of the holders of any such bonds payable only from revenues and which shall not constitute a general obligation of the City for the establishment of a fund or funds, for the maintaining of adequate rates or charges, for restrictions upon further indebtedness payable out of the same fund or revenues, for restrictions upon transfer out of such fund, and other appropriate covenants. Money placed in any such special fund for the payment of principal and/or interest on any issue of such bonds or to ensure the application thereof to a specific purpose shall not be expended for any other purpose whatever except for the purpose for which such special funds were established and shall be deemed segregated from all other funds of the City and reserved exclusively for the purpose for which such special fund was established until the purpose of its establishment shall have been fully accomplished.

 

Section 612. PUBLIC UTILITIES AND PARKS AND BEACHES.
 

        (a)    No public utility or park or beach or portion thereof now or hereafter owned or operated by the City shall be sold, leased, exchanged or otherwise transferred or disposed of unless authorized by the affirmative votes of at least a majority of the total membership of the City Council and by the affirmative vote of at least a majority of the electors voting on such proposition at a general or special election at which such proposition is submitted.

 

        (b)    No golf course, driving range, road, building over three thousand square feet in floor area nor structure costing more than $161,000.00 may be built on or in any park or beach or portion thereof now or hereafter owned or operated by the City unless authorized by the affirmative votes of at least a majority of the total membership of the City Council and by the affirmative vote of at least a majority of the electors voting on such proposition at a general or special election at which such proposition is submitted after the appropriate environmental assessment, conceptual cost estimate, and reasonable project description has been completed and widely disseminated to the public. Effective January 1, 2011, and each year thereafter, the maximum cost will be adjusted by the Consumer Price Index for the Los Angeles-Riverside-Orange County area.

 

        (c)    Section 612(a) and 612(b) shall not apply;

 

(1)    to libraries or piers;

 

(2)    to any lease, franchise, concession agreement or other contract where;

-  the contract is to perform an act or provide a service in a public park or beach AND

-  such act was being performed or service provided at the same location prior to January 1, 1989 AND

-  the proposed lease, franchise, concession agreement or other contract would not increase the amount of parkland or beach dedicated to or used by the party performing such act or providing such service.

 

(3)    to aboveground public works utility structures under 3,000 square feet;

 

(4)    to underground public works utility structures if park or beach use is not impeded;

 

(5)    to any public works construction, maintenance or repair mandated by state or federal law that does not negatively impact recreational opportunities; or

 

(6)    to renewable energy projects that do not negatively impact recreational opportunities.

 

        (d)    If any section, subsection, part, subpart, paragraph, clause or phrase of this amendment, or any amendment or revision of this amendment, is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional, the remaining sections, subsections, parts, subparts, paragraphs, clauses or phrases shall not be affected but shall remain in full force and effect.

 

Section 613. EXECUTION OF CONTRACTS.
        Except as hereinafter provided, the City shall be bound by a contract only if it is made in writing, approved by the City Council and signed on behalf of the City by the Mayor and City Clerk or by a City officer designated by the City Council and only upon the direction of the City Council. Exceptions to this procedure are as follows:

 

        (a)    By ordinance or resolution the City Council may authorize the City Manager or other officer to bind the City, with or without a written contract, for the acquisition of equipment, materials, supplies, labor, services or other items included within the budget approved by the City Council, and may impose a monetary limit upon such authority.

 

        (b)    By ordinance or resolution, the City Council may provide a method for the sale or exchange of personal property not needed in the City service or not fit for the purpose for which intended, and for the conveyance of title thereto.

 

        (c)    Contracts for the sale of the products, commodities or services of any public utility owned, controlled or operated by the City may be made by the manager of such utility or by the head of the department or City Manager upon forms approved by the City Manager and at rates fixed by the City Council.

 

Section 614. CONTRACTS ON PUBLIC WORKS.
        Except as hereinafter expressly provided, every contract involving an expenditure as set forth by ordinance of the City Council for the construction or improvement (excluding maintenance and repair) of public buildings, works, streets, drains, sewers, utilities, parks and playgrounds, and each separate purchase of materials or supplies for the same, where the expenditure required for such purchase shall exceed the amount set by ordinance, shall be let to the lowest responsible bidder after notice by publication in accordance with Section 503 by two or more insertions, the first of which shall be at least ten days before the time for opening bids.

 

        The City Council may reject any and all bids presented and may readvertise in its discretion. After rejecting bids, or if no bids are received, or without advertising for bids if the total amount of the contract or project is below the amount set by ordinance, the City Council may declare and determine that in its opinion, the work in question may be performed better or more economically by the City with its own employees, or that the materials or supplies may be purchased at lower price in the open market, and after the adoption of a resolution to this effect by the affirmative vote of a majority of the total members of the City Council, it may proceed to have said work done or such materials or supplies purchased in the manner stated without further observance of the provisions of this section.

 

        All public works contracts exceeding the amount set by ordinance may be let and purchases exceeding the amount set by ordinance may be made without advertising for bids if such work or the purchase of such materials or supplies shall be deemed by the City Council to be of urgent necessity for the preservation of life, health, or property and shall be authorized by at least five affirmative votes of the City Council.

 

        Projects for the extension, replacement or expansion of the transmission or distribution system of any existing public utility operated by the City or for the purchase of supplies or equipment for any such project or any such utility may be excepted from the requirements of this section by the affirmative vote of a majority of the total members of the City Council.

 

Section 615. GRANTING OF FRANCHISES.
        The City Council shall by ordinance regulate the granting of franchises for the City.

 

Section 616. INDEPENDENT AUDIT.
        The City Council shall provide for an independent annual audit of all City accounts and may provide for such more frequent audits as it deems necessary. Such audits shall be made by a certified public accountant or firm of such accountants who have no personal interest, direct or indirect, in the fiscal affairs of the City government or any of its officers. The Council may, without requiring competitive bids, designate such accountant or firm annually provided that the designation for any particular fiscal year shall be made no later than thirty days after the beginning of such fiscal year. As soon as practicable after the end of the fiscal year, a final audit and report shall be submitted by such accountant to the City Council, one copy thereof to be distributed to each member. Additional copies of the audit shall be placed on file in the office of the City Clerk where they shall be available for inspection by the general public, and a copy of the financial statement as of the close of the fiscal year shall be published in the official newspaper.

 

Section 617. INFRASTRUCTURE FUND.
 

        (a)    All revenue raised by vote of the electors or imposed by vote of the City Council on or after March 5, 2002, by a measure which states that the revenue to be raised is for the purpose of infrastructure, as said term is defined in this paragraph, shall be placed in a separate fund entitled “Infrastructure Fund.” The term “Infrastructure” shall mean long-lived capital assets that normally are stationary in nature and normally can be preserved for significantly greater number of years. They include storm drains, storm water pump stations, alleys, streets, highways, curbs and gutters, sidewalks, bridges, street trees, landscaped medians, parks, beach facilities, playgrounds, traffic signals, streetlights, block walls along arterial highways, and all public buildings and public ways. Interest earned on monies in the Infrastructure Fund shall accrue to that account. Monies in said Fund shall be utilized only for direct costs relating to infrastructure improvements or maintenance, including construction, design, engineering, project management, inspection, contract administration and property acquisition. Monies in said Fund shall not be transferred, loaned or otherwise encumbered for any other purpose.

 

        (b)    Revenues placed in the Infrastructure Fund shall not supplant existing infrastructure funding. The average percentage of general fund revenues utilized for infrastructure improvements and maintenance, for the five- (5) year period of 1996 to 2001, is and was 14.95%. Expenditures for infrastructure improvements and maintenance, subsequent to 2001, shall not be reduced below 15% of general fund revenues based on a five- (5) year rolling average.

 

        (c)    The City Council shall by ordinance establish a Citizens Infrastructure Advisory Board to conduct an annual review and performance audit of the Infrastructure Fund and report its findings to the City Council prior to adoption of the following fiscal-year budget.

ARTICLE VII ELECTIONS
Section 700. GENERAL MUNICIPAL ELECTIONS.
        General municipal elections shall be held in the City on the first Tuesday after the first Monday in November in each even-numbered year.

 

Section 701. SPECIAL MUNICIPAL ELECTIONS.
        All other municipal elections that may be held by authority of this Charter, or of any law, shall be known as special municipal elections.

 

Section 702. PROCEDURE FOR HOLDING ELECTIONS.
        All elections shall be held in accordance with the provisions of the Elections Code of the State of California, as the same now exists or hereafter may be amended, for the holding of municipal elections, so far as the same are not in conflict with this Charter.

 

Section 703. INITIATIVE, REFERENDUM AND RECALL.
        There are hereby reserved to the electors of the City the powers of the initiative and referendum and of the recall of municipal elective officers. The provisions of the Elections Code of the State of California, as the same now exists or hereafter may be amended, governing the initiative and referendum and the recall of municipal officers, shall apply to the use thereof in the City so far as such provisions of the Elections Code are not in conflict with the provisions of this Charter.

 

Section 704. NOMINATION PAPERS.
        Nomination papers for candidates for elective municipal office must be signed by not less than twenty nor more than thirty electors of the City.

ARTICLE VIII MISCELLANEOUS
Section 800. TRANSITION.
        Elective officers and elective officers whose offices are made appointive of the City shall continue to hold such offices until the completion of their current terms and the election or appointment and qualification of their respective successors under this Charter. All boards, commissions and committees presently in existence shall continue to act in accordance with their original grant of authority until such time as the City Council adopts appropriate ordinances pertaining to their activities or for one year, whichever occurs first. All lawful ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations, and portions thereof, in force at the time this Charter takes effect and not in conflict or inconsistent herewith, are hereby continued in force until the same shall have been duly repealed, amended, changed or superseded by proper authority.

 

Section 801. DEFINITIONS.
        Unless the provisions or the context otherwise requires, as used in this Charter:

 

        (a)    “Shall” is mandatory, and “may” is permissive.

 

        (b)    “City” is the City of Huntington Beach and “department,” “board,” “commission,” “agency,” “officer,” or “employee” is a department, board, commission, agency, officer or employee, as the case may be, of the City of Huntington Beach.

 

        (c)    “County” is the County of Orange.

 

        (d)    “State” is the State of California.

 

        (e)    The masculine includes the feminine and the feminine includes the masculine.

 

        (f)    The singular includes the plural and the plural the singular.

 

        (g)    “Person” includes firm and corporation.

 

Section 802. VIOLATIONS.
        The violation of any provision of this Charter shall be a misdemeanor.

 

Section 803. PROPERTY RIGHTS PROTECTION MEASURE.
 

        (a)    The City shall not enact or enforce any measure which mandates the price or other consideration payable to the owner in connection with the sale, lease, rent, exchange or other transfer by the owner of real property. Any such measure is hereby repealed.

 

        (b)    The word “mandates” as used in subsection (a) includes any measure taken by ordinance, resolution, administrative regulation or other action of the City to establish, continue, implement or enforce any control or system of controls on the price or other terms on which real property in the City may be offered, sold, leased, rented, exchanged or otherwise transferred by its owner. The words “real property” as used in subsection (a) refer to any parcel of land or site, either improved or unimproved, on which a dwelling unit or residential accommodation is or may be situated for use as a home, residence or sleeping place.

 

        (c)    This Section 803 shall not apply to:

 

(1)    any real property which contains serious health, safety, fire or building code violations, excluding those caused by disasters, for which a civil or criminal citation has been issued by the City and remains unabated for six months or longer;

 

(2)    any real property owned by a public entity, and real property where the owner has agreed by contract with the public entity, including the City and any of its related agencies, to accept a financial contribution or other tangible benefit including without limitation, assistance under the Community Redevelopment Law;

 

(3)    any planning or zoning power of the City as relates to the use, occupancy or improvement of real property and to any real property which the City or any of its related agencies may acquire by eminent domain, purchase, grant or donation;

(4)    any power of the City to require a business license for the sale or rental of real property, whether for regulation or general revenue purposes;

 

(5)    any dwelling unit or accommodation in any hotel, motel or other facility when the transient occupancy of that dwelling unit or accommodation is subject to a transient occupancy tax; or

 

(6)    to impair the obligation of any contract entered into prior to the enactment of this Section 803 or otherwise required by State law.

 

Section 804. CHARTER REVIEW.
        The City Council shall determine if there is a need to convene a citizen’s Charter Review Commission to conduct a review of the City Charter no less frequently than every ten years.

 

Section 805. SAFE AND SANE FIREWORKS.
        It shall be lawful to possess, sell, display, use or discharge within the City, those fireworks that are defined and classified as Safe and Sane Fireworks (a.k.a. “state-approved fireworks”) in the California State Fireworks Law (sections 12500 et seq. of the Health and Safety Code and the relevant sections of Code of Regulations Title 19, Subchapter 6) subject to regulation by City Council.

MUNICIPAL CODE
Title 1 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Title 2 ADMINISTRATION AND PERSONNEL
Title 3 REVENUE AND FINANCE
Title 4 RESERVED
Title 5 BUSINESS LICENSES AND REGULATIONS
Title 6 RESERVED
Title 7 ANIMALS
Title 8 HEALTH AND SAFETY
Title 9 PUBLIC PEACE, MORALS AND WELFARE
Title 10 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
Title 11 RESERVED
Title 12 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Title 13 PUBLIC PROPERTY
Title 14 WATER AND SEWERS
Title 15 HUNTINGTON BEACH OIL CODE
Title 16 RESERVED
Title 17 BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION
Title 18 RESERVED
Title 19 RESERVED

Title 1 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Chapter 1.01 CODE ADOPTION
1.01.010 Repeal of Ordinance Code
The Huntington Beach Municipal Code, excepting Division 9 thereof, is hereby repealed. (1990-7/75)

 

1.01.020 Adoption
Pursuant to the provisions of Article V, Section 500 of the Charter of the City of Huntington Beach, there is hereby adopted the “Huntington Beach Municipal Code,” as published by Quality Code Publishing, Seattle, Washington, together with those secondary codes adopted by reference as authorized by the Charter of the City of Huntington Beach, save and except those portions of the secondary codes as are deleted or modified by the provisions of the Huntington Beach Municipal Code. (1990-7/75; 3976-5/13)

 

1.01.030 Title—Citation—Reference
This code shall be known as the Huntington Beach Municipal Code and it shall be sufficient to refer to said code as the Huntington Beach Municipal Code in any prosecution for the violation of any provision thereof or in any proceeding at law or equity. It shall be sufficient to designate any ordinance adding to, amending, correcting or repealing all or any part or portion thereof as an addition to, amendment to, correction or repeal of the Huntington Beach Municipal Code. Further reference may be had to the titles, chapters, sections and subsections of the Huntington Beach Municipal Code and such references shall apply to that numbered title, chapter, section or subsection as it appears in the code. (1990-7/75)

 

1.01.040 Codification Authority
This code consists of all the regulatory and penal ordinances and certain of the administrative ordinances of the City of Huntington Beach, codified pursuant to the provisions of Article V, Section 500 of the Charter of the City of Huntington Beach. (1990-7/75; 3976-5/13)

 

1.01.050 Reference Applies to All Amendments
Whenever a reference is made to this Code as the Huntington Beach Municipal Code or to any portion thereof, or to any ordinance of the City of Huntington Beach, the reference shall apply to all amendments, corrections and additions heretofore, now or hereafter made. (1990-7/75)

 

1.01.060 Title, Chapter and Section Headings
Title, chapter and section headings contained herein shall not be deemed to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any title, chapter, or section hereof. (1990-7/75)

 

1.01.070 Reference to Specific Ordinances
The provisions of this Code shall not in any manner affect matters of record which refer to, or are otherwise connected with ordinances which are therein specifically designated by number or otherwise and which are included within the code, but such reference shall be construed to apply to the corresponding provisions contained within this Code. (1990-7/75)

 

1.01.080 Effect of Code on Past Actions and Obligations
Neither the adoption of this Code nor the repeal or amendment hereby of any ordinance or part or portion of any ordinance of the City shall in any manner affect the prosecution for violations of ordinances, which violations were committed prior to the effective date hereof, nor be construed as a waiver of any license, fee, or penalty at said effective date due and unpaid under such ordinances, nor be construed as affecting any of the provisions of such ordinances relating to the collection of any such license, fee or penalty, or the penal provisions applicable to any violation thereof, nor to affect the validity of any bond or cash deposit in lieu thereof required to be posted, filed or deposited pursuant to any ordinances and all rights and obligations thereunder appertaining shall continue in full force and effect. (1990-7/75)

 

1.01.090 Effective Date
This code shall become effective on the date the ordinance adopting this Code as the “Huntington Beach Municipal Code” shall become effective. (1990-7/75)

 

Chapter 1.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS
1.04.010 Definitions
A.    As used in this Code, unless a different meaning is apparent from the context or is specified elsewhere in this Code:

“Board” means a body of members appointed pursuant to Huntington Beach Charter Section 405 to serve in a continuing advisory capacity to the City Council.

“City” means the City of Huntington Beach.

“Commission” means a body of members appointed pursuant to Huntington Beach Charter Section 405 which may have decision making authority in those activities delegated to them by the City Council.

“Committee” means a body of members appointed pursuant to Huntington Beach Charter Section 405 on an ad hoc basis to advise the City Council on particular matters.

“Council” means the City Council of this City.

“Oath” includes affirmation.

“Person” means and includes a natural person, corporation, company, firm, association, organization, partnership, joint venture, trust, syndicate, estate, receiver, social club, fraternal organization, any group or combination acting as a unit, trustee in bankruptcy, receiver, executor, administrator, assignee, fiduciary, and officer, agent, employee and servant of any of the foregoing.

“Public nuisance,” for the purposes of this Code, means anything which is injurious to the senses, or an obstruction to the free use of property, so as to interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property by an entire neighborhood, or by any considerable number of persons, or unlawfully obstructs the free passage or use, in the customary manner, of any navigable lake, or river, bay, stream, canal or basin, or any public park, square, street or highway.

“Section,” “chapter” and “title” mean, respectively, section, chapter and title of this Code.

“Shall” and “must” are mandatory and “may” is permissive.

“Written” includes every form of legible recording.

B.     Undefined Words. Words and phrases not defined in this Code are construed according to the approved usage of the language.

C.     Number. The singular number includes the plural, and the plural the singular.

D.    Gender. Words used in the masculine gender include the feminine and the neuter.

E.     Tense. Words used in the present tense include the future. (588-8/52, 1825-4/73, 1935-11/74, 2352-3/79)

 

1.04.020 Severability
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion or this Code, or any future amendments or additions hereto, is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by the decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this Code, or any future amendments or additions hereto. The City Council declares that it would have adopted this Code and each section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of any future amendments or additions thereto, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, clauses, phrases, portions or any future amendments or additions thereto be declared invalid or unconstitutional. (588-8/52, 1540-12/69, 1935-11/74)

 

1.04.030 Construction—Generally
The provisions of this Code and all proceedings under it are to be construed to effect its object and to promote justice. (588-8/52)

 

1.04.040 Territorial Limitation
This code shall refer only to the omission or commission of acts within the territorial limits of the City and that territory outside of this City over which the City has jurisdiction or control by virtue of the Constitution, or any law, or by reason of ownership or control of property. (588-8/52)

 

1.04.050 Local Signification
All references in this Code to places, acts, persons or things and all else in relation to this Code shall be construed to mean that the same are applicable to this City, whether the City is mentioned in each particular section or not. (588-8/52)

 

1.04.060 Construction—Titles of Officers, Boards and Commissions
The use of the title of any officer, employee, office, department, board, commission or ordinance shall mean such officer, employee, office, department, board, commission or ordinance of the City unless otherwise designated. (588-8/52)

 

Chapter 1.08 OFFICIAL SEAL
1.08.010 Design—Inscription
The common seal of the City shall be so constructed as to make the following impression: a circle with a centerpiece consisting of a view of ocean waves, with the outline of Catalina Island, as seen from the City, in the background, and with the words, “City of Huntington Beach, Orange County, California, Incorporated February 17, 1909 A. D.” surrounding said centerpiece and near the inside margin of the circle. (3-3/09)

 

1.08.015 Use of Official Seal
No person shall use or allow to be used the official seal of the City of Huntington Beach, or any cut, facsimile, or reproduction of said seal, or make or use any design which is an imitation of said seal or of the design thereof or which may be mistaken for the seal of this City or the design thereof for any reason or purpose, including but not limited to commercial purposes, other than for City purposes or for the purposes of any officer, board or department thereof, without the express consent of the City Council of the City of Huntington Beach. (3887-9/10)

 

Chapter 1.12 CITY HALL
1.12.010 Designation
The room or building used by the City Council for its meetings shall be called the “City Hall.” (1-2/09)

 

1.12.020 Location of Civic Center
Those certain municipal buildings in the City of Huntington Beach and within an area bounded by Yorktown Avenue on the north, Main Street on the west, Utica Avenue on the south, Park Street and Lake Street on the east and Park Street on the southeast and south shall be the Civic Center of the City of Huntington Beach. (1-2/1909, 262-6/23, 1337-7/67, 1908-3/74, 3420-6/99)

 

Chapter 1.13 FISCAL YEAR
1.13.010 Established
Chapter 1.13 is hereby enacted and inserted in Title 1, General Provisions of the Huntington Beach Municipal Code. (3199-1/94)

 

1.13.020 First Interim Term
There shall be a one-time nine-month fiscal year from October 1, 2017, and ending on June 30, 2018. (3199-1/94, 4143-2/18)

 

1.13.030 Second Interim Term
A normal 12-month fiscal year will begin on July 1, 2018, and end on June 30, 2019. (3199-1/94, 4143-2/18)

 

1.13.040 Third Interim Term
Reserved. (3199-1/94, 4143-2/18)

 

1.13.050 Term
Continuing thereafter, the City’s fiscal year will begin on July 1st and end on June 30th. (3199-1/94, 4143-2/18)

 

Chapter 1.16 GENERAL PENALTY—ENFORCEMENT
1.16.010 Violation—Misdemeanor/Infraction
Any person who violates or willfully fails to comply with any provision of this Code is guilty of a misdemeanor or an infraction. (588-7/52, 1902-3/74, 3207-10/93)

 

1.16.020 Continuing Violation
Each person, firm or corporation shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each day or portion thereof during which any violation of any provision of this Code is committed, continued or permitted, by such person, firm or corporation, and shall be punishable therefor as herein provided. (588-7/52)

 

1.16.030 Penalty—Misdemeanor
Any person convicted of a misdemeanor under the provisions of this Code (unless otherwise provided herein) shall be punishable by imprisonment in the City jail, or in the county jail of Orange County, not exceeding six months, or by fine not exceeding $1,000.00, or by both fine and imprisonment. (588-7/52, 1905-3/74, 3567-9/02)

 

1.16.040 Penalty—Infraction
Any person convicted of an infraction under the provisions of this Code shall be punishable by (1) a fine not exceeding $100.00, for the first offense; (2) a fine not exceeding $200.00 for the second offense; (3) a fine not exceeding $500.00 for each additional offense within one year, unless otherwise provided herein. (588-7/52, 1902-3/74, 3567-9/02)

 

1.16.045 Prosecutor Discretion
The City Attorney has discretion to file a complaint charging any offense in this Code as either a misdemeanor or an infraction. (3207-10/93)

 

1.16.050 Form of Action
A violation of this Code may be prosecuted by the City Attorney in the name of the people of the State of California, or it may be redressed by civil action at the option of the Council. (588-7/52)

 

1.16.065 Reimbursement of Costs
In addition to the above penalties the court may order that the person convicted of a misdemeanor or infraction reimburse the City for all of its costs of investigation, analyzing and prosecuting the enforcement action against the person convicted; the court shall fix the amount of any such reimbursement upon submission of proof of such costs by the City. (3567-9/02)

 

1.16.080 Issuance of Subpoenas
The City Clerk, Personnel Commission and its members, City Attorney, and hearing officers may issue subpoenas requiring attendance of witnesses or production of books, records, or other documents for evidence or testimony in any action or proceeding pending before the City and administer oaths or affirmations in conjunction with such action or proceeding. Subpoenas shall be signed by the issuing officer and may be served as subpoenas are served in civil actions. (2996-5/89)

 

1.16.090 Violation of Conditions of Approval
No person, including a responsible person as defined in Section 1.18.020 of this Code, shall fail to comply with the terms and conditions of any permit or approval issued pursuant to this Code or with any other ordinance relating to land use or development. This section shall apply to any person who knew, or had reason to know, of the terms and conditions of the permit or approval. (3988-10/13)

 

1.16.100 Public Nuisance Abatement—Recovery of Attorneys’ Fees Authorized
A.    Public Nuisance Abatement. In addition to the penalties provided in this Code, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this Code, uniform or adopted codes, or any provision of state or federal law that may be enforced by the City, shall be deemed a public nuisance and may be, by this City, summarily abated as such by filing criminal or civil actions, and each day such condition continues shall be regarded as a new and separate offense.

B.     Recovery of Attorneys’ Fees Authorized. The prevailing party in any judicial action, administrative proceeding, or special proceeding to abate a nuisance may recover its reasonable attorneys’ fees, provided that the City elected, at the initiation of such individual action or proceeding, to recover its own attorneys’ fees. In no judicial action or administrative proceeding shall an award of attorneys’ fees to a prevailing party exceed the amount of reasonable attorneys’ fees incurred by the City in the judicial action or administrative proceeding. A judicial action includes, but is not limited to, any civil or criminal action, inspection or abatement warrant, administrative proceeding, or appeal from an administrative proceeding. “Abatement” shall include any action taken by the City to cause or otherwise obtain compliance with this municipal code or other codes, as specified herein, even if the violation is ultimately corrected by the violator. Any recovery of attorneys’ fees for abatement of a nuisance shall be in accordance with this section. (4115-10/16)

 

Chapter 1.18 ADMINISTRATIVE CITATIONS
1.18.010 Applicability
A.    This chapter makes any violation of the provisions of this Code subject to civil fine.

B.     This chapter establishes the administrative procedures for the imposition, enforcement, collection, and administrative review of civil fines pursuant to Government Code Section 53069.4 and the City’s plenary police power under its charter.

C.     The issuance of an administrative citation under this chapter is solely at the City’s discretion and is one option the City has to address violations of this Code. By adopting this chapter, the City does not intend to limit its discretion to utilize any other remedy, civil or criminal, for such violations that the City may select in a particular case.

D.    The purpose of issuing administrative citations pursuant to this chapter is to encourage voluntary and complete compliance with the provisions of this Code for the protection and benefit of the entire community.

E.     Notwithstanding any lease, license or any other instrument or agreement, the owner of any real property has the right to enter upon his or her own property to the extent reasonably necessary to abate any nuisance or correct any violation of this Code existing thereon. The provisions of this subsection shall be an implied term of any instrument affecting the right to possession of real property located in the City of Huntington Beach.

F.     Because of the serious blighting conditions that can result affecting the residents’ health and safety, this chapter is intended to impose strict civil liability upon the owners and lessees of real property for all building, housing, fire and health code and zoning violations that occur upon the subject premises. (3397-7/98)

 

1.18.020 Definitions
The following definitions apply to the use of these terms for the purposes of this chapter:

Building Violation. Any violation of this Code pertaining to building, plumbing, electrical, or other similar structural or zoning regulations set forth in this Code that does not create an immediate danger to health or safety.

Citation. An administrative citation issued pursuant to this chapter. Citation includes a notice of noncorrection unless the context clearly shows otherwise.

Citee. Person given an administrative citation charging him or her as a responsible person for a code violation.

City Attorney. The City Attorney or his or her designee.

City Treasurer. The City Treasurer or his or her designee.

Enforcement Officer. Any City employee or agent of the City designated by the director of any City department which has the authority and responsibility to enforce provisions of this Code.

Finance Director. The Director of the City’s Finance Department or his or her designee.

Hearing Officer. The person appointed by the City Manager to serve as the hearing officer for administrative hearings. Prior to conducting hearings the hearing officer must first be certified by the City Attorney as qualified to provide a fair and impartial hearing based on appropriate education, training and experience.

Issued. Giving a citation to the citee and issuance occurs on the date when a citation is personally served on the citee, the date it is mailed to the citee, or the date it is posted on real property where a property related violation occurs.

Issuing Department. The City department that has the authority and responsibility for enforcing the code section(s) designated on a citation as having been violated.

Notice of Noncorrection. A reissuance of an original citation for a building violation which notes a violation(s) on the original citation has not been corrected within the applicable correction period.

Responsible Person. A responsible person is any of the following:

1.     A person who causes a code violation to occur.

2.     A person who maintains or allows a code violation to continue, by his or her action or failure to act.

3.     A person whose agent, employee, or independent contractor causes a code violation by its action or failure to act.

4.     A person who is the owner of, and a person who is a lessee or sublessee with the current right of possession of, real property where a property related code violation occurs.

5.     A person who is the on-site manager of a business who normally works daily at the site when the business is open and is responsible for the activities at such premises.

For purposes of this subsection “person” includes a natural person or legal entity, and the owners, majority stockholders, corporate officers, trustees, and general partners of a legal entity.

There shall be a legal rebuttable presumption that the record owner of a parcel according to the county’s latest equalized property tax assessment rolls and a lessee or sublessee of a parcel has notice of any code violation existing on the premises.

For the purposes of this chapter, there may be more than one responsible person for a code violation, and a minor at least 14 years of age may be a responsible person subject to the provisions of this chapter. (3397-7/98, 3630-02/04, 3751-11/06)

 

1.18.030 Administrative Citation for Non-Building Violation
A.    Any enforcement officer upon determining that a provision of this Code, which he or she is charged to enforce, has been violated has the authority to issue an administrative citation to any responsible person or persons. An enforcement officer may issue a citation for a violation the officer did not see occur if the officer has determined through investigation that the responsible person did commit the violation. A responsible person to whom a citation is issued shall be liable for and shall pay to the City Treasurer the fine or fines described in the citation when due pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.

B.     Each day a violation of this Code exists shall be a separate violation and be subject to a separate fine. A citation may charge a violation for one or more days on which a violation exists, and for violation of one or more code sections.

C.     The City may take into consideration the fact that a person has been issued citations when the City is determining whether to grant, suspend, revoke, or deny any permit, license, or any type of land use approval for the person and such citations are evidence that the person has committed acts that are not compatible with the health, safety and general welfare of other persons and businesses in the vicinity. (3397-7/98, 3630-2/04, 3751-11/06)

 

1.18.040 Administrative Citation for Building Violation
A.    When a citation is issued for a building violation, a 30-day correction period shall be provided for the correction of the violation and the citee shall correct the violation within that period. Notwithstanding Section 1.18.030, no responsible person for a building violation shall be liable for a civil fine unless the violation continues after the 30 days allowed for its correction (plus any extension) and he or she is issued a notice of noncorrection.

B.     The citee of a building violation may request an extension of the correction period provided that a request is filed with the director of the issuing department before the 30-day period ends. The director may in his or her discretion grant a reasonable extension of the period of time to correct the violation if the citee has supplied substantial evidence showing that the correction cannot reasonably be made within the 30-day period. The director’s decision shall be in writing and is final. The filing for such an extension does not, unless granted, extend the 30-day correction period or any other time periods set by this chapter.

C.     If a building violation has not been corrected by the end of the correction period, the enforcement officer has authority to issue to the responsible person a notice of noncorrection. The citee to whom the notice of noncorrection is issued shall be liable for and shall pay to the City the fine or fines described in the notice of noncorrection which fine shall be due on the date the notice of noncorrection is issued. Additional citations may be issued and fines imposed for every day the violation continues uncorrected from the date the notice of noncorrection is issued and the citee shall be liable for and shall pay to the City Treasurer any additional fine which shall be due on the date any new citation is issued.

The director of the department that issued the citation may cancel a citation within 30 days of the citation date upon a showing of special circumstances if an administrative hearing has not been requested under Section 1.18.100.

D.    If upon reinspection the enforcement officer determines the violation has been corrected, he or she will issue a notice of decision to the citee indicating correction has been made. (3397-7/98, 3751-11/06, 3828-5/09)

 

1.18.050 Citation Contents
Each administrative citation shall contain the following information:

A.    Name of the responsible person for the violation of this Code.

B.     Date on which an inspection established the code violation.

C.     Issuing department for the code section(s) violated.

D.    The code section violated.

E.     Address where the code violation occurred.

F.     Description of the violation established by inspection.

G.    Amount of the fine for the violation and procedure to pay the fine and avoid a late payment penalty.

H.    Designation of a building violation (if applicable), date the 30-day correction period expires, and how to request an extension of that period, and designation of a notice of noncorrection for a building violation that has not been corrected.

I.      Designation of any prior citations, issued for the same code violations, if known.

J.      Description of the procedure for requesting a waiver of fine deposit and/or an administrative hearing to contest a citation.

K.    A notice that the code violation is a nuisance and that collection of unpaid fines and/or nuisance abatement costs can be enforced as an assessment or lien against the property where a property related code violation occurs and that unpaid assessments can result in the property being sold after three years by the County Assessor as set forth in Section 1.18.150 of this Code.

L.     Signature of the enforcement officer issuing the citation.

M.    Date the citation is issued.

N.    Any other information deemed necessary by the City Attorney, City Treasurer or Finance Director for enforcement or collection purposes. (3397-7/98, 3630-02/04, 3751-11/06)

 

1.18.060 Service of Citation
A citation may be served as follows:

A.    An enforcement officer may personally serve the citation on the citee. The citee is required to sign a copy of the citation showing his or her receipt of the citation.

B.     An enforcement officer may mail the citation by certified mail. The citation shall be mailed to the citee’s address shown on the county’s last equalized property tax assessment rolls for a property related violation, or to any address known for the citee for all other violations.

C.     An enforcement officer may post the property in a conspicuous place with a copy of the citation when the citee resides at an unknown address other than where the violation occurs. A copy of the citation shall also be mailed via certified mail to the citee at the property address. (3397-7/98, 3630-02/04)

 

1.18.070 Amount of Civil Fines
A.    The amount of the fines for violating particular provisions of this Code shall be set in a schedule of fines adopted by resolution by the City Council. The schedule may include escalating fine amounts for repeat code violations occurring within specified periods of time.

B.     The schedule of fines may also specify the amount of interest, late payment penalty, and processing fee owed for any fine not paid when due. A late payment penalty and interest shall be owed for fines not paid within 30 days of the date of issuance of the citation.

C.     Fines are due on the day the citation is issued, except (1) fines for building violations shall be due on the day the notice of noncorrection is issued and (2) when a fine deposit has been waived pursuant to Section 1.18.110 and the hearing officer upholds the citation, the fine shall be due on the date the decision is made and personally served on the citee or the date the decision is mailed to the citee. (3397-7/98, 3630-02/04)

 

1.18.080 Payment of Civil Fines
A.    Fines shall be paid to and received by the City Treasurer within 30 days of the date of issuance of the citation.

B.     Payment of a fine shall not excuse the citee from correcting the code violation. The issuance of a citation and/or payment of a fine does not bar the City from taking any other enforcement action regarding a code violation that is not corrected, including issuing additional administrative citations and/or criminal complaints. (3397-7/98, 3630-02/04)

 

1.18.090 Preliminary Review
A.    A person issued an administrative citation may request a preliminary review, if the request is made within 14 days of the date the citation is issued. A notice of noncorrection of a building violation shall not be subject to a request for preliminary review.

B.     To obtain a review, the citee shall go to the City government building where the issuing department is located. The citee must present a copy of the citation and a completed and signed request form stating the reasons why there was no violation or why he or she is not a responsible person for the violation. All requests shall be date stamped upon receipt.

C.     The preliminary review shall be conducted by a City employee designated by the director of the issuing department. The reviewer shall not be the enforcement officer who issued the citation. The purpose of the review is to uncover and cancel any mistakenly issued citations due to errors that are easily verifiable, and not to resolve factual disputes concerning the violation that is the subject of the citation.

D.    The preliminary review will be decided at the time the request is filed if reasonably practical as determined by the reviewer. It shall consist of a review of the citation and the written request form and any other evidence submitted at the time of the request by the citee and, at the discretion of the reviewer, any other related information. Where the review is not completed within five working days of receipt of the request, the request shall be deemed denied.

E.     The citee shall be notified of the results of the review by being given a notice of decision form stating the review decision. The citee may also be given additional notice by telephone or facsimile when practicable.

F.     A request for preliminary review does not extend any time periods for compliance, including the fine due date, the time any correction period ends, and the time to request an administrative hearing.

G.    If the reviewer concludes that no code violation occurred or that the citee was not responsible for the violation, the citation shall be canceled. (3397-7/98)

 

1.18.100 Request for Administrative Hearing
A.    Any person receiving an administrative citation may contest it by filing a request for an administrative hearing, except that a hearing for a building violation may not be requested unless and until a notice of noncorrection is issued. To obtain a hearing, the citee shall file a signed written request form contained on the reverse side of the citation and indicate the grounds for contesting the citation and fine. A citee may contest the citation by denying that a violation occurred, by denying that it was not corrected within the correction period, if applicable, or by denying that the citee is a responsible person for the violation.

B.     To be effective and complete, the request must be received by the City Attorney within 30 days of the date the citation was issued, and be accompanied by evidence of payment of the full amount of the fine. Where a request and fine deposit are mailed by the citee, the request and fine deposit shall be deemed filed on the date received by the City Treasurer. All requests shall be date stamped upon receipt.

C.     The person requesting the administrative hearing may file a written declaration with the City Attorney before the hearing or personally attend the hearing on the date, time and place specified by the City Attorney. A failure to file a written declaration before the hearing or personally attend the hearing will be considered a non-appearance. Non-appearance by the citee shall constitute an abandonment of the request, unless the hearing was continued pursuant to Section 1.18.120(F). (3397-7/98, 3630-02/04)

 

1.18.110 Waiver of Fine Deposit
A.    A person who files a request for an administrative hearing may also request at the same time a hardship waiver of the fine deposit. To seek such a waiver and obtain a separate hearing on the request, the citee must check the box indicating this request on the form contained on the reverse side of the citation and attach a statement of the grounds for the request. To be effective, this form requesting the waiver and the administrative hearing must be received by the City Attorney within 30 days of the date the citation is issued.

B.     The person requesting the waiver bears the burden of establishing by substantial evidence that he or she does not have the financial ability to make the deposit of the fine. The citee shall appear at the hearing as set by the City Attorney’s office or file a written declaration with the City Attorney prior to the hearing. A failure to file a written declaration before the hearing or personally attend the hearing will be considered a non-appearance. Non-appearance shall constitute an abandonment of both the requests unless the hearing was continued pursuant to Section 1.18.120(F).

C.     The waiver request will be decided by the hearing officer at a separate hearing before the administrative hearing on the contest of the citation. At the conclusion of the hearing on the waiver request, the hearing officer shall issue a decision that the fine deposit is or is not waived. A copy of the notice of decision shall be delivered to the citee at the end of the hearing on the waiver request.

D.    If the waiver is denied, the citee shall pay the fine amount within 14 days to the City Treasurer. Failure to make the deposit by the time required shall be deemed an abandonment of the contest. Upon receipt of the fine amount, the administrative hearing to contest the citation shall be set pursuant to Huntington Beach Municipal Code Section 1.18.120.

E.     The filing of a request for hardship waiver of the fine deposit does not extend any time periods set forth in this chapter, except the time when the fine deposit must be made. The hearing officer’s decision on the waiver request is final and not subject to an appeal pursuant to Section 1.18.140. (3397-7/98, 3630-02/04, 3751-11/06)

 

1.18.120 Hearing Procedures
A.    The hearing shall be conducted by a hearing officer on the date, time and place specified by the City Attorney.

B.     The City Attorney shall ensure that the pertinent citation records are delivered to the hearing officer for a citation set for a hearing, including information showing all fine deposits and waivers granted. The City Attorney shall also make available to the citee before the hearing a copy of any additional reports concerning the citation that are provided to the hearing officer.

C.     The citee shall be given the opportunity to testify and to present evidence relevant to the code violation specified in the citation. A parent or legal guardian of a citee who is a minor, under 18 years of age, shall accompany the citee.

D.    The citation and any other reports prepared by the enforcement officer, or at his or her request, concerning the code violation or attempted correction of the code violation that are provided to the hearing officer shall be accepted by the hearing officer as prima facie evidence of the code violation and the facts stated in such documents.

E.     Neither the enforcement officer nor any other representative of the City shall be required to attend the hearing, nor shall the hearing officer require that there be submitted any evidence, other than the citation, that may exist among the public records of the City on the violation. However, any such appearance and/or submission may be made at the discretion of the enforcement officer or any City employee or agent.

F.     The hearing officer may continue a hearing if a request is made showing good cause by the citee or a representative of the City. All continuance requests shall either: (1) be made in person at the hearing by the citee or his or her representative if the citee is physically unable to attend, or (2) be made by a written request received by the City Attorney at least 24 hours before the hearing date. If the continuance is granted, a new hearing date shall be set within 45 days. If the continuance is denied, the hearing shall proceed then and there as scheduled, and if the citee is not present the request(s) shall be deemed abandoned in accordance with subsection H below. The hearing officer’s decision is final and he or she shall either personally give the notice of decision to the citee or the representative if present at the end of the hearing or request that the notice be mailed by the City Attorney.

G.    The hearing shall be conducted informally and the legal rules of evidence need not be followed. The hearing officer does not have the authority to issue a subpoena.

H.    The failure of the citee to appear at the hearing, unless the hearing was continued per subsection F of this section, shall constitute an abandonment of the request for waiver of the fine deposit and/or the contest, and a failure to exhaust administrative remedies concerning the violation set forth in the citation. The fine deposit shall be credited by the City upon the fine due for the violation. The failure to appear by the citee shall be noted on the notice of decision by the hearing officer which will be mailed to the citee by the City Attorney. (3397-7/98, 3630-02/04)

 

1.18.130 Administrative Hearing Decision
A.    After considering all the evidence and testimony submitted at the administrative hearing, the hearing officer shall issue a written decision to uphold or cancel the citation. The hearing officer has no discretion or authority to reduce or modify the amount of any fine. The decision will be made on a notice of decision form and will state the reasons and evidence considered for the decision. The decision of the hearing officer shall be made at the conclusion of the hearing and shall be final. The notice of decision for the administrative hearing shall be personally delivered to the citee at the conclusion of the hearing.

B.     If the decision is to uphold the citation, the City shall keep the fine deposited as payment upon the fine due. If the decision is to cancel the citation, the Finance Director shall refund the fine deposit to the citee within 30 days of the filing of the decision. If the citation is upheld and the fine deposit has been waived, the fine shall be due to the City Treasurer on the date the decision is given to the citee at the end of the hearing by the hearing officer.

C.     The hearing officer’s continued employment, performance evaluation, compensation, and benefits shall not directly or indirectly be linked to the amount of citations upheld or canceled by the officer. (3397-7/98, 3751-11/06)

 

1.18.140 Right to Judicial Review
A.    The citee may seek judicial review of the administrative hearing decision by filing an appeal with the Orange County Superior Court within 20 calendar days after the citee receives a copy of the notice of decision at the conclusion of the hearing in accordance with the provisions of California Government Code Section 53069.4. The appeal filed with the court must also contain a proof of service showing a copy of the appeal was served upon “City of Huntington Beach (Attention: City Attorney).” The citee must pay to the Orange County Superior Court a $25.00 filing fee when the appeal is filed.

B.     No appeal is permitted from a decision on a request for preliminary review, or an extension of the 30-day correction period for building violations, or a request for waiver of the fine deposit, or where the citee is deemed to have abandoned the contest of the citation by an unexcused nonappearance at the hearing or failure to deposit the fine.

C.     The City Attorney shall forward to the Court, within 15 days of its request, the pertinent citation documents for any case appealed to that court. If the Court cancels any citation, the City Treasurer will refund any fine deposit made and the $25.00 appeal filing fee. (3397-7/98, 3630-02/04, 3751-11/06, 4072-12/15)

 

1.18.150 Collection of Unpaid Fines
A.    The City Treasurer at his or her discretion may pursue any and all legal and equitable remedies for the collection of unpaid fines, interest and penalties.

1.     Pursuit of one remedy does not preclude the pursuit of any other remedies until the total fines, interest and penalties owed by a person under this chapter have been collected.

2.     The City may refuse to issue, extend, or renew to any person, who has unpaid delinquent fines, interest, penalties, liens or assessments, any City permit, license, or other City services or approval pertaining to the property or person that is the subject of the fine and citation.

3.     Any permit, license, or any type of land use approval issued by the City to a person who has unpaid fines, interest and penalties totaling $1,000.00 or more that remain delinquent for 30 days or longer shall automatically be suspended. The suspension becomes effective 10 days after the day notice of the suspension is sent via certified, U.S. mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the person, and continues until the delinquency is paid in full. The person may request a review hearing pursuant to the procedures in Section 1.18.090 on the issue of delinquency, if the request is filed before the 10-day period ends. Continuing to operate under a suspended permit, license or approval shall be grounds for the revocation of the permit, license or approval.

4.     The City Attorney, at his or her discretion, may also issue a criminal complaint to any citee for a code violation when the applicable fine, interest or penalty has not been paid.

B.     Any violation of this Code shall constitute a nuisance. To compel code compliance, the City may seek to abate the nuisance and collect the costs incurred by means of a nuisance abatement lien and/or special assessment against the property where a property related violation occurred in accordance with the procedures in Government Code Sections 38773.1 and 38773.5. Any unpaid delinquent civil fines, interest and penalties may be recovered as such a lien or special assessment against the property of the responsible person who is the owner of the property where the violation occurred.

C.     To pursue an abatement of a code violation as a nuisance and recover any delinquent civil fines, interest and penalties as a lien or special assessment, the following conditions must be met:

1.     The City Treasurer, in conjunction with the City Attorney, must certify the amounts of the liens and special assessments sought to be collected from each property owner; and

2.     The total amount of the delinquent fine, interest and penalty against the property owner must be $250.00 or more and be delinquent for 60 days or more.

D.    The City Treasurer is authorized to take any steps necessary to enforce collection of the lien or special assessment, including but not limited to the following:

1.     Request the County Recorder to record a notice of any lien or special assessment certified by the City Treasurer.

2.     Request the County Tax Collector to collect any special assessments certified by the City Treasurer.

The City Treasurer may pursue these remedies whether or not the City is pursuing any other action to terminate an ongoing code violation that was the basis for the fine.

E.     All citations shall contain a notice that unpaid fines, interest and penalties are subject to the assessment and lien collection procedures of this section. This notice shall satisfy the notice requirements of Government Code Sections 38773.1 and 38773.5 when a citation is personally served on the citee.

F.     The mother, father and the legal guardian if there is no living parent, of a citee who is a minor shall be liable for any fines, penalties or interest or any other fees imposed upon the minor pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. Any such amounts may be collected from the minor or a parent or guardian. (3397-7/98, 3630-02/04, 3751-11/06, 3828-5/09)

 

Chapter 1.20 NOTICES
1.20.010 Service
Whenever a notice is required to be given under this Code (unless different provisions are otherwise specifically made herein) such notice may be given either by personal delivery thereof to the person to be notified or by deposit in the United States mail in a sealed envelope, postage prepaid, addressed to such person to be notified, at his or her last known business or residence address as the same appears in the public records or other records pertaining to the matters to which such notice is directed. Service by mail shall be deemed to have been completed at the time of deposit in the post office. (588-7/52)

 

1.20.020 Proof of Service
Proof of giving any notice may be made by the certificate of any officer or employee of this City or by affidavit of any person over the age of 18 years, which shows service in conformity with this Code or other provisions of law applicable to the subject matter concerned. (588-7/52)

 

Chapter 1.22 CLAIMS AGAINST THE CITY
1.22.010 Authority
A.    This chapter is enacted pursuant to the authority under the Constitution and laws of the State of California, including, but not limited to, California Constitution Article XI, Sections 3 and 5 and Section 935 of the California Government Code; and

B.     The City of Huntington Beach (the “City”) is a municipal corporation and charter City duly organized and existing under a charter pursuant to which the City has the right and power to make and enforce all laws and regulations in respect to municipal affairs and certain other matters in accordance with and as more particularly provided in Sections 3, 5 and 7 of Article XI of the Constitution of the State of California and Section 500 of Article V of the Charter of the City; and

C.     The City Council of the City acting under and pursuant to the powers reserved to the City under Sections 3, 5 and 7 of Article XI of the Constitution of the State of California and Section 500 of Article V of the Charter of the City, finds that claims filed against the City are a municipal affair and therefore public interest and necessity require the establishment of a process for handling such claims. (3753-11/06, 3948-7/12)

 

1.22.020 Claims Required
All claims against the City of Huntington Beach for money or damages not otherwise governed by the Tort Claims Act, California Government Code Sections 900 et seq., or another state law or another provision of this Code (hereinafter in this chapter, “claims”) shall be presented within the time, and in the manner prescribed by Part 3 of Division 3.6 of Title 1 of the California Government Code (commencing with Section 900 thereof) for the claims to which that part applies by its own terms, as those provisions now exist or shall hereafter be amended, and as further provided by this chapter. (3753-11/06, 3948-7/12)

 

1.22.030 Form of Claim
All claims shall be made in writing and verified by the claimant or by his or her guardian, conservator, executor or administrator. In addition, all claims shall contain the information required by Government Code Section 910. The foregoing reference to Government Code Section 910 shall not be construed to authorize a class claim or a representative claim, and no claim may be filed on behalf of another person or a class of persons unless verified by such other person(s) and each member of any purported class. (3753-11/06, 3948-7/12)

 

1.22.040 Claim Prerequisite to Suit
In accordance with California Government Code Sections 935(b) and 945.6, all claims shall be presented as provided in this chapter and acted upon by the City Risk Manager prior to the filing of any action on such claims and no such action may be maintained by a person who has not complied with the requirements of this chapter. Where the amount of the claim exceeds $15,000.00, but is less than $50,000.00, approval of the City Attorney is also required to pay the claim. No claim in excess of $50,000.00 may be paid without City Council approval. (3753-11/06, 3948-7/12)

 

1.22.050 Suit
Any action brought against the City of Huntington Beach upon any claim or demand shall conform to the requirements of Sections 940-949 of the California Government Code. Any action brought against any employee of the City of Huntington Beach shall conform with the requirements of Sections 950-951 of the California Government Code. (3753-11/06, 3948-7/12)

 

1.22.060 Property Taxes
This chapter shall apply to all claims for refunds of any property tax levied pursuant to Revenue and Taxation Code Section 96.31(a)(4). (3753-11/06, 3948-7/12)

 

1.22.065 Severability
Should any provision of this chapter, or its application to any person or circumstance, be determined by a court of competent jurisdiction to be unlawful, unenforceable or otherwise void, that determination shall have no effect on any other provision of this chapter or the application of this chapter to any other person or circumstance and, to that end, the provisions hereof are severable. (3948-7/12)

Title 2 ADMINISTRATION AND PERSONNEL
Note
*       Note: Ch. 2.05 repealed by Ord. 3714-7/05, Ch. 2.06 repealed by Ord. 3811-8/08 (later replaced by Ord. 3978-6/13), Ch. 2.12 repealed by Ord. 3722-10/05, Ch. 2.16 repealed by Ord. 3907-3/11, Ch. 2.32 repealed by Ord. 3855-2/10, Ch. 2.36 repealed by Ord. 2464-12/80, Chs. 2.44 and 2.60 repealed by Ord. 2332-1/79, Ch. 2.48 repealed by Ord. 2330-1/79, Ch. 2.68 repealed by Ord. 2591-1/83, Chs. 2.88 and 2.92 repealed by Ord. 2363-5/79, Chs. 2.99 and 2.103 repealed by Ord. 3335-10/96, Ch. 2.104 repealed by Ord. 3770-8/07, Ch. 2.105 repealed by Ord. 3403-10/98, Ch. 2.109 repealed by Ord. 3923-12/11.

 

2.111    Public Works Commission

2.112    Mobile Home Advisory Board

2.114    Department of Information Services

 

Chapter 2.04 ELIGIBILITY OF CANDIDATES
Note
*       Note: §§ 2.04.010, 2.04.050 and 2.04.090 repealed by Ord. 2507-11/81.

 

2.04.030 Residence and Registered Voter Requirements for Elective Officers
A.    No person is eligible to hold any elective office in the City of Huntington Beach unless that person was a resident and a registered voter of the City both at the time of assuming such office and at the time of issuance of nomination papers.

B.     No person shall be appointed to fill a vacancy in an elective office in the City unless that person is at the time of assuming such office a resident and a registered voter of the City.

C.     Any elective officer of the City, whether elected or appointed, shall at all times during his or her term of office be a resident and a registered voter of the City, and if during his or her term of office he or she moves his or her place of residence outside of the City limits or ceases to be a registered voter of the City, his or her office shall immediately become vacant. (1756-7/72, 2023-1/75, 2943-7/88)

 

Chapter 2.06 CAMPAIGN DOCUMENTS
2.06.010 Findings and Purpose
The City Council finds and declares as follows:

A.    Elections are susceptible to the dissemination of campaign literature known as “hit pieces.” These documents are sent to voters in the later stages of a campaign, typically contain personal attacks on candidates or the proponents/opponents of measures and frequently misrepresent a candidate’s position on issues or the true impact of a measure.

B.     Prompt public disclosure of the contents of last-minute campaign documents including hit pieces will allow for the discussion of important issues and the conduct of fair elections by: (1) offering the candidate attacked an opportunity to accurately represent his or her position on issues; (2) offering opponents or proponents the opportunity to respond to statements about a measure that are untrue or believed to be untrue; and (3) providing an opportunity for a candidate, proponent or opponent to disavow the contents of any campaign document that he or she believes represents an unfair, untrue or improper attack on any person.

C.     The requirement for prompt disclosure of last-minute campaign documents is content neutral, serves compelling municipal interests in fair elections and full discussions of relevant issues, and is the least intrusive method available to further these interests. (3978-6/13)

 

2.06.020 Definitions
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meaning specified in this section:

“Campaign document” means any writing or document which supports, opposes or relates to any candidate or measure.

“Candidate” means any individual who is listed on the ballot or who has qualified to have write-in votes on his or her behalf counted by election officials for the City of Huntington Beach.

“Distributing” or “distribution” shall mean mailing via United States mail or passing out any campaign document to any person.

“Measure” means any initiative, referendum, Charter amendment or other proposition which is listed on the ballot for any general or special municipal election and which is being voted on only in the City of Huntington Beach.

“Person” includes any individual, proprietorship, firm, partnership, joint venture, syndicate, business trust, company, corporation, association, committee, and any other organization or group of persons acting in concert. (3978-6/13)

 

2.06.030 Filing
Any person distributing 1,000 or more substantially similar campaign documents within 30 days of any general or special municipal election shall, within one business day of first distribution, transmit two copies of the campaign document to the City Clerk for the City of Huntington Beach. (3978-6/13)

 

2.06.040 Public Record
Campaign documents filed with the City Clerk shall be a matter of public record. The City Clerk shall make available, upon the request of any person appearing at the office of the City Clerk during normal business hours, a copy of campaign documents filed with the City Clerk. (3978-6/13)

 

2.06.050 Penalties
Any violation of this chapter shall be punishable by:

A.    Administrative Citation. Violation of this chapter is subject to the issuance of an administrative citation under the provisions of Chapter 1.18 of this Code. An operator may be cited for violations occurring on the premises in their presence or for knowingly permitting violations of this chapter.

B.     Civil Action. The City Attorney may institute an action in any court of competent jurisdiction, including an action to abate a nuisance, to restrain, enjoin, or abate the condition(s) found to be in violation of the provisions of this chapter, as provided by law.

C.     It shall be a violation of this chapter for any principal, including but not limited to any operator, to permit, procure, counsel or assist any agent of that principal, including but not limited to an employee or independent contractor, to violate any provision of this chapter. (3978-6/13)

 

Chapter 2.07 CAMPAIGN REFORM
Note
*       Note: §§ 2.07.060, 2.07.110, 2.07.120, 2.07.160—2.07.210 and 2.07.250 repealed by Ord. 3803-7/08.

 

2.07.010 Name
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the “City of Huntington Beach Campaign Reform Law.” (3220-1/94)

 

2.07.020 Purpose
The purpose of this chapter is to ensure that the financial strength of certain individuals or organizations does not permit them to exercise a disproportionate or controlling influence on the election of City candidates. To achieve such purpose, this chapter is designed to reduce the influence of large contributions, to ensure that multiple contributions in excess of the contribution limits do not originate from the same source of funds, to ensure that individuals and interest groups continue to have a fair and equal opportunity to participate in electing City candidates, and to maintain public trust in governmental institutions and the electoral process. (3220-1/94)

 

2.07.030 Relation to Political Reform Act of 1974
This chapter is intended to supplement the Political Reform Act of 1974. Unless the term is specifically defined in this chapter, or the contrary is stated or clearly appears from the context, words and phrases shall have the same meaning as when they are used in Title 9 of the California Government Code, in which the Political Reform Act of 1974 is codified, as the same may be, from time to time amended. (3220-1/94)

 

2.07.040 Definitions
“City candidate” means any person who is a candidate for City Council, City Clerk, City Treasurer, or City Attorney of the City of Huntington Beach.

“Elective City officer” means any person who is Mayor, a member of the City Council, City Clerk, City Treasurer, or City Attorney of the City of Huntington Beach.

“Electronic filing” means the submission of required campaign statements and reports in an electronic format approved by the Secretary of State and the City Clerk.

“Non-elected City official” means any person who is a member of a City of Huntington Beach board, committee, or commission, and who is not elected to that position.

“Person” means an individual, proprietorship, firm, partnership, joint venture, syndicate, business trust, company, corporation, association, committee, and any other organization or group of persons acting in concert. (3220-1/94, 4009-4/14)

 

2.07.050 Campaign Contribution Limitations
No person shall make to any City candidate or the controlled committee of any such City candidate, and no such candidate or committee shall accept from any such person, a contribution or contributions totaling more than $500.00 in a City Council, City Clerk, City Treasurer, or City Attorney election cycle. Thereafter said contribution limitations shall increase by the October consumer price index (CPI) of Los Angeles, Long Beach, and Anaheim areas, rounded to the nearest $10.00, effective at the beginning of each new election cycle. (3220-1/94, 3599-2/03, 3803-6/08)

 

2.07.070 Election Cycle
A.    City Council, City Clerk, City Treasurer, and City Attorney Elections. For purposes of the limits of this chapter, as applied to elections for City Council, City Clerk, City Treasurer, and City Attorney, the final date for contributions shall be December 31st of the year in which the election for the open position was held. Contributions made after the final date shall be deemed contributions for the next election cycle. Notwithstanding the foregoing, contributions made after the final date to an elected councilmember who is ineligible for a further consecutive term, shall be deemed a contribution for the most recent election cycle in which such councilmember was eligible, and such contributions shall be subject to all other limitations and regulations in effect during said election cycle.

B.     Examples of the Election Cycle. January 1, 1987, to December 31, 1990, was the “election cycle” for the 1990 election. Pursuant to this section, the four-year period for purposes of applying the interpretation of the Campaign Ordinance Election Cycle 2.07.070(A) shall be as follows:

1.     Example 1.

1992 Election Cycle - Three Council Seats and City Clerk and City Treasurer: January 1, 1989 - December 31, 1992.

a.     The “last election” was November 1988.

b.     December 31, 1988, was the last or final date for receipt of campaign contributions for the 1988 election.

c.     January 1, 1989, began the election cycle for the 1992 election.

d.     December 31, 1992, ended the election cycle for the 1992 election.

2.     Example 2.

1994 Election Cycle - Four Council Seats and City Attorney: January 1, 1991 - December 31, 1994.

a.     The “last election” was November 1990.

b.     December 31, 1990, was the last or final date for receipt of campaign contributions for the 1990 election.

c.     January 1, 1991, began the election cycle for the 1994 election.

d.     December 31, 1994, ends the election cycle for the 1994 election.

3.     Example 3.

1996 Election Cycle - Three Council Seats and City Clerk and City Treasurer: January 1, 1993 - December 31, 1996.

a.     The “last election” was November 1992.

b.     December 31, 1992, was the last or final date for receipt of campaign contributions for the 1992 election.

c.     January 1, 1993, began the election cycle for the 1996 election.

d.     December 31, 1996, ends the election cycle for the 1996 election.

C.     Recalls. For purposes of the limits of this chapter, campaign contributions made at any time after a committee has been formed, pursuant to the provisions of the Political Reform Act, in support of a recall election or after the City Clerk has approved a recall petition for circulation and gathering of signatures, whichever occurs first, shall be considered contributions during a recall election cycle. A recall election cycle shall end whenever any of the following occur:

1.     The recall proponents fail to return signed petitions to the City Clerk within the time limits set forth in the California Elections Code.

2.     All committees formed in support of the recall have been terminated pursuant to the provisions of the Political Reform Act.

3.     Ten days after a recall election has been held. (3220-1/94, 3749-9/06, 3830-5/09)

 

2.07.080 Prohibition on Multiple Campaign Committees
A City candidate or an elective City officer shall have no more than one campaign committee which shall have only one bank account out of which all qualified campaign and office holder expenses related to that City office shall be made. This section does not prevent a City candidate or an elective City officer from establishing another campaign committee solely for the purpose of running for a state, federal, local, or other City office. This section also does not prevent an elective City officer from establishing another campaign committee solely for the purpose of opposing his or her own recall. (3220-1/94)

 

2.07.090 Prohibition on Transfers
A.    No funds may be transferred into any City candidate or elective City officer’s campaign committee from any other campaign committee controlled by a candidate (including said City candidate) or by an elective City officer (including said elective City officer).

 

B.     No City candidate and no committee controlled by a City candidate or elective City officer shall make any contribution to any other City candidate running for office or to any committee supporting or opposing a City candidate for elective City office, nor to any committee supporting or opposing a recall of an elective City officer. This section shall not prohibit a City candidate from making a contribution from his or her own personal funds to his or her own candidacy or to the candidacy of any other candidate for elective City office.

The provision of this section shall not apply to the candidate or elected officer who forms a new committee for purposes of reelection to the same office and, to close out the prior committee, transfers the money or debt from the prior committee to the new committee and, in so doing, complies with all regulations of the Political Reform Act of 1974, and as amended. (3220-1/94)

 

2.07.100 Loans to City Candidates and Elective City Officers and Their Controlled Committee
A.    A loan shall be considered a contribution from the maker and the guarantor of the loan and shall be subject to the contribution limitations of this chapter.

B.     Every loan to a City candidate or elective City officer or their controlled committees shall be by written agreement which shall be filed with the candidate’s or committee’s campaign statement on which the loan is first reported.

C.     The proceeds of a loan made to a City candidate or elective City officer by a commercial lending institution in the regular course of business on the same terms available to members of the public shall not be subject to the contribution limitations of this chapter if the loan is made directly to the City candidate or elective City officer or his or her controlled committee. The guarantors of such a loan shall remain subject to the contribution limits of this chapter.

D.    Extensions of credit (other than loans pursuant to subsection C of this section) for a period of more than 30 days are subject to the contribution limitations of this chapter.

E.     This section shall apply only to loans and extensions of credit used or intended for use for campaign purposes or which are otherwise connected with the holding of public office.

F.     The monetary limitations or provisions of this section shall not apply to a candidate’s loan of his or her personal funds to his or her own campaign committee.

G.    No City candidate and no committee controlled by a City candidate or elective City officer shall make any contribution to any other City candidate running for office or to any committee supporting or opposing a City candidate for elective City office, nor to any committee supporting or opposing a recall of an elective City officer. This section shall not prohibit a City candidate from making a contribution from his or her own personal funds to his or her own candidacy or to the candidacy of any other candidate for elective City office. (3220-1/94)

 

2.07.130 Transmittal of Campaign Contributions in City Office Buildings
A.    No person shall receive or personally deliver or attempt to deliver a contribution in any office which the City owns or for which the City pays the majority of the rent where the business of the City is conducted.

B.     For purposes of this section:

1.     “Personally deliver” means delivery of a contribution in person or causing a contribution to be delivered in person by an agent or intermediary, other than the United States mail.

2.     “Receive” includes the receipt of a campaign contribution delivered in person. (3220-1/94, 3803-6/08)

 

2.07.140 Disclosure of Occupation and Employer
No campaign contribution shall be deposited into a campaign bank account of a City candidate or elective City officer unless the disclosure information required by the Political Reform Act, including the name, address, occupation and employer of the contributor, or, if self-employed, name of business, is on file in the records of the recipient of the contribution. This information is to be reported on each campaign statement required to be filed by the Political Reform Act. (3220-1/94)

 

2.07.150 Reporting of Cumulative Contributions
A cumulative contribution for each contributor shall be based on an election cycle and shall be reported on each campaign statement required to be filed by the Political Reform Act. (3220-1/94)

 

2.07.155 Requirement to File Statements and Reports Electronically
A.    An elective City officer, City candidate, committee, or other person required to file campaign statements or reports under this chapter and Title 9, Chapter 14 of the California Government Code (commencing with Section 84100), who receives contributions totaling $2,000.00 or more, or makes expenditures totaling $2,000.00 or more in a calendar year, must submit all campaign statements and reports as an electronic filing. Once an elective City officer, City candidate, committee or other person is required to submit campaign statements or reports as an electronic filing, that elective City officer, City candidate, committee or other person shall continue to use electronic filing until the committee has officially terminated or the elective City officer, City candidate or other person has no further filing obligations.

1.     An elective City officer, City candidate, committee, or other person that must file pursuant to this chapter, but has not met the $2,000.00 threshold, may submit required statements or reports as an electronic filing or in paper format.

2.     In any instance in which the original campaign statement, report, or other document is required to be filed with the Secretary of State and a copy of that campaign statement, report or other document is required to be filed with the City of Huntington Beach, the copy may be submitted as an electronic filing. (4009-4/14, 4084-9/16)

 

2.07.165 Filing Procedures
A.    Electronic filing procedures shall be administered in accordance with Government Code Section 84615 as may be amended from time to time.

B.     Notwithstanding any other provision of law, any campaign statement, report or other document submitted as an electronic filing shall serve as the filing of record and shall not be required to be filed with the City Clerk in paper format. (4009-4/14)

 

2.07.175 Statements and Reports—Signature and Verification Requirements
Campaign statements and reports filed under this chapter shall be signed under penalty of perjury and verified by the filer. The verification shall state that the filer has used all reasonable diligence in its preparation,

and that to the best of his or her knowledge, it is true and complete. A campaign statement or report filed by a committee shall be signed and verified by a responsible officer of the organization or by an attorney or a certified public accountant. Every person who signs or verifies any campaign statement or report required to be filed under this chapter which contains material which he or she knows to be false is guilty of perjury. For a campaign statement or report submitted as an electronic filing, a secure electronic signature shall meet the requirements of this section. (4009-4/14)

 

2.07.220 Applicability of Other Laws
Nothing in this chapter shall exempt any person from applicable provisions of any other laws of this state or jurisdiction. (3220-1/94)

 

2.07.230 Severability
If any provisions of this chapter, or the application of any such provision to any person or circumstances, shall be held invalid, the remainder of this chapter, to the extent it can be given effect, or the application of such provision to persons or circumstances other than those as to which it is held invalid, shall not be affected thereby, and to this extent the provisions of this chapter are severable. (3220-1/94)

 

2.07.240 Interpretation of Chapter
This chapter should be liberally construed to accomplish its purposes. (3220-1/94)

 

2.07.260 Effective Date
The provisions of this chapter shall become effective upon adoption, pursuant to Huntington Beach City Charter Section 500(e)(1). (3220-1/94)

 

Chapter 2.08 CITY MANAGER
Note
*       Note: §§ 2.08.020, 2.08.040 and 2.08.070 repealed by Ord. 3718-8/05; §§ 2.08.060 repealed by Ord. 3906-3/11; §§ 2.08.080—2.08.100 repealed by Ord. 2123-11/76.

 

2.08.010 Powers—Duties
In addition to such other duties and responsibilities as may be designated by the Charter of the City, this Code, or the City Council, the office of the City Manager shall perform and be charged with the duties of general budget policy administration and general City policy management, general research and systems development, administrative management, community relations, public information and volunteer program administration.

A.    Meeting. To attend meetings of the Council, with the duty of reporting on or discussing any matter concerning the affairs of the departments, services or activities under his or her supervision upon which in his or her judgment the Council should be informed unless excused therefrom by the City Council, except when his or her removal is under consideration by the City Council.

B.     Coordination of Departments. To assist the Council in coordinating the administrative functions and operations of the various departments, divisions and services of the City government; and, on its behalf to carry out the policies, rules and regulations and ordinances adopted by it, relating to the administration of the affairs of such departments, divisions or services.

C.     Analysis and Recommendations. To analyze the functions, duties and activities of the various departments, divisions and services of the City government and of all employees thereof; and to make such recommendations to the Council with reference thereto as in his or her judgment will result in the highest degree of efficiency in the overall operation of the City government.

D.    Director of Emergency Services. To act as local director of emergency services.

E.     Administration of Budget. To be responsible for the administration of the budget after its final adoption, and to keep the Council informed with respect thereto.

F.     Supervision Over Expenditures. As agent for the Council, to supervise the expenditures of all departments, divisions or services of the City government.

G.    Public Improvements. To develop and organize necessary public improvement projects and programs; and to aid and assist the Council and various departments in carrying the same through to successful conclusion.

H.    Cooperation With Community Organizations. To cooperate within lawful limits, with all community organizations whose aim and purpose it is to advance the spiritual and material interests of the City and its people; and to provide them, within lawful limits, with assistance through the City government.

I.      Additional Duties. To perform such other duties pertaining to this position as the Council may from time to time reasonably require.

J.      Agency for Council—Limitations. The City Manager shall act as the agent for the City Council in the discharge of its administrative functions but shall not exercise any policy-making or legislative functions whatsoever, nor attempt to commit or bind the Council or any member thereof to any action, plan or program requiring official councilmanic action.

K.    Duties Vested Elsewhere. It is not intended by this section to grant any authority to, or impose any duty upon the City Manager which is vested in or imposed by general law or valid City ordinances in any other City commission, board, department, officer or employee. (524-2/48, 1935-11/74, 3718-8/05, 3906-3/11)

 

2.08.030 Eligibility—Councilmember
No person elected as a councilmember of the City shall, subsequent to such election, be eligible for appointment as City Manager until one year has elapsed after such councilmember shall have ceased to be a member of the City Council. (740-12/59, 3718-8/05, 3906-3/11)

 

2.08.050 Absence
The City Manager shall designate an officer of the City to serve as acting City Manager during any temporary absence or disability of the City Manager. In the event of failure to make such designation, the City Council may appoint an officer to perform the duties of the City Manager during the period of absence or disability of said City Manager. (740-12/59, 3718-8/05, 3906-3/11)

 

2.08.120 Standard of Conduct
In the discharge of his or her duties as City Manager, the person holding such position shall endeavor at all times to exercise the highest degree of tact, patience and courtesy in his or her contacts with the public and with all City commissions, boards, departments, officers and employees, and shall use his or her best efforts to establish and maintain a harmonious relationship between all personnel employed in the government of this City to the end that the highest possible standards of public service be continuous. (524-2/48, 3718-8/05, 3906-3/11)

 

2.08.130 Attendance at Commission or Board Meetings
The City Manager may attend any and all meetings of any commissions, boards or committees hereafter created by the City Council, upon his or her own volition or upon direction of the City Council. At such meetings which the City Manager attends, he or she shall be heard by such commissions, boards or committees as to all matters upon which he or she wishes to address the members thereof; and he or she shall inform said members as to the status of any matter being considered by the City Council, and shall cooperate to the fullest extent with the members of all commissions, boards or committees appointed by the City Council. (740-12/59, 3718-8/05, 3906-3/11)

 

2.08.140 Council Administrative Relations
The City Council and its members shall deal with the administrative services of the City only through the City Manager, except for the purpose of inquiry, and neither the City Council nor any members thereof shall give any orders to any subordinates of the City Manager. The City Manager shall take orders and instructions from the City Council as a body, and no individual councilmember shall give any orders or instructions to the City Manager. (740-12/59, 3718-8/05, 3906-3/11)

 

2.08.150 City Manager
All references to City Administrator in the Huntington Beach Municipal Code shall be considered a reference to the City Manager. (3906-3/11)

 

Chapter 2.15 FINANCE DEPARTMENT
2.15.010 Establishment
There is hereby established a Finance Department which shall include the staff functions of finance, and purchasing. (3752-11/06)

 

2.15.020 Objectives
The objectives of the department shall be to establish, facilitate and maintain support to City operating departments. (3752-11/06)

 

2.15.030 Chief Financial Officer—Powers and Duties
The Chief Financial Officer shall be appointed by the City Manager. The Chief Financial Officer shall have the following powers and duties:

A.    Direct, plan, organize and coordinate programs and activities of the Finance Department.

B.     Establish and maintain a system of financial procedures, accounts and controls for the City government and each of its offices, officers, departments and agencies.

C.     Provide direction for the control of all expenditures to ensure that budget appropriations are not exceeded.

D.    Manage the business license functions including the issuance of permits.

E.     Direct and administer the City’s centralized purchasing function with regard to procurement of all supplies, services and equipment for all City departments and agencies of the City.

F.     Administration and enforcement of appropriate sections of Title 5 of the Huntington Beach Municipal Code relating to business licensing.

G.    Administer and enforce all Municipal Code regulations including, but not limited to:

1.     Licensing Procedures (Chapter 5.08).

2.     Natural Resources Production (Chapter 5.32).

3.     Transient Occupancy Tax (Chapter 3.28).

4.     Late Charges (Chapter 3.48).

5.     Service Connections (Chapter 14.08).

6.     Fees, Rates and Deposits (Chapter 14.12).

H.    Establishes and controls all bank accounts, negotiates services and contracts with bank, and handles returned checks and reconciliation thereof.

I.      Collects and deposits or causes to be deposited monies owed to the City whether by tax, fee, charge, judgment, settlement or otherwise; utilizes letters, phone calls, and collection agencies as required; and may write off uncollectible items up to $10,000.00 without further authorization, between $10,000.00 and $50,000.00 with the prior approval of the City Manager and in excess of $50,000.00 with City Council approval only, in furtherance of the City Treasurer’s duties under the City Charter.

J.      Makes cash flow projections on a weekly and monthly basis.

K.    Receives all City monies including taxes, fees, water, sewer and trash fees including oil well royalties and transient occupancy taxes in furtherance of the City Treasurer’s duties under the City Charter.

L.     Maintains all trusts, bonds, security agreements, and funds for the City including the filing, depositing, refunds and releases, letters of release, and inquiries relating thereto. (3807-8/08, 3907-3/11, 4086-5/16)

 

2.15.040 Appointment of Subordinates
The Chief Financial Officer, with the approval of the City Manager, shall appoint all other officers, assistants, deputies and employees of the Finance Department. (3907-3/11, 4086-5/16)

 

2.15.050 Financial and Accounting Duties of City Clerk Transferred
In accordance with Government Code Sections 37209 and 40805.5, the financial and accounting duties imposed upon the City Clerk by Government Code Sections 40802 through 40805 are hereby transferred to the Chief Financial Officer. (3907-3/11, 4086-5/16)

 

Chapter 2.20 CITY ATTORNEY (Reserved)
Chapter 2.24 POLICE CHIEF
2.24.010 Powers—Duties
The Police Chief shall have charge of the Police Department of the City, and it shall be his or her duty to preserve the peace. (15-5/1909, 403-9/37, 3807-8/08)

 

2.24.020 Powers, Immunities of Sheriff
The Police Chief shall have the same powers that are now or may hereafter be conferred on Sheriff’s bylaws of the state, and shall be entitled to the same protection. (15-5/1909)

 

2.24.030 Reports
The Police Chief shall make monthly and annual reports to the Council on the work of the Police Department. (1248-10/66)

 

2.24.040 Responsible for Jail and Prisoners
The Police Chief shall have charge of the City Jail and prisoners. (15-5/1909)

 

2.24.050 Other Required Acts
The Police Chief shall perform such other acts as the laws of the state and ordinances of the Council may require. (15-5/1909)

 

Chapter 2.28 CITY COUNCIL
2.28.010 Expense Allowance
A.    It is deemed reasonable and adequate that in reimbursement of the ordinary and routine expenses, losses and costs imposed upon them by virtue of their serving the City in their official capacity, each Council Member shall receive monthly, during their term of office, $1,310.91 per month, and the Mayor shall receive $1,838.44 per month, to be adjusted annually by the Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers, all items, 1982-84 equals 100, published by the United States Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics, for the Los Angeles/Anaheim/Riverside Metropolitan Area. Further, such expense allowance need not be accounted for by the recipient.

B.     In addition thereto, each member of the City Council, including the Mayor, shall be reimbursed pursuant to the City’s Business Expense Policy for Council authorized travel and other expenses when on official duty upon submission of itemized expense account therefor. This section is intended to meet the requirements of Section 302 of the City Charter. Appropriations for the allowance and other expenses provided for herein shall be included in the annual budget approved by the City Council. (1346-9/67, 2079-8/76, 2566-8/82, 2997-5/89, 3956-9/12, 4044-3/15)

 

2.28.020 Health Insurance Benefits
Except as provided herein, each member of the City Council shall be offered all health insurance benefits (medical/dental/vision/life/add/ltd) which are granted, and in the future shall be granted, to the department heads of the City of Huntington Beach, and the cost of such health insurance benefits shall be included in the annual budget and paid by the City. Each Council Member shall be offered City-funded health insurance benefits (medical/dental/vision/life/add/ltd). Each Council Member may add their current spouse and/or family member dependents onto the City’s group health insurance policy with the additional monthly premium cost above single coverage for medical/dental/vision to be borne by the requesting member via payroll deduction or direct bill if insufficient funds. No cash-in-lieu thereof (medical opt-out) shall be offered to a Council Member or spouse and/or family member dependent. (2079-8/76, 3956-9/12, 4044-3/15, 4127-12/17)

 

Chapter 2.30 COMMUNITY SERVICES DEPARTMENT
2.30.010 Established
There is hereby established a Department of Community Services. (2399-11/79)

 

2.30.020 Objectives
The objectives of the department shall be as follows:

A.    To establish, facilitate, and maintain ample and sufficient safety services for the harbors and beaches owned, leased and controlled by the City.

B.     To operate and maintain all department facilities.

C.     To encourage, foster, facilitate, establish and maintain systematized recreation, park acquisition and development, cultural and human services programs as directed by the City Council.

D.    To assist department advisory boards, commissions, and committees including, but not limited to, the Community Services Commission, Human Resources Board, Council on Aging, Allied Arts Board, Youth Board and Historic Resources Board.

E.     To cooperate with other governmental agencies and civic groups in the advancement of sound recreational, park, beach and cultural planning under the direction of the City Council.

F.     To be responsible for human services, including direct service delivery as well as the enhancement of communication, cooperation, and coordination among agencies, organizations, and those individuals providing services to the residents of the City, such services to be offered on any part of the properties owned or controlled by the City or on any other properties with the consent of the owners and the authorities thereof.

G.    To ensure that park property shall not be subject to continuous or exclusive use of any one particular or special interest group unless the membership of such group is open to the public on a nondiscriminatory basis.

H.    To be responsible for cultural services including both direct and indirect services delivery in the areas of municipal arts and museum/historic services by cooperative efforts with numerous cultural organizations for the enhancement of the cultural environment and economic viability of the community. (2932-4/88, 3075-10/90)

 

2.30.030 Director—Powers and Duties
The Director of Community Services shall be appointed by the City Manager. The director shall have the following powers and duties:

A.    Plans, organizes and directs programs and activities in harbors, beaches, recreation, parks, human services, and the arts and historic/museum services.

B.     Directs and coordinates all activities and phases of operations within the department.

C.     Advises on acquisition, design and construction of recreational, beach, park and cultural facilities.

D.    Ensures recreation, beach, park, human services, cultural, arts and museum needs are met and maintained within established framework, and executes policy, rules and regulations as established by the City Council.

E.     Investigates and authorizes purchase of materials and equipment necessary to implement and operate programs.

F.     Determines department policies and procedures.

G.    Communicates program plans and activities to various City, intercity and community groups.

H.    Prepares and administers departmental budget.

I.      Serves as secretary to the department’s advisory boards and commissions or appoints appropriate staff so to serve.

J.      Performs such other duties and has such other powers as the City Council may establish hereafter by resolution. (2932-4/88, 3075-10/90, 4086-5/16)

 

2.30.040 Appointment of Subordinates
The director, with the approval of the City Manager, shall appoint all other officers, assistants, deputies, and employees of the Community Services Department. (2399-11/79)

 

2.30.050 Fees and Charges
The department has authority to charge reasonable fees for use of City buildings, property, and facilities, and for participation in related activities to help defray public expense, subject to approval of the City Council. (2932-4/88)

 

2.30.060 Acceptance of Gifts
The department may accept all gifts, devises, legacies, or bequests from any source, public or private, in the name of the City subject to the approval of the City Council. All monies so obtained by the department shall be deposited by the director or his or her duly authorized subordinate in the general fund of the treasury of the City or in any special fund the City Council may designate. (2332-1/79)

 

2.30.070 Annual Budget
The City Council shall annually establish a community services budget. (2399-11/79)

 

2.30.080 Terms
Wherever the terms “Harbors and Beaches Department,” “Recreation, Parks and Human Services Department” or “Department of Harbors, Beaches, Recreation and Parks” are used in this Code, or in any resolution adopted by the City Council, they shall be deemed to mean and read “Community Services Department.” Wherever the terms “Director of Harbors and Beaches,” “Director of Recreation, Parks and Human Services” or “Director of Harbors, Beaches, Recreation and Parks” are used in this Code, they shall be deemed to mean and read “Director of Community Services.” (2932-4/88, 3075-10/90)

 

Chapter 2.33 DEPARTMENT OF COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT
2.33.010 Department Established
There is hereby created the Department of Community Development of the City of Huntington Beach. (3550-5/02, 3855-2/10, 4086-5/16)

 

2.33.020 Director—Appointment
The Director of Community Development shall be the head of the department and such director shall be appointed by the City Manager. (3550-5/02, 3855-2/10, 4086-5/16, 4086-5/16)

 

2.33.030 Department Objectives
The objectives of the department shall be as follows:

A.    Provide long-range data analysis and comprehensive planning, including statistical research, neighborhood planning and analysis, special projects, and methods of implementing plans and programs.

B.     Administer ongoing and continuing planning and zoning functions, including administration of zoning and subdivision ordinances.

C.     Provide services to developers and investors to assist in facilitating development or to encourage new development in accordance with policies of the City Council.

D.    Administer and enforce laws, ordinances, regulations and programs related to housing, zoning and property maintenance.

E.     Provide staff services and support to the Planning Commission, Zoning Administrator, Design Review Board, Environmental Board, Subdivision Committee, Environmental Assessment Committee, and other committees, subcommittees, boards and commissions pertaining to planning.

F.     Administer and enforce state and local construction regulations to protect the health and safety of the community.

G.    Utilize automation to improve the access to information and services.

H.    Provide plan review and inspection services in a professional, flexible and equitable manner.

I.      Perform such other related duties as shall be required by law, ordinance or the City Manager. (3550-5/02, 3855-2/10, 4086-5/16)

 

2.33.040 Director—Powers and Duties
A.    The Director of Community Development shall be responsible for the administration and enforcement of appropriate sections of Titles 8, 15 and 17 of the Huntington Beach Municipal Code, the City of Huntington Beach Zoning and Subdivision Ordinance, and California Labor Code Section 6404.5 (smoking in closed places of employment).

B.     In addition to the foregoing, the Director of Community Development shall perform other acts or duties, not inconsistent with the City Charter, as may be required by the City Council or the laws of the State of California.

C.     Whenever in this Code, the Huntington Beach Zoning and Subdivision Ordinance or any resolution, adopted by the City Council, reference is made to the Department of Planning or the director of such department, such references shall mean the Department of Community Development and the Director of Community Development.

D.    Whenever in this Code, Zoning and Subdivision Ordinance of the City of Huntington Beach, or any resolution, adopted by the City Council, reference is made to the Department of Building & Safety and/or the director of such department, such references shall mean the Department of Community Development and the Director of Community Development.

E.     Whenever in this Code, Zoning and Subdivision Ordinance of the City of Huntington Beach, or any resolution, adopted by the City Council, reference is made to the Department of Planning and Building and/or the director of such department, such references shall mean the Department of Community Development and the Director of Community Development. (3550-5/02, 3855-2/10, 4086-5/16)

 

2.33.050 Appointment of Subordinates
The director, with the approval of the City Manager, shall appoint all other officers, assistants, deputies and employees of the Department of Community Development. (3550-5/02, 3855-2/10, 4086-5/16)

 

Chapter 2.34 CITY PLANNING COMMISSION
2.34.010 Commission Established
There is hereby established a Planning Commission in and for the City of Huntington Beach which shall be known as the Planning Commission of the City of Huntington Beach. The authority to create a Planning Commission is derived from the Huntington Beach City Charter Section 405. (3253-11/94)

 

2.34.020 Duties
A.    The duties of the Planning Commission shall be as provided in the California Government Code Title 7, as may be amended, and as provided by ordinance of the City of Huntington Beach.

B.     In addition to powers and duties specified in the Government Code, the Planning Commission shall have the power and be required to:

1.     Recommend to the City Council after a public hearing thereon, the adoption, amendment or repeal of a master or general plan, or any part thereof, for guidance in the physical development of the City.

2.     Exercise such functions with respect to land subdivisions as shall be provided by the Subdivision Map Act, and by ordinance not inconsistent with the provisions of the Charter.

3.     Exercise such functions with respect to zoning, building, land use, precise plans, specific plans, and related matters which may be prescribed by ordinance not inconsistent with the provisions of the Charter.

4.     Perform such other functions not inconsistent with the Charter as may be delegated to it by the City Council. (3253-11/94)

 

2.34.030 Records of Commission
Accurate and permanent records of the acts of the commission shall be kept, and such records shall have the same status as records of other administrative departments of the City. (3253-11/94)

 

2.34.040 Members
The Planning Commission shall consist of seven members who shall be residents of the City and shall not be officers or employees of the City. (3253-11/94)

 

2.34.050 Appointment
Each member of the City Council shall appoint one member to the Planning Commission. (3253-11/94)

 

2.34.060 Term
Each member of the Planning Commission shall serve a four-year term commencing on January 1st following a general municipal election at which the appointing councilmember was elected. In the event the office of any appointing councilmember becomes vacant during the term thereof, the term of the Planning Commissioner appointed by such councilmember shall terminate 30 days after such vacancy occurs. Following expiration of his or her term of office, each member of the Planning Commission shall continue to serve until his or her successor is appointed and qualified. Members of the Planning Commission may be removed by the councilmember of which he or she is the appointee, upon announcement of such removal at a regular City Council meeting; provided, however, that no member of the Planning Commission may be removed prior to January 1st following any general municipal election. (3253-11/94, 3418-6/99)

 

2.34.070 Vacancies
Vacancies in the Planning Commission shall be filled by appointment by the City councilmember or his or her successor, who made the appointment which is vacated. (3253-11/94)

 

2.34.080 Temporary Absences
Any Planning Commissioner who, because of health reasons, or prolonged absence from the City, shall notify the councilmember of which he or she is the appointee, and such councilmember may appoint an acting commissioner to serve during the period the appointee is to be absent. The acting commissioner shall meet all the requirements of the appointed Planning Commissioner. (3253-11/94)

 

2.34.090 Bylaws
The Planning Commission shall adopt such bylaws and rules as it deems necessary to provide for its officers and their method of selection, time and place of meetings and for such other matters relative to its work and administration of its duties which are not otherwise provided for by statute or ordinance. (3253-11/94)

 

2.34.100 Advisors
The Planning Commission may request attendance at its meetings of any officer or employee of the City to assist the commission in its deliberations in an advisory capacity but who shall not have the authority to vote upon any matter being considered by the commission. (3253-11/94)

 

2.34.110 Assistance for Commission
The commission may make such investigations, employ such City help, secure such advice, and have prepared such plans and reports as it may deem necessary to perform its duties and functions. (3253-11/94)

 

2.34.120 Compensation
Members of the Planning Commission may receive compensation for their service. Said compensation shall be set by resolution of the City Council. (3253-11/94)

 

Chapter 2.40 FIRE DEPARTMENT
2.40.010 Established
A Fire Department is established for the City. (2917-12/87)

 

2.40.020 Mission
The primary mission of the Fire Department is to provide a range of programs designed to protect the lives and property of the inhabitants of the City from the adverse effects of fires, sudden medical emergencies or exposure to dangerous conditions created by either man or nature. (2917-12/87)

 

2.40.030 Function
The Fire Department shall be under the management of the Fire Chief. The functions of the Fire Department shall include:

A.    The extinguishment of structural, brush and other types of fires.

B.     The enforcement of laws concerned with fire prevention.

C.     The abatement of any hazard or nuisance caused by any substance that presents a threat to the public because of toxicity, radioactivity, flammability or other characteristic dangerous to the public health or environment.

D.    Such other functions as may be delegated by the City Manager or the City Council. (2917-12/87)

 

2.40.040 Chief—Appointment
The Fire Chief shall be appointed as provided in the Charter. (2917-12/87)

 

2.40.050 Chief—Ex Officio Duties
The Fire Chief shall be ex officio Fire Marshall with police power. (2917-12/87)

 

Chapter 2.52 POLICE DEPARTMENT
Note
*       Note: § 2.52.080 repealed by Ord. 3863-3/10, § 2.52.130 repealed by Ord. 3807-8/08 and § 2.52.140 repealed by Ord. 1979-6/75.

 

2.52.010 Established
A Police Department is established in this City. (216-6/21)

 

2.52.020 Authority to Arrest
Each and every member of the Police Department is authorized to make arrests and detain prisoners in all cases where a peace officer is so authorized under the law of the state. (216-6/21)

 

2.52.030 Duty to Enforce Laws
It shall be the duty of each and every member of the Police Department to enforce impartially all the laws and statutes of the United States and of the State of California and all of the ordinances of the City, within the limits of this City, and to perform such other and further duties as by statute and ordinance now existing or hereafter enacted, may be imposed upon them in their capacity as peace officers. (216-6/21, 1949-1/75, 3089-2/91)

 

2.52.040 Officers—Daily Reports
All subordinate police officers shall report to the Police Chief each day, as to events occurring while such officers are on duty and all other information pertaining to general police regulations in the City which come to their notice. (216-6/21, 3807-8/08)

 

2.52.050 False Reports
It is unlawful for any person willfully to make to the Police Department, or any officer in the department, any false, misleading or unfounded report for the purpose of interfering with the operation of said department or for the purpose of inducing or causing to be issued a complaint or indictment against any person, firm or corporation. (639-1/56)

 

2.52.060 Officers—Promotions
Those eligible to advancement to the next higher classification shall be promoted only upon recommendation of the Police Chief, and thereafter shall receive the salary provided for said classification. (216-6/21, 416-8/38, 3807-8/08)

 

2.52.070 Officers—Discipline
All police officers shall at all times be subject to the orders of the Police Chief, and shall be subject to call by the Police Chief at any time during the day or night. (216-6/21, 3807-8/08)

 

2.52.090 Reserve Police Force—Established
There is established in the Police Department, a reserve police force. The reserve police force shall be a volunteer organization composed of qualified members who shall be subject to all applicable regulations and orders that are issued to the regular police officers of the department. The members of the reserve force may be called to active duty for the City at the discretion of the Police Chief. (661-6/57, 3807-8/08)

 

2.52.100 Reserve Police Force—Eligibility
Members of the reserve police force shall be between the ages of 21 and 50 years, residents of the City, shall be of good character and shall have no physical disabilities. (661-6/57)

 

2.52.110 Reserve Police Force—Training
Before being appointed as a member of the reserve police force, the recruit shall satisfactorily pass such training requirements as may be prescribed by the Council by resolution or by directive of the Police Chief. The recruit shall at all times during said probationary period, when called to duty, be under the direct control and supervision of a police officer. (661-6/57, 3807-8/08)

 

2.52.120 Reserve Police Force—Rules and Regulations
The City Council shall provide by resolution such further rules and regulations governing the reserve police force as it may deem necessary and all recruits and reserve police personnel shall be subject thereto and to such other and further rules, regulations and orders as may be prescribed by the Police Chief. (661-6/57, 3807-8/08)

 

Chapter 2.56 PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT
2.56.010 Establishment
There is hereby established a Department of Public Works. (964-6/63, 2591-1/83)

 

2.56.020 Objectives
The objectives of the department shall be as follows:

A.    To develop, facilitate, and maintain a community facilities element of the City’s General Plan for ample and sufficient master plan for sewers, flood control, water, public facilities and landscaping.

B.     To produce, transmit, and distribute water meeting state quality standards and consumer demands to property owners and residents of the City.

C.     To provide appropriate and efficient preventive and restoration maintenance to City facilities, streets, sewers, storm drains, parks, water systems, vehicles and equipment in order to maintain clean, adequate, effective, safe conditions.

D.    To provide fuel and fueling facilities for equipment of the City.

E.     To provide and maintain engineering services in accordance with applicable state and City codes, criteria, standards, rules and regulations.

F.     To ensure all construction within public rights-of-way and private streets in planned developments complies with contractual obligations and adopted City standards.

G.    To provide and facilitate a safe, efficient, smooth, orderly flow of vehicular and pedestrian traffic on the streets and highways of the City.

H.    To provide and ensure landscape plan check, inspection, design and maintenance services pursuant to adopted City standards.

I.      To utilize contractual services where appropriate, cost-effective and available.

J.      To develop, facilitate, maintain and cooperate under joint powers agreements in the advancement of sound public works plans, projects, tasks and undertakings as directed by the City Council. (964-6/63, 2591-1/83)

 

2.56.030 Director—Powers and Duties
The Director of Public Works shall be the head of the Public Works Department, and shall be appointed by the City Manager. The director shall have the following powers and duties:

A.    Plans, organizes, directs and coordinates all divisions, programs and activities of the Public Works Department.

B.     Determines and directs department policies, procedures, and organization.

C.     Establishes and maintains systems for public flood control, sewers, streets, parks, City facilities, potable water, landscape services and basic public health and safety.

D.    Assists boards, commissions and committees which encourage, foster, promote and facilitate the objectives of the department including, but not limited to, the Planning Commission, Community Services Commission, Public Works Commission, Subdivision Committee, Board of Zoning Adjustments, or appoints deputy so to assist.

E.     Investigates and authorizes purchase of materials, services and equipment necessary to implement and operate department activities within the scope of the department budget.

F.     Communicates department plans, policies and activities to various governmental agencies and civic groups in the advancement of department objectives under the direction of the City Manager.

G.    Prepares, submits and administers department budget.

H.    Investigates, analyzes, and makes recommendations as to construction or improvement bids on Public Works projects, and administers the contract upon approval of the City Council.

I.      Performs such other duties and has such other powers as the City Council may establish hereafter by resolution.

J.      Administration and enforcement of appropriate sections of Titles 8, 12, 13 and 14 of the Huntington Beach Municipal Code. (2591-1/83, 3319-2/96, 3609-7/03, 4086-5/16)

 

2.56.040 Appointment of Subordinates
The director, with the approval of the City Manager, shall appoint all other officers, assistants, deputies and employees of the Public Works Department. (2591-1/83)

 

2.56.050 Fees and Charges
The director has authority to charge reasonable fees for use of department services, materials and City facilities to help defray public expense when such fees are established by resolution of the City Council. (2591-1/83)

 

2.56.060 Annual Budget
The City Council shall annually establish a public works budget. (2591-1/83)

 

2.56.070 Terms
Whenever the terms “Sewer Department,” “Sanitation Department,” “Water Department,” “Street Department,” “Traffic Department,” and “Engineering Department” are used in this Code, or in any resolution adopted by the City Council, they shall be deemed to mean and read “Public Works Department.” Whenever the terms “Sanitation Superintendent,” “Street Superintendent,” “Water Superintendent” and “City Engineer” appear in this Code, they shall be deemed to mean and read “Director of Public Works.” (2591-1/83)

 

Chapter 2.64 COMMUNITY SERVICES COMMISSION
Note
*       Note: §§ 2.64.030, 2.64.070, 2.64.080 and 2.64.090 repealed by Ord. 3983-1/14.

 

2.64.010 Established
There is established an advisory Community Services Commission in and for the City. (1113-7/65, 2383-9/79, 2399-11/79, 3983-1/14)

 

2.64.020 Composition
The commission shall be composed of 13 members. (803-12/60, 1113-7/65, 1300-3/67, 3983-1/14)

 

2.64.025 Appointment
Each member of the City Council shall appoint one member to the Community Services Commission for a four-year term. (3983-1/14)

 

2.64.027 Term
Each member of the Community Services Commission shall serve a four-year term commencing on January 1 following a general municipal election at which the appointing Councilmember was elected. In the event the office of any appointing Councilmember becomes vacant during the term thereof, the term of the Community Services Commissioner appointed by such Councilmember shall terminate 30 days after such vacancy occurs. Following expiration of his/her term of office, each member of the Community Services Commission shall continue to serve until his/her successor is appointed and qualified. Members of the Community Services Commission may be removed by the Councilmember of which he/she is the appointee, upon announcement of such removal at a regular City Council meeting; provided, however, that no member of the Community Services Commission may be removed prior to January 1 following any general municipal election. (3983-1/14)

 

2.64.028 Vacancies
Vacancies in the Community Services Commission shall be filled by appointment by the City Councilmember or his/her successor, who made the appointment which is vacated. (3983-1/14)

 

2.64.040 One-Year Members
The City Council shall appoint six members for terms of one year. Each elementary, high school and public community college district having facilities within the City may recommend to the Council, on or before the third Monday in June of each year, two or more persons, residents of the City of Huntington Beach, to represent their district. One of said persons shall be appointed by the Council for a one-year term which will terminate on July 1 the following year. In the event that any district shall not make such recommendations to the Council by the first day of July, then the Council may appoint some qualified person to a one-year term to represent such school district on the commission. (1113-7/65, 1300-3/67, 2383-7/79, 2389-9/79, 3723-12/05, 3983-1/14)

 

2.64.045 Service Limitation
No person shall serve more than two consecutive four-year terms; provided, however, that persons serving on the effective date of this chapter may complete their current terms and, if reappointed, an additional term thereafter. No person shall serve more than eight consecutive one-year terms. (2918-12/87)

 

2.64.050 Mayor—Ex Officio Member
The Mayor shall be an ex officio member of the commission. (1113-7/65)

 

2.64.060 Secretary
The Director of Community Services, or his/her designee, shall serve as secretary to the commission without vote and shall keep permanent minutes of the commission meetings. (1113-7/65, 2383-7/79, 2389-9/79, 2399-11/79)

 

2.64.100 Duties and Responsibilities
The commission shall act in an advisory capacity to the City Council, the boards of trustees of the school districts and the Director of Community Services in all matters pertaining to harbors and beaches facilities, park acquisition, development and maintenance, and recreational programming or facilities. Also the commission shall cooperate with other governmental agencies and civic groups in the advancement of sound parks and recreational planning under the direction of the City Council. Commissioners may study, report and interpret the needs of the public to the City Council and may assist in securing financial support from the community for harbors, beaches, parks and recreational needs. The commission may review the annual budget as presented to the City Council and advise them on the current operational needs and long-range plans for capital improvement. (1113-7/65, 2383-7/79, 2399-11/79)

 

2.64.105 Operating Policies
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the board shall conform to the operating policy for boards and commissions as set forth in Chapter 2.100 of this Code. (2918-12/87)

 

2.64.110 Meetings
The commission shall meet regularly on the second Wednesday of each month at 6:00 p.m. in the Council Chambers unless it should fall on a holiday. In such case, the following Wednesday shall be designated. Special meetings may be called by the chairperson. (1113-7/65, 2383-7/79, 2389-9/79, 3983-1/14)

 

2.64.120 Election of Officers
The commission shall elect from its members a chairperson and vice chairperson at the regular July meeting and such officers shall serve for one year and until their successors are elected and qualified. The chairperson and vice chairperson may make and second motions and shall have a voice and vote in all proceedings of the commission. (1434-9/68, 2383-7/79)

 

2.64.130 Quorum Proceedings
A majority of the members of the commission in office shall constitute a quorum. A majority vote of the members present and voting, where a quorum is present at any regular or special meeting, is required to carry a motion, proposal or resolution. Upon demand of any member, the roll call shall be called for yeas and nays upon any question before the commission. Absence from three consecutive meetings without formal consent of the commission chairperson shall be deemed to constitute the retirement of such member and the position shall become vacant. Roberts’ Rules of Order Revised shall govern the procedure of meetings of the commission unless inconsistent with other provisions of this chapter. (1434-9/68, 2383-7/79)

 

Chapter 2.65 HARBOR COMMISSION
2.65.010 Established
There is an established advisory Harbor Commission in and for the City with its purpose to advise City Council regarding issues related to the Huntington Harbour. (4170-1/19)

 

2.65.020 Composition
The Commission shall be comprised of seven members with two City Council Member Liaisons. The Council Member Liaisons will present the chosen applicants to City Council for approval. (4170-1/19)

 

2.65.025 Appointment
The City Council shall appoint the seven members to the Harbor Commission. (4170-1/19)

 

2.65.030 Removal
A.    Harbor Commissioners shall hold no paid office or employment in the City government while serving on the Harbor Commission. If the City Council determines that a member be retired, or otherwise no longer would like to serve, it may so order and appoint a successor for the unexpired term of office of such retired member. Further, members shall be privileged to retire voluntarily from the Harbor Commission at any time, successors to be appointed in such cases for the unexpired terms of office, and also in the event of other occurring vacancies from whatever cause, by the City Council by a majority of votes.

B.     Regular attendance at meetings is required of all Harbor Commissioners to enable the Commission to discharge its duties. A member absent from three meetings in a fiscal year shall be deemed to have resigned from the Harbor Commission, and immediate notification shall be given to the Mayor and City Council of such vacancy. Following expiration of his/her term of office, each member of the Harbor Commission shall continue to serve until his/her successor is appointed and qualified. Members of the Harbor Commission may be removed by the City Council for any reason upon announcement of such removal at a regular City Council meeting; provided, however, that no member of the Harbor Commission may be removed prior to January 1 following any general municipal election. (4170-1/19)

 

2.65.035 Vacancies
Vacancies in the Harbor Commission shall be filled by appointment by the City Council. (4170-1/19)

 

2.65.040 Service Limitation
No person shall serve more than two consecutive four-year terms; provided, however, that persons serving on the effective date of this chapter may complete their current terms and, if reappointed, an additional term thereafter. (4170-1/19)

 

2.65.045 Mayor—Ex Officio Member
The Mayor shall be an ex officio member of the Commission. (4170-1/19)

 

2.65.050 Secretary
The City Manager and his or her designee, shall serve as secretary to the Harbor Commission without vote and shall keep permanent minutes of the Harbor Commission meetings. (4170-1/19)

 

2.65.055 Duties and Responsibilities
The Harbor Commission shall act in an advisory capacity to the City Council on matters pertaining to the Huntington Beach Harbour, its beaches, facilities, and parks. The primary role of the Harbor Commission is to advise City Council concerning Waterway Safety, General Infrastructure (e.g., seawalls, pier headlines, bulk heads etc.), Water Quality and Municipal Code Amendments. The Harbor Commission shall cooperate with other governmental agencies and civic groups in the advancement of the Huntington Harbour and recreational planning under the direction of the City Council. Harbor Commissioners may study, report and analyze issues regarding the Huntington Harbour and may assist in securing financial support for the Huntington Harbour, its beaches, parks and recreational needs. The Harbor Commission may advise City Council on current operational needs and long-range plans for City proposed capital improvement in the Huntington Harbour. In addition, the Harbor Commission shall advise the City Council on any other matters concerning the Huntington Harbour when so requested by Council. The Harbor Commission may advise the City Council on proposed Huntington Harbour related improvements; make recommendations to City Council for adoption of regulations and programs necessary for the ongoing implementation of the goals, objectives, and policies of the Huntington Harbour; advise the City Council on implementation of dredging priorities; advise the City Council on matters pertaining to the use, control, and operation of vessels and watercraft within the Huntington Harbour; make recommendations to City Council concerning the acquisition, disposition, or repair of equipment, facilities, materials, and supplies relating to the Huntington Harbour. (4170-1/19)

 

2.65.060 Operating Policies
The Harbor Commission shall conform to the operating policy for boards and commissions as set forth in Chapter 2.100 of this Code. In addition, the Harbor Commission shall establish operating policies and procedures. (4170-1/19)

 

2.65.065 Meetings
The Harbor Commission shall follow all Ralph M. Brown Act open meeting laws as well as the California Public Records Act. The Harbor Commission shall meet regularly on the 4th Thursday of the month at 5:00 p.m. at City Hall unless it should fall on a holiday. In such case, the following Wednesday shall be designated. Special meetings may be called by the chairperson. (4170-1/19)

 

2.65.070 Election of Officers
The Harbor Commission shall elect from its members a chairperson and vice chairperson at the regularly scheduled July of each year meeting and such officers shall serve for one year and until their successors are elected and qualified. The chairperson and vice chairperson may make and second motions and shall have a voice and vote in all proceedings of the Commission. (4170-1/19)

 

2.65.075 Quorum Proceedings
A majority of the members of the Harbor Commission in office shall constitute a quorum. A majority vote of the members present and voting, where a quorum is present at any regular or special meeting, is required to carry a motion, proposal or resolution. Upon demand of any member, the roll call shall be called for yeas and nays upon any question before the Commission. Absence from three consecutive meetings without formal consent of the Harbor Commission chairperson shall be deemed to constitute the retirement of such member and the position shall become vacant. Roberts’ Rules of Order Revised shall govern the procedure of meetings of the Commission unless inconsistent with other provisions of this chapter. (4170-1/19)

 

Chapter 2.70 OPENNESS IN LABOR NEGOTIATIONS
2.70.010 Applicability
This chapter shall apply to all labor negotiations between the City and any employee, group of employees or City-recognized collective bargaining unit(s) (hereinafter “association”) (hereinafter collectively referred to as “affected employees”) in the securing of labor agreements in the form of Memorandums of Understanding (“MOU”) or amendments thereto including “side letters” with the City relating to and/or having a material relationship to wages, hours, and terms and conditions of employment that are within the scope of bargaining.

Any discussions, meet and confers, negotiations, and/or other communications between the City and association(s) affected employees regarding proposed changes to wages, hours, and/or any other terms or conditions of employment within the scope of bargaining may also be referred to in this chapter as “labor negotiations.” (4078-12/15, 4154-4/18)

 

2.70.020 Pre-Negotiation, Meet and Confer on Ground Rules
The City Manager and/or designee(s) shall meet with affected employees regarding any and all ground rules, including, but not limited to, confidentiality, at the commencement of Labor Negotiations. Nothing within this chapter shall be construed to limit, bind or otherwise dictate either party’s position with respect to any mandatory subject of bargaining, including ground rules. To the extent that any negotiated ground rules, including the confidentiality of proposals, conflicts with any provisions of this Chapter 2.70, the negotiated ground rules will control and supersede inconsistent provisions of this chapter. (4078-12/15, 4154-4/18)

 

2.70.030 Negotiator
A.    Where an independent negotiator is deemed not necessary by the City Council for a particular labor negotiation, the City Manager or designee will act as the lead negotiator (“designated negotiator”) on behalf of the City. No designee may be a member of an association.

B.     An independent negotiator may be appointed by the City Council to lead the City in labor negotiations. If an independent negotiator is deemed necessary by the City Council, he or she shall: (1) not be an employee of the City; (2) not be a member of the public pension plan that covers City employees; and (3) have a demonstrated expertise in negotiating labor and employment agreements on behalf of municipalities.

 

C.     The City Council may designate one or more executive or management level employees to assist the designated or independent negotiator as deemed appropriate.

D.    The City Council shall report out to the public the identity of the designated or independent negotiator for each labor negotiation upon designation. (4078-12/15, 4154-4/18)

 

2.70.040 Negotiation Disclosures to Public
A.    After the first submitted offer and counter-offer have been made, the City Council shall report to the public within 24 hours of accepting or rejecting a submitted written proposal or portion thereof from affected employees. The subject written proposal shall be made public by posting on a designated area of the City’s website. This section shall not mandate publication of City Council-directed future proposals and/or the analytical thought process utilized by the City Council in labor negotiations.

B.     No verbal or written reports or publications to the public regarding offers and counter-offers waive the attorney-client privileges that attach to closed session. All other information communicated during closed session, excluding offers and counter-offers, will remain subject to and covered by the privilege. By passing the ordinance codified in this chapter, the City Council does not waive this privilege of confidentiality. (4078-12/15, 4154-4/18)

 

2.70.050 Cost of Proposals and Labor Agreements
A.    Except for the first offer and counter-offer made, the Director of Finance shall cause to be prepared a report determining the fiscal impacts attributed to each term and condition of employment of each subsequent written proposal (offer and/or counter-offer) resulting from labor negotiations, using the current MOUs as a baseline. These cost reports will be presented for review by the City Council, the affected association, and the general public within 20 days after said proposal is made.

B.     The Director of Finance shall also cause to be prepared a report determining the fiscal impacts attributed to each term and condition of employment in the final, tentatively agreed upon labor agreement resulting from labor negotiations, which is reduced to writing in the form of an MOU between the City and the association. This cost report will be presented for review by the City Council, the affected employees, and the general public at least five calendar days prior to the final MOU being acted upon by City Council. (4078-12/15, 4154-4/18)

 

2.70.060 Council Member Disclosures
Each City Council member shall disclose both during closed sessions and publicly in open sessions, the identity of any and all representatives of the affected employees with whom the City Council member has had any verbal, written, electronic or other communication(s) regarding a subject matter of pending labor negotiations. (4078-12/15, 4154-4/18)

 

2.70.070 Adoption of Memorandum of Understanding
A.    A proposed MOU shall be introduced at the City Council not more than 30 days after the initial City Council consideration and tentative approval.

B.     At each City Council meeting, the proposed MOU shall be agendized as an administrative item.

C.     The rendering of a final City Council determination regarding adoption of an MOU shall only be undertaken after the matter has been heard at a minimum of two open City Council meetings, wherein the public has had the opportunity to review and comment on the matter. (4078-12/15, 4154-4/18)

 

Chapter 2.72 PERSONNEL SYSTEM
Note
*       Note: § 2.72.030 repealed by Ord. 2464-12/80 and § 2.72.110 repealed by Ord. 3917-9/11.

 

2.72.010 Adopted
In order to establish an equitable and uniform procedure for dealing with personnel matters; to attract to municipal service the best and most competent persons available; to ensure that appointments and promotions of employees will be based on merit and fitness; and to provide a reasonable degree of opportunity for qualified employees, the following personnel system is adopted. (1225-8/66)

 

2.72.020 Department Established
A Human Resources Department is hereby created and shall be under the supervision and control of the Director of Human Resources. The objectives of the department shall be to provide services related to human resources management to all City employees, and to provide services to other City departments to achieve the selection and development of a workforce which can provide the highest quality of services to the community. (1225-8/66, 1642-6/71, 2464-12/80, 3718-8/05, 3770-8/07)

 

2.72.040 Director of Human Resources—Powers and Duties
The Director of Human Resources shall be appointed by the City Manager with the approval of a majority of the City Council. The director shall have the following powers and duties:

A.    To administer the provisions of this Code relating to personnel and City employees; the personnel resolution; and the employer-employee relations resolution; and

B.     To be the City’s principal representative in all matters of employer-employee relations, with authority to meet and confer in good faith with recognized employee organizations within the scope of representation and shall serve as secretary to the personnel board; and

C.     To be responsible for directing, planning, organizing and managing the operations of the Department of Human Resources, and all other personnel functions and programs of the City, including, but not limited to, recruitment and selection, classification and compensation, training, employee benefits, risk management, the City’s self-insured programs in liability, worker’s compensation, and loss prevention; and

 

D.    With the approval of the City Manager, to appoint all other officers, assistants, deputies and employees of the Human Resources Department; and

E.     To perform other such tasks and duties as may be assigned by the City Manager. (1225-8/66, 1642-6/71, 2464-12/80, 3718-8/05, 3770-8/07, 3917-9/11)

 

2.72.050 Commission Created
There is hereby created a Personnel Commission to consist of five members effective June 30, 2012. (2377-7/79, 2665-12/83, 3917-9/11)

 

2.72.060 Commission—Members—Terms
The members of the Personnel Commission shall be appointed by the City Council from the electors of the City. No member shall hold any paid office or employment in the City government while serving on the commission or for one year after ceasing to be a member. Members shall be subject to removal by motion of the City Council, adopted by the affirmative votes of a majority of the total membership thereof. Effective June 30, 2011, the members thereof shall serve for terms of two years. The terms shall be staggered so that the number of terms expiring in any year shall not vary by more than one from the number of terms expiring in any other year. Terms shall expire on June 30th of the appropriate year. A vacancy occurring before the expiration of a term shall be filled by appointment for the remainder of the unexpired term. (2377-7/79, 2926-2/88, 3323-5/96, 3917-9/11)

 

2.72.065 Service Limitation
No person shall serve more than two consecutive terms on the commission. (3323-5/96, 3917-9/11)

 

2.72.070 Commission—Functions and Duties
The Personnel Commission shall have the power and be required to:

A.    Make any investigation upon request of the City Council concerning the administration of the personnel system and report its findings to the City Council and City Manager;

B.     Hear appeals on grievance matters for final decision except for such matters as may be submitted to final and binding arbitration;

C.     Hear appeals from decisions of the City Manager or his or her designee made pursuant to the employer-employee relations resolution;

D.    Determine hearing procedures and select hearing officers and advisory arbitrators for hearings;

E.     Review impasse matters as provided in the employer-employee relations resolution; and

F.     Perform such other functions as may be prescribed by ordinance or resolution. (2377-7/79, 2464-12/80, 3718-8/05, 3917-9/11)

 

2.72.080 Meetings—Chairperson
A.    As soon as practicable following the first day of July of each year, the Personnel Commission shall elect one of its members to serve as chairperson of the commission.

B.     The City Manager shall designate a secretary for the Personnel Commission who need not be a member of such commission, and who shall keep a record of its proceedings and transactions. The Personnel Commission may prescribe its own rules and regulations subject to the approval of the City Council. Copies of such rules shall be kept on file in the Office of the City Clerk where they shall be available for public inspection. (2377-7/79, 3917-9/11)

 

2.72.090 Oaths—Affirmations
Each member of the Personnel Commission and the secretary thereof shall have the power to administer oaths and affirmations in any investigation or proceeding pending before such commission. (2377-7/79)

 

2.72.100 Employer-Employee Relations
An employer-employee relations resolution shall be adopted and may be amended from time to time by the City Council following hearings open to the public before the personnel board. (1225-8/66, 1642-6/71)

 

Chapter 2.76 COMPETITIVE SERVICE REGULATIONS
2.76.010 Exclusions From Competitive Service
Pursuant to Section 403 of the City Charter, it is declared that all departments and appointive officers and employees of the City are included within the personnel system and the competitive service except:

A.    Elective officers;

B.     City Manager;

C.     Assistant City Manager;

D.    Members of appointive boards, commissions and committees;

E.     Persons engaged under contract to supply expert, professional, technical or other services;

F.     Emergency employees who are hired to meet the immediate requirements of the emergency;

G.    Employees who are employed to work a regular schedule of less than 1,040 hours in any fiscal year;

H.    Temporary employees;

I.      Appointive department heads;

J.      Appointive Deputy City Treasurer;

K.    Ambulance operators;

L.     Chief Assistant City Attorney;

M.    Deputy Community Prosecutor;

N.    Deputy Director of Community Development;

O.    Assistant Chief of Police;

P.     Assistant Chief Financial Officer;

Q.    Deputy Director of Public Works;

R.     Deputy Director of Administrative Services; and

S.     Deputy Director of Community and Library Services.

(1225-8/66, 1642-6/71, 3088-1/91, 3221-1/94, 3718-8/05, 3745-8/06, 3746-9/06, 3770-8/07, 3959-10/12, 4105-10/16, 4160-11/18, 4167-12/18, 4181-7/19, 4200-12/19, 4221-12/20)

 

2.76.020 City Employees—Political Activity Restricted
This chapter applies to all officers and employees of the competitive service. (1225-8/66)

 

2.76.030 Soliciting Campaign Contributions From Other Employees
An officer or employee of the City shall not, directly or indirectly, solicit or receive political funds or contributions, knowingly, from other officers or employees of the City or from persons on the employment lists of the City. (1225-8/66)

 

2.76.040 City Officers Barred From Contribution Notices
Every officer or employee of the City shall prohibit the entry into any place under his or her control, occupied and used for the governmental purposes of the City, of any person for the purpose of therein making, or giving notice of any political assessment, subscription or contribution. (1225-8/66)

 

2.76.050 Compliance With Bar on Governmental Premises
A person shall not enter or remain in any such place described in Section 2.76.040 for the purpose of therein making, demanding or giving notice of any political assessment, subscription or contribution. (1225-8/66)

 

2.76.060 Exception to Section 2.76.040
This chapter shall not apply to any auditorium or other place used for the conduct of public or political rallies or similar events, nor to any park, street, public land or other place not being used for the governmental purposes of the City. (1225-8/66)

 

2.76.070 Use or Threat to Use Political Authority or Influence
No one who holds, or who is seeking election or appointment to any office or employment in the City shall, directly or indirectly, use, promise, threaten or attempt to use, any office, authority or influence, whether then possessed or merely anticipated, to confer upon, secure for any person or to aid or obstruct any person in securing or to prevent any person from securing any position, nomination, confirmation, promotion, change in compensation or position, within the City, upon consideration or condition that the vote or political influence or action of such person or another shall be given partly or upon any other corrupt condition or consideration. (1225-8/66)

 

2.76.080 Political Activity Prohibited While in Uniform
No officer or employee of the City shall participate in political activities of any kind while he or she is in uniform. (1225-8/66)

 

Chapter 2.80 REDEVELOPMENT AGENCY
2.80.010 Established
It is found and declared, pursuant to Section 33101 of the California Health and Safety Code, that there is a need for the redevelopment agency created by Section 33100 of said law to function in the City, and said agency is authorized to transact business and exercise its powers under the California Health and Safety Code. (1285-2/67)

 

2.80.020 Powers and Duties
Pursuant to the provisions of Section 33200 of the California Health and Safety Code, this body declares itself to be the agency provided in Section 2.80.010 hereof and that all rights, powers, duties, privileges and immunities vested by the California Health and Safety Code in such agency shall be, and are, vested in this body. (1285-2/67)

 

Chapter 2.84 PUBLIC LIBRARY—GENERAL PROVISIONS
2.84.010 Library and Library Board Established
A.    A public library is established in and for this City, the inhabitants thereof, and nonresident taxpayers.

B.     An advisory library board is established in and for the City composed of seven members who shall be appointed, from the electors of the City, by the Mayor with the approval of the City Council. Members shall serve without compensation, and shall hold no paid office or employment in the City government while serving on such board. (2625-7/83, 3924-12/11)

 

2.84.020 Board—Terms
A.    The members of the board shall serve for four years. Any vacancy occurring on such board shall be filled by appointment for the unexpired term or until such time as a successor is regularly appointed and qualified.

B.     Regular attendance at meetings is required of all members to enable the board to discharge its duties. A member absent from three consecutive meetings without consent of the chairperson shall be deemed to have resigned from the board, and immediate notification shall be given to the Mayor and City Council of such vacancy. (2625-7/83, 2925-2/88)

 

2.84.030 Mayor—Ex Officio Member
The Mayor shall be an ex officio member of the board. (2625-7/83)

 

2.84.040 Secretary
The Director of Library Services, or his/her designee, shall serve as secretary to the board without vote, and shall keep permanent minutes of the board meetings. Roberts’ Rules of Order Revised shall govern the procedure of the meetings of the board unless inconsistent with other provisions of this chapter. (2625-7/83, 3076-10/90)

 

2.84.050 Duties and Responsibilities
The board shall act in an advisory capacity to the City Council in all matters pertaining to the library except those dealing with administrative functions. Also the board shall cooperate with other civic groups in the advancement of library planning under the direction of the City Council. The board may study, report and interpret the needs of the public to the City Council and may assist in securing financial support from the community for library needs. The board may review the annual budget as presented to the City Council and advise it on the current operational needs and long-range plans for capital improvement. The board shall perform such other functions as the City Council may direct and require from time to time. (2625-7/83)

 

2.84.060 Meetings—Quorum
The board shall meet at such time and place as it may fix by resolution. All meetings shall be open to the public. A majority of the board shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. (2625-7/83)

 

2.84.070 Election of Officers
The board shall elect from its members a chairperson and vice chairperson at the regular January meeting. Such officers shall serve for one year or until their successors are elected. The chairperson and vice chairperson may make and second motions and shall have a voice and vote in all proceedings. (2625-7/83)

 

2.84.080 Library Privileges Regulated
Upon receipt of a report from the Director of Library Services that any person has abused his or her library card privileges, the library board may apply the following rules and regulations:

A.    The board may determine, upon investigation, to suspend, revoke, or refuse to issue or renew library card privileges of any person. Notice and opportunity to be heard shall be given before taking such action.

B.     Whenever the board suspends or revokes the library card privileges of any person, such suspension or revocation shall apply to all library cards held by such person, and all such cards shall be surrendered to the board unless previously surrendered to a court. Revoked or suspended library cards shall be retained by the board.

C.     Upon the expiration of a suspension or revocation period, the board shall return the library card(s) to the person or may order new cards to be issued. Suspension of library cards shall not exceed six months unless a longer period has been recommended by a court.

D.    Upon recommendation of a court of competent jurisdiction, the board shall suspend or revoke the library privileges of any person who has been found guilty of a violation of California Penal Code Section 490.5 pertaining to theft of property from a public library. The board shall not grant a hearing to any person whose library card privileges have been suspended or revoked pursuant to the provisions of this subsection. (2652-11/83, 3076-10/90)

 

2.84.090 Operative Policy
The board shall conform to the policy for boards and commissions as contained in Chapter 2.100 of the Huntington Beach Municipal Code, except that notwithstanding any other provision of this Municipal Code, there shall be no limit on the number of consecutive terms a board member may serve. (2925-2/88, 3924-12/11)

 

Chapter 2.86 LIBRARY SERVICES DEPARTMENT
2.86.010 Establishment
There is hereby established a Department of Library Services. (3077-10/90)

 

2.86.020 Mission
The library assists in the educational development and cultural enrichment of the citizens of the community by providing access to library facilities, materials and information for the betterment of the community. (3077-10/90)

 

2.86.030 Objectives
The objectives of the Library Services Department shall be as follows:

A.    To provide and maintain library materials and service for the citizens of Huntington Beach and its environs.

B.     To provide information and assistance to the Library Board and other civic groups relating to the library.

C.     Acquire, circulate, maintain and secure library materials.

D.    Issue library cards, collect fees and fines, answer patrons inquiries.

E.     Develop comprehensive children’s services and collections to encourage and promote reading and education by children.

F.     Provide for recovery of overdue material.

G.    Inform in the use of the library and its resources and develop and maintain relevant material collections by skilled, professional librarians.

H.    Utilize technology for efficient and effective circulation control and for staff and patron applications.

I.      Circulate materials and provide library services in outlying areas through local library branches.

J.      Recruit, train and supervise volunteers to assist in the library operation.

K.    Encourage and foster literacy.

L.     Administration and enforcement of Section 13.52.020 of the Huntington Beach Municipal Code. (3077-10/90, 3662-10/04)

 

2.86.040 Director—Powers and Duties
The Director of Library Services shall be the head of the Library Services Department, and shall be appointed by the City Manager. The director shall have the following powers and duties:

A.    Plans, organizes, and administers programs and procedures governing library services that are relevant to the present and future community needs.

B.     Reviews and approves materials, supplies, and capital outlay items for library system.

C.     Directs the preparation of the annual budget, administers the approved budget and controls expenditures.

D.    Responsible for the selection and evaluation of employees in accordance with established procedures.

E.     Meets and confers with the Library Board and with elected officials, City administration, and other department heads.

F.     Directs the maintenance of the library, statistics, records and related reports.

G.    To the extent it encourages, fosters, promotes, and/or facilitates the objectives of the department, provides assistance to Friends of the Library, Friends of the Children’s Library, Literacy Volunteers of America, and other library-related groups.

H.    Advises on the acquisition, design and construction of library facilities.

I.      Ensures library needs are met and maintained within established framework and executes policy rules and regulations as established by the City Council.

J.      Preserve Library Bill of Rights by challenging censorship and affirming that all libraries are forums for information and ideas, and that library resources be provided for the interest, information and enlightenment of the people.

K.    Perform such other duties and have such other powers as the City Council may establish hereafter by resolution.

L.     Administration and enforcement of Section 13.52.020 of the Huntington Beach Municipal Code. (3077-10/90, 3662-10/04, 4086-5/16)

 

2.86.050 Appointment of Subordinates
The director, with the approval of the City Manager, shall appoint all other officers, assistants, deputies and employees of the Library Services Department. (3077-10/90)

 

2.86.060 Fees and Charges
The director has authority to charge reasonable fees for use of department services, materials and City facilities to help defray public expense when such fees are established by resolution of the City Council. (3077-10/90)

 

2.86.070 Annual Budget
The City Council shall annually establish a library services budget. (3077-10/90)

 

2.86.080 Acceptance of Gifts
The department may accept all gifts, devices, legacies or bequests from any source, public or private in the name of the City, subject to the approval of the City Council. All monies so obtained by the department shall be deposited by the director or his or her duly authorized subordinate in the general fund of the treasury of the City or in any special fund the City Council may designate. (3077-10/90)

 

Chapter 2.96 DISPOSITION OF UNCLAIMED PROPERTY
2.96.010 Generally
All unclaimed property in the possession of the City shall be handled and disposed of in the manner set out in Sections 2.96.020 through 2.96.070. (1457-1/69, 1561-4/70)

 

2.96.020 Delivery to One Who Finds Property
If no owner appears and proves his or her ownership, such property shall be delivered to the person who found or saved the property, as provided in and subject to the limitations of Section 2080.3 of the Civil Code of the State of California. (1457-1/69, 1561-4/70)

 

2.96.030 Period for Holding Property by Police
If no person claims the property, as provided in Section 2.96.020, such unclaimed property, except unclaimed bicycles, shall be held by the Police Department for a period of at least four months, and unclaimed bicycles shall be held for a period of at least three months. (1457-1/69, 1561-4/70)

 

2.96.040 Transfer to Purchasing Department
Thereafter such property shall be transferred to the City Purchasing Department for sale to the public at auction. Upon transfer of such property to the City Purchasing Department, such property shall not be redeemable by the owner or other person entitled to possession. If the City Purchasing Department determines that any such property transferred to it for sale is needed for a public use, such property may be retained by the department and need not be sold. (1457-1/69, 1561-4/70)

 

2.96.050 Auction—Notice
If the City Purchasing Department determines that any such property is not needed for a public use, thereafter such property will be sold at public auction to the highest bidder, with notice of such sale being given by the Purchasing Department at least five days before the time fixed therefor by publication once in a newspaper of general circulation published in the county. (1457-1/69, 1561-4/70)

 

2.96.060 Restoration to Owner Upon Claim
In the event the owner of any property shall appear on or before the time the property is transferred to the City Purchasing Department and reclaims the property and reimburses the City for all expenses incurred in the care and preservation of the property, then the property shall be restored to the owner. (1457-1/69, 1561-4/70)

 

2.96.070 Nonsale—Given to Nonprofit Organization
In the event any property cannot be sold at public auction, it may be given away to any fraternal, benevolent, patriotic, charitable or religious organization not organized for profit or retained by the City; but if any such property is of no value and cannot otherwise be disposed of by gift or sale, or the City does not wish to retain said property, the property may be destroyed as junk, provided that if the unclaimed property consists of money or currency and is unclaimed by the owner or finder at the time set for property to be transferred to the City Purchasing Department, said money or currency shall be deposited in the general fund of the City. (1457-1/69, 1561-4/70)

 

Chapter 2.97 CITIZEN PARTICIPATION ADVISORY BOARD (CPAB)
2.97.010 Created
There is hereby created the Citizen Participation Advisory Board (CPAB). (3335-10/96)

 

2.97.020 Composition
Until September 30, 2015, the Citizen Participation Advisory Board (CPAB) shall consist of up to 15 members to be appointed by vote of the City Council. From October 1, 2015 and thereafter, the CPAB shall consist of seven members and each member of the City Council shall appoint one such member to the CPAB. Terms shall be concurrent with the City’s Housing and Urban Development (HUD) grant year. (3335-10/96, 3818-12/08, 4035-12/14)

 

2.97.030 Duties and Responsibilities
The purpose of the board shall be to provide citizen participation and coordination in the City’s planning processes for the Community Development Block Grant Program administered by the Federal Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD). The board shall assess the needs of the community, particularly that of low and moderate income households, evaluate and prioritize projects pertaining to the required plans and provide recommendations to City Council on such plans and projects. The board may hold public hearings to obtain citizen input on community needs, plans or proposals. The board shall provide specific recommendations regarding the projects reviewed by the board to the City Council. (3335-10/96, 3818-12/08)

 

2.97.040 Operating Policies
The board shall conform to the operating policy for boards and commissions as contained in Chapter 2.100 of the Huntington Beach Municipal Code. The Standard Code of Parliamentary Procedure, new and revised, shall be the guide for the conduct of meetings. (3335-10/96)

 

2.97.050 Quorum
A simple majority of the existing membership shall constitute a quorum, disregarding vacant positions if any. (3335-10/96)

 

2.97.060 Officers and Terms
The officers of the CPAB shall be the chairperson, vice chairperson, and secretary. Officers shall serve for a term of one year until successors are elected. The chairperson shall not serve more than two consecutive years in this office. Terms of office shall be commensurate with the City’s grant year. (3335-10/96)

 

2.97.070 Meeting Location and Time
The board shall hold regular monthly meetings, excluding July through September, and establish its meeting times and locations by a minute action. All meetings are open to the public, and special meetings may be called in conformance with the Ralph M. Brown Act. The board is encouraged to hold meetings in areas where the proposed activities may occur, providing opportunities for increased participation. (3335-10/96, 3818-12/08)

 

2.97.080 Conflict of Interest
No board member shall obtain a financial interest or benefit from a recommended activity or have a financial interest in any contract, subcontract, or agreement with respect to either a recommended activity or with respect to the proceeds of the activity, either for themselves or those with whom they have business or immediate family ties, during their tenure or for one year thereafter, unless an exception is permitted as determined by HUD. (3335-10/96, 3818-12/08)

 

Chapter 2.100 OPERATING POLICY FOR BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
2.100.010 Establishment
All advisory boards and commissions shall be established by ordinance. Committees may be established by resolution. The enabling document may establish the duration, manner of appointment, term of office, and powers and duties. (2896-6/87, 3124-12/91)

 

2.100.020 Definitions
Board. A body of members appointed pursuant to Huntington Beach Charter Section 405 to serve in a continuing advisory capacity to the City Council, except for such boards which have decision making authority pursuant to the particular establishing ordinance creating such board;

Commission. A body of members appointed pursuant to Huntington Beach Charter Section 405 which may have decision making authority in those activities delegated to them by the City Council;

Committee. A body of members appointed pursuant to Huntington Beach Charter Section 405 on an ad hoc basis to advise the City Council on particular matters. (2896-6/87, 3250-10/94)

 

2.100.030 Budget
When deemed necessary, the City Council may cause to be set aside in the budget for each fiscal year an amount necessary for the functioning of such boards and commissions. (2896-6/87)

 

2.100.040 Staff
The City shall assign a staff liaison to each board and commission. (2896-6/87)

 

2.100.050 Staff Liaison and Residency
Unless otherwise specified, each board or commission is to be assigned one staff liaison specified by the City Council. All members of boards and commissions shall be residents and electors of the City of Huntington Beach. (2896-6/87)

 

2.100.060 Service Limitation
No person shall serve on more than one board or commission at any one time. No person shall serve more than two consecutive terms on any one board or commission, and no person who has been a member for more than two years of a term to which some other person was appointed a member shall be appointed to the same board or commission for more than one further consecutive term. No person who has served two consecutive terms on any one board or commission shall be eligible for reappointment to the same board or commission within 30 days of the expiration of the person’s most recent term. (2896-6/87, 3256-11/94, 3323-5/96, 3327-5/96, 3776-9/07)

 

2.100.065 Statements of Economic Interests
Every person appointed to a board, commission, or committee designated by the City Council resolution adopting the City’s Conflict of Interest Code, shall file a statement of economic interests with the City Clerk on forms provided by the City Clerk. Statements of economic interests shall be filed upon taking office, annually no later than 30 days after the date specified by law, and upon leaving office. Any such person who fails to file a statement of economic interests as provided in this section shall automatically vacate the office. (3391-8/98)

 

2.100.070 Employment Limitation
No person serving on any board or commission shall hold any full or part-time paid office or employment in the Huntington Beach personnel system while so serving, unless otherwise specified. (2896-6/87)

 

2.100.080 Duration of Terms
Members shall serve until their respective successors are appointed and qualified. The City Council shall have the power to fill any vacancies. Unless otherwise specified, terms of members of boards and commissions shall be four years, staggered so that the majority of terms shall end in odd-numbered years following the election of four councilmembers and remainder of the terms shall end in odd-numbered years following the election of three councilmembers. (2896-6/87)

 

2.100.085 Attendance
Any person appointed to any City board, commission, or committee shall automatically vacate the office upon a fifth unexcused absence during a calendar year or upon more than three consecutive unexcused absences at any time during the term of office. Upon request of the absent member, each board, commission, or committee shall have the authority to determine whether an absence is excused. The appointing authority shall appoint a successor to fill the vacancy. (3124-12/91, 3776-9/07)

 

2.100.090 Open Meetings
All meetings of boards and commissions shall be open to the public unless subject to the closed session exceptions contained in the Ralph M. Brown Act (Government Code Section 54950). (2896-6/87)

 

2.100.100 Rules
Each board and commission may adopt such bylaws and rules as may be necessary or convenient for the conduct of its business, subject to approval of the City Council. (2896-6/87)

 

2.100.110 Applicability
This chapter shall apply to all boards and commissions, unless an ordinance enacted after the date of this section establishes different requirements. (3124-12/91, 3323-5/96)

 

Chapter 2.102 ENVIRONMENTAL BOARD
2.102.010 Established
There is hereby created for the City of Huntington Beach the Huntington Beach Environmental Board hereinafter referred to as the Environmental Board. (2385-7/79)

 

2.102.020 Composition
A.    The Environmental Board shall consist of not more than nine voting members, all appointed by the City Council. All members shall be residents of the City of Huntington Beach, and over one-half of the members shall be registered voters of the City of Huntington Beach. All members shall serve without compensation, and none shall hold any office or employment in the City government.

B.     The members shall serve a term of four years. Members shall have a term starting July 1st and expiring June 30th, and present members shall continue in office until June 30th of the year of expiration of term. Each member shall serve his or her term until his or her successor is qualified and appointed. If vacancies shall occur otherwise than by expiration of term, they shall be filled by appointments for the unexpired portion of the term. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Municipal Code, there shall be no limit on the number of consecutive terms a boardmember may serve. (2385-7/79, 2392-10/79, 2893-4/87, 3358-7/97, 3924-12/11)

 

2.102.030 Removal of Members
Any member of the Environmental Board, including the chairperson, shall be subject to removal by motion of the City Council adopted by at least four affirmative votes. The membership of any member of the Environmental Board shall be vacated if such member absents him or herself from three consecutive regular meetings of the Environmental Board, unless by permission of such Environmental Board, or ceases to continue to comply with the requirements of new members as to residence and/or voter registration. (2385-7/79)

 

2.102.040 Advisers and Assistants to Environmental Board
The Environmental Board may request the City staff to provide information, and subject to approval of the City Manager, such assistance as may be helpful and desirable to effectuate the purposes of the Environmental Board. The Environmental Board may have as many ex-officio members, without the power to vote, as may be appointed by the City Council. The Environmental Board may make investigations and employ persons, subject to the approval of the City Council, as it may deem necessary to perform its duties and functions. (2385-7/79)

 

2.102.050 Powers and Duties Generally
The Environmental Board shall be empowered and have the duty to:

A.    Study the environment of the City of Huntington Beach and investigate all actual and potential threats to a clean environment for the City and its inhabitants; and

B.     Report to the City Council, and to other City boards, commissions, departments and officers its recommendations for legislation and other action that could or might curtail or limit those activities which appear to be an actual present threat, or which may become a potential threat in the future, to the assurance of a clean, healthy, desirable environment for the City and its inhabitants; and

C.     Advise the City Council and staff on sustainability challenges and opportunities to enhance the overall sustainability, economic, ecological and social environments of Huntington Beach; and

D.    Perform such other duties as may from time to time be properly assigned or delegated to it by the City Council. (2385-7/79, 2938-5/88, 3851-1/10)

 

2.102.060 Bylaws
The board may establish bylaws, and amendments thereto, subject to prior submission to and approval by the City Council. (2938-5/88)

 

Chapter 2.103 CITIZENS INFRASTRUCTURE ADVISORY BOARD
2.103.010 Creation
There is hereby created a Citizens Infrastructure Advisory Board. (4057-6/15)

 

2.103.020 Composition
The Board shall consist of seven members. Each City Council member shall appoint one member of the Commission to serve the same term as the City Council member. The Board shall adopt such bylaws and rules as it deems necessary to provide for its chair and officers and their method of selection, time and place of meetings and for such other matters relative to its work and administration of its duties which are not otherwise provided for by statute or ordinance. (4057-6/15)

 

2.103.030 Purpose
The Board shall act in an advisory capacity to the City Council in matters pertaining to infrastructure. (4057-6/15)

 

2.103.040 Duties
The Board shall have the duty to:

A.    Pursuant to City Charter Section 617(c), conduct an annual review and performance audit of the infrastructure fund and report its findings to the City Council prior to the City Council’s adoption of the ensuing fiscal year budget.

B.     Perform such other duties or studies as may be directed by the City Council. (4057-6/15)

 

2.103.050 Authority
A.    It is intended that the Board act only in an advisory capacity and not be vested with final authority regarding infrastructure matters.

B.     The Board shall not interfere with the duties of any elected or appointed officer or employee. (4057-6/15)

 

2.103.060 Operating Policies
Except as otherwise provided in this Chapter, the Board shall conform to operating policies for Boards and Commissions as set forth in Chapter 2.100 of the Huntington Beach Municipal Code. The Board should meet monthly in the quarter prior to release of the annual budget. (4057-6/15)

 

2.103.070 Financial Disclosure
In accordance with California Law, members of the Board shall be required to file appropriate statements of economic interest. (4057-6/15)

 

2.103.080 Brown Act
Meetings of the Board shall be subject to the open meeting law (Government Code Section 54950). (4057-6/15)

 

Chapter 2.104 JET NOISE COMMISSION
2.104.010 Established
There is hereby established the Jet Noise Commission (“JNC”). (4168-12/18)

 

2.104.020 Purpose
The purpose of the JNC shall be:

A.    To continually monitor issues related to jet noise from commercial aviation traffic flying over the City.

B.     To act as an advisory body to the City Council on matters pertaining to jet noise from commercial aviation traffic over the City of Huntington Beach.

C.     To engage with neighboring cities, regulatory bodies, airlines, and staff regarding the impact of air traffic activities on the quality of life in Huntington Beach. (4168-12/18)

 

2.104.030 Composition
A.    In addition to two City Council liaisons, the JNC shall consist of seven members-at-large recommended by the liaisons and appointed by a majority of City Council.

The term of office of the JNC members shall be four years. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Municipal Code, there shall be a two-term limit on the number of consecutive terms a JNC member may serve. Members shall hold no paid office or employment in the City government while serving on such JNC. If the City Council determines that a member be retired, or otherwise no longer would like to serve, it may so order and appoint a successor for the unexpired term of office of such retired member.

Further, members shall be privileged to retire voluntarily from the JNC at any time, successors to be appointed in such cases for the unexpired terms of office, and also in the event of other occurring vacancies from whatever cause, by the City Council by a majority of votes.

B.     Regular attendance at meetings is required of all members to enable the JNC to discharge its duties. A member absent from three meetings in a fiscal year shall be deemed to have resigned from the JNC, and immediate notification shall be given to the Mayor and City Council of such vacancy. (4168-12/18)

 

2.104.040 Secretary
A designee of the City Manager’s office shall serve as secretary to the JNC without the power to vote, and shall keep permanent minutes of the JNC meetings. Roberts’ Rules of Order (current edition) shall govern the procedure of the meetings of the JNC unless inconsistent with other provisions of this chapter. (4168-12/18)

 

2.104.050 Authority and Responsibilities
The JNC shall act in an advisory capacity to the City Council in matters related to commercial air traffic, including jet noise from commercial aviation traffic:

A.    To study, interpret, and report to City Council on commercial aviation activities related to the City.

B.     To perform other functions as directed by the City Council. (4168-12/18)

 

2.104.060 Meetings—Quorum
The JNC shall meet at such time and place as it may fix by resolution. All meetings shall be open to the public. A majority of the JNC shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. (4168-12/18)

 

2.104.070 Election of Officers
The JNC shall elect from its members a chairperson and vice chairperson at the regular January meeting. Such officers shall serve for one year or until their successors are elected. The chairperson and vice chairperson may make and second motions and shall have a voice and vote in all proceedings. (4168-12/18)

 

2.104.080 Operating Policies
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the JNC shall conform to the operating policy for commissions as set forth in Chapter 2.100 of this Code. (4168-12/18)

 

Chapter 2.106 FOURTH OF JULY EXECUTIVE BOARD
2.106.010 Established
There is hereby established a Fourth of July Executive Board which shall be an advisory body to the City Council, implementing policy as set by the City Council, and shall work with staff and volunteers to assist in coordinating the City’s annual Fourth of July parade and celebration. (2654-11/83, 3298-9/95, 3435-11/99)

 

2.106.020 Composition
The board shall consist of nine to 15 members, appointed by Council upon the recommendation of the liaisons to the board. All members of the board shall be residents and electors of the City of Huntington Beach. Council liaisons shall possess the power to remove appointees to the board at any time and without cause, and appoint new board members subject to the approval of City Council. The board will establish committees with committee chairs as necessary to implement the Fourth of July activities. (2654-11/83, 2754-4/85, 2812-2/86, 2892-3/87, 2923-12/87, 3298-9/95, 3435-11/99, 3760-2/07)

 

2.106.030 Operating Policies
Except as otherwise stated herein, the board shall conform with operating policies established in Chapter 2.100 of this Code. (2923-12/87)

 

2.106.040 Staff Cooperation
The board will coordinate with Community Services Department staff whose responsibility it will be to prepare and post agenda, take and distribute minutes, develop and process the budget, process contracts/material requisitions, obtain permits, and coordinate activity among City departments. The Community Services Department shall provide a staff liaison to the board. (3298-9/95)

 

2.106.050 Meetings
The board shall establish meeting dates as needed in the City Council Chambers or a posted location subject to the Brown Act. (3298-9/95, 3435-11/99)

 

2.106.060 Funding
All funds generated by the board will be deposited with the City. All expenses will be paid by the City for the Fourth of July parade and celebration subject to City purchasing and contracting policies and procedures. (3298-9/95, 3435-11/99)

 

2.106.070 Officers
The officers of the board shall be a chair and vice chair. City Council shall appoint the chair and vice chair on an annual basis based upon the recommendations of the Council liaisons and the board. (3298-9/95, 3435-11/99, 3760-2/07)

 

2.106.080 Duties of Officers
A.    Chair. The chair shall:

1.     Serve as the chief officer of the Fourth of July Executive Board and shall preside at all meetings of the board.

2.     With the advice of the board, select all committee chairpersons.

3.     With the advice of the board, assign responsibilities subject to approval of the board.

4.     Be the official spokesperson for the board.

B.     Vice Chair. The vice chair shall:

1.     Serve as an officer of the Fourth of July Executive Board.

2.     In the absence or disability of the chair, to perform all the duties of the chair and, when so acting, shall have all the powers of and be subject to all the restrictions upon the chair. The vice chair shall have other powers and perform such other duties as may be prescribed from time to time by the board. (3298-9/95, 3435-11/99)

 

2.106.090 Duties of Executive Board Members
Members shall:

A.    Attend all meetings unless excused by the chair.

B.     Execute all duties as assigned.

C.     Recommend to Council liaisons the removal of any member who has not complied with this chapter of the Municipal Code. (3298-9/95, 3760-2/07)

 

2.106.100 Duties of Committee Chairpersons
Chairpersons shall:

A.    Serve as leader of committee.

B.     Hold meetings as needed.

C.     With approval of committee members, present recommendations to the board for action.

D.    Present written year end report to the board at the first meeting following the Fourth of July each year. (3298-9/95, 3435-11/99)

 

2.106.110 Attendance
Regular attendance at meetings is required to enable the board to discharge its duties. Any member absent from three consecutive meetings without securing the consent of the chair, or the designee of the chair, shall be deemed to have resigned from the board. The chair shall notify the Council liaisons of such resignation and request the Council liaisons to appoint a new member. All members are encouraged to attend regular board meetings so their knowledge and expertise may be utilized to the fullest and they can keep abreast of the board’s plans and activities. (3298-9/95, 3435-11/99, 3760-2/07)

 

2.106.120 Quorum
A.    At any meeting of the Fourth of July Executive Board, a simple majority shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business.

B.     In the event there is no quorum at a meeting, the chair shall adjourn said meeting or shall adjourn to a date certain. (3298-9/95, 3435-11/99)

 

2.106.130 Bylaws
The board shall adopt bylaws as it deems necessary to provide for such matters relative to its work and administration of its duties which are not otherwise provided for by statute or ordinance, subject to prior submission to and approval by the City Council. (3435-11/99)

 

Chapter 2.107 HISTORIC RESOURCES BOARD
2.107.010 Establishment
There is hereby established the Huntington Beach Historic Resources Board, to consist of not less than seven nor more than nine members, to be appointed to serve terms of four years. (2895-5/87, 3924-12/11)

 

2.107.020 Purposes
The purposes of the board shall be to:

A.    Act as an advisory body to the City Council on matters pertaining to historic issues and services.

B.     Encourage and promote programs and activities that enhance public awareness of community historic resources.

C.     Cooperate with other City agencies such as the Community Services Commission and the Planning Commission, to ensure that historic preservation and services are considered in the planning for the future development of the community.

D.    Act as a liaison to Council for local, state, and federal groups and agencies whose interest involves historic issues. (3083-12/90)

 

2.107.030 Attendance
Regular attendance at meetings is required of all members to enable the board to discharge its duties. A member absent from three consecutive meetings, without consent of the chairperson, or from five meetings in a 12-month period, shall be deemed to have resigned from the board, and immediate notification shall be given to the Mayor and City Council of such vacancy. (3083-12/90)

 

2.107.040 Operating Policies
The board shall conform to the operating policy for boards and commissions as contained in the Huntington Beach Municipal Code, except that notwithstanding any other provision of this Municipal Code, there shall be no limit on the number of consecutive terms a boardmember may serve. (3083-12/90, 3924-12/11)

 

2.107.050 Secretary
The Director of the Planning Department, or his or her designee, shall serve as secretary to the board without the power to vote, and shall keep permanent minutes of the board meetings. Newly Revised Roberts’ Rules of Order (current edition) shall govern the procedure of the meetings of the board unless inconsistent with other provisions of this chapter. (3083-12/90, 3851-1/10)

 

2.107.060 Authority and Responsibilities
The board shall act in an advisory capacity to the City Council in all matters pertaining to historic issues by:

A.    Studying, interpreting and reporting to City Council on historic issues and activities appropriate to the City.

B.     Encouraging financial support from the community for historic programs and facilities.

C.     Reviewing the annual budget as presented to City Council.

D.    Performing other functions and cooperating with other civic organizations as required.

E.     May request from City staff and outside sources, via the secretary, reports and recommendations for action consistent with the purposes and functions set forth in this and preceding sections. (3083-12/90)

 

2.107.070 Meetings—Quorum
The board shall meet at such time and place as it may fix by resolution. All meetings shall be open to the public and comply with all provisions. A majority of the board shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. (3083-12/90)

 

2.107.080 Acceptance of Gifts
The board may recommend to the City Council the acceptance of all gifts, devices, legacies or bequests, either real or personal property from any source, public or private. Any acquisition to the board shall be administered through the Planning Department of the City on authorization from this board. All acquisitions shall be consistent with the functions of the board as set forth in Section 2.107.060 above. Historic structures surveys, collection management policies and documentation on historic artifacts will be reviewed by the board as required. (3083-12/90, 3718-8/05, 3851-1/10)

 

2.107.090 Mayor Ex Officio Member
The Mayor may be an ex officio member of the board or may appoint a representative to act as an ex-officio member. (3083-12/90)

 

2.107.100 Election of Officers
The board shall elect from its members a chairperson and vice chairperson at the regular June meeting. Such officers shall serve for one year or until their successors are elected. The chairperson may only serve two consecutive terms. The chair and vice chair may make and second motions and shall have a voice and vote in all proceedings. (3083-12/90)

 

Chapter 2.108 HUNTINGTON BEACH YOUTH BOARD
2.108.010 Established
The Huntington Beach Youth Board is hereby established to accomplish the following objectives:

A.    To promote Council, City staff and public understanding of the achievements, problems and needs of the City’s young people;

B.     Under Council direction, to enable young people to participate in various City activities and make recommendations to the Council therefor; and

C.     To promote and encourage increased interest and participation among young people in community affairs. (2921-12/87)

 

2.108.020 Composition and Appointment
A.    The Huntington Beach Youth Board shall be appointed by the City Council to serve as an advisory body, composed of the following members who shall serve terms of one year with a maximum of four consecutive terms for any representative:

1.     One member representing Huntington Beach High School.

2.     One member representing Ocean View High School.

3.     One member representing Edison High School.

4.     One member representing Marina High School.

5.     Five members chosen from the community at large.

B.     All members of the Huntington Beach Youth Board shall be enrolled in public schools (grades 8th - 12th) and shall be residents of this City during their service on the board. As of June 1, 1988, no board member may be a full or part time officer or employee of the City.

C.     The board shall inform the City Council of any vacancy which may occur and request that such vacancy be filled. (2921-12/87)

 

2.108.030 Operating Policies
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the board shall conform to the operating policy for boards and commissions as set forth in Chapter 2.100. (2921-12/87)

 

2.108.040 Bylaws
With the assistance of members of the City staff, the board shall promulgate bylaws by which it shall determine the number and election of officers, the frequency and time of its meetings, and the order of its business. Bylaws shall be subject to approval by the City Council. (2921-12/87)

 

2.108.050 Brown Act
The board shall be governed by the provisions of the Brown Act (Government Code Section 54950, et seq.). (2921-12/87)

 

Chapter 2.109 FINANCE COMMISSION
2.109.010 Creation
There is hereby created a Finance Commission. (4056-6/15)

 

2.109.020 Composition
The Finance Commission shall consist of seven members. Each City Council member shall appoint one member of the Commission to serve the same term as the City Council member. The Commission shall adopt such bylaws and rules as it deems necessary to provide for its Chair and officers and their method of selection, time and place of meetings and for such other matters relative to its work and administration of its duties which are not otherwise provided for by statute or ordinance. (4056-6/15)

 

2.109.030 Purpose
The Finance Commission shall act in an advisory capacity to the City Council in matters pertaining to financial planning. (4056-6/15)

 

2.109.040 Duties
The Finance Commission shall have the duty to:

A.    Review and make recommendations regarding:

1.     Fiscal Policies, Financial Planning and Funding;

2.     Annual adopted budget;

3.     Proposals related to financial matters;

4.     Fiscal impacts of major projects;

5.     Service contracts on an as-needed basis; and

6.     Proposed State or Federal Legislation which impacts the City’s finances.

B.     Perform such other duties or studies as may be directed by the City Council. (4056-6/15)

 

2.109.050 Authority
A.    It is intended that the Finance Commission act only in an advisory capacity and not be vested with final authority in the establishment of priorities or the expenditure of funds.

B.     The Finance Commission shall not interfere with the duties of any elected or appointed officer or employee. (4056-6/15)

 

2.109.060 Operating Policies
Except as otherwise provided in this Chapter, the Commission shall conform to operating policies for Boards and Commissions as set forth in Chapter 2.100 of the Huntington Beach Municipal Code. The Commission should meet once per month. (4056-6/15)

 

2.109.070 Financial Disclosure
In accordance with California Law, members of the Finance Commission shall be required to file appropriate statements of economic interest. (4056-6/15)

 

2.109.080 Brown Act
Meetings of the Finance Commission shall be subject to the open meeting law. (4056-6/15)

 

Chapter 2.110 INVESTMENT ADVISORY BOARD
2.110.010 Creation
There is hereby created an Investment Advisory Board. (3920-11/11)

 

2.110.020 Composition
The Investment Advisory Board shall consist of up to seven members. Each City Council member may appoint one member of the board to serve the same term as the City Councilmember. (3920-11/11)

 

2.110.030 Purpose
The Investment Advisory Board shall act in an advisory capacity to the City Council and City Treasurer in matters pertaining to all the City’s investments. (3920-11/11)

 

2.110.040 Duties
The Investment Advisory Board shall have the duty to:

A.    Prepare an annual report to the City Council. Annually, by January 20th, the board shall submit a report to the City Council. In preparing this report, the board shall review the investment policy, and any other investment information determined by the board to be applicable to its annual report. The report shall include any recommendations by the board pursuant to subsection B of this section.

B.     Review and make recommendations regarding:

1.     City’s statement of investment policy.

2.     Risk-return analysis.

3.     Long-term investment strategies.

4.     New investment opportunities.

5.     Proposed state or federal legislation which impacts the City’s investments.

6.     Anticipated exposure to loss.

7.     Quarterly reports.

8.     Compliance with investment policy.

C.     Meet on a quarterly basis.

D.    Perform such other duties or studies as may be directed by the City Council. (3920-11/11)

 

2.110.050 Authority
A.    It is intended that the Investment Advisory Board act only in an advisory capacity and not be vested with final authority in the establishment of priorities, the expenditure of funds or the establishment of the investment policy.

B.     The board shall not interfere with the duties of any elected or appointed officer specified in the City Charter. (3920-11/11)

 

2.110.060 Operating Policies
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the Investment Advisory Board shall conform to operating policies for boards and commissions as set forth in Chapter 2.100 of the Huntington Beach Municipal Code. (3920-11/11)

 

2.110.070 Brown Act
Meetings of the Investment Advisory Board shall be subject to the open meeting law (Government Code Section 54950). (3920-11/11)

 

2.110.080 Powers of Appointment
The Investment Advisory Board shall have the power to appoint subcommittees of not more than three of its members to perform tasks within the scope of duties. (3920-11/11)

 

Chapter 2.111 PUBLIC WORKS COMMISSION
2.111.010 Commission Established
There is hereby established a Public Works Commission in and for the City of Huntington Beach which shall be known as the Public Works Commission of the City of Huntington Beach. The authority to create a Public Works Commission is derived from the Huntington Beach City Charter Section 405. (3318-2/96)

 

2.111.020 Non-Interference
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter as may be amended by ordinance by the City Council of the City of Huntington Beach, no member of the Public Works Commission shall order, directly or indirectly, the Director of Public Works or his or her staff in the administration or execution of the director’s powers and duties as established in Chapter 2.56 of the Huntington Beach Municipal Code. The Director of Public Works shall be responsible to the City Manager for the administration and execution of Public Works affairs. (3318-2/96, 3886-5/11)

 

2.111.030 Duties
The duties of the Public Works Commission shall be as provided below:

A.    Provide annual review and comment upon Public Works capital improvement projects and program.

B.     Review and comment upon the following:

1.     The long-term infrastructure maintenance and repair program;

2.     Oil pipeline permits issued by Public Works staff; and

3.     Traffic control device permits issued by Public Works staff.

C.     Recommend to the City Council capital improvement projects which exceed $50,000.00 and may review capital project repairs exceeding $50,000.00.

D.    Review and recommend to the City Council all capital improvements project construction change orders exceeding the authorized change order limit for the project.

E.     Receive regular reports of the active capital improvement projects.

F.     Conduct an annual review and performance audit of the sewer service fund.

G.    Recommend to the City Council on an annual basis any fees, rates and/or charges proposed to be modified or added to the sewer service user charge.

H.    Have the power and be required to hear for final decision appeals following sewer service user charge adjustment and/or exemption decisions made by the Director of Public Works.

I.      Reserved.

J.      Pursuant to California Vehicle Code Section 21950.5, or its successor statute, the Public Works Commission shall conduct public meetings as necessary to consider the removal of a marked crosswalk or crosswalks on public streets; and based upon the results of such meetings, direct City staff, by motion, to either retain the marked crosswalk(s) or take any necessary steps for removal of the marked crosswalk(s). Any person who disagrees with the decision of the Public Works Commission may, in writing, no later than 10 days after the date of such decision, appeal the decision to the City Council. Such appeal shall be filed with the City Clerk. If a timely appeal is filed, the City Manager shall cause the matter to be set for hearing before the City Council within 30 days. The City Manager shall give the appellant at least 10 days’ written notice of the time and place of the City Council hearing. After hearing the appeal, the City Council may affirm, overrule or modify the decision of the Public Works Commission. The decision of the City Council shall be final. If the Public Works Commission’s decision is to direct City staff to take the necessary steps to remove a marked crosswalk(s), and, further, if a timely appeal is filed, the decision of the Public Works Commission shall be stayed until the City Council has decided the appeal. If the decision of the City Council directs removal of a marked crosswalk(s), such removal shall not occur until at least 30 days after the City Council’s decision.

K.    Have the power and be required to hear for final decision, appeals following street work construction permit decisions made by the Director of Public Works.

L.     Have the power and be required to consider application of a fee adjustment of the fair share traffic impact fee if the development project does not have a discretionary development permit. The commission shall consider the application within 60 days after the fee application is deemed complete by the Director of Public Works.

M.    Work to protect water quality in the channels of Huntington Harbour. (3318-2/96, 3506-10/01, 3515-12/01, 3591-1/03, 3886-5/11, 4055-6/15)

 

2.111.040 Records of Commission
Accurate and permanent records of the acts of the commission shall be kept, and such records shall have the same status as records of other departments of the City. (3318-2/96)

 

2.111.050 Members
The Public Works Commission shall consist of seven members who shall be residents of the City of Huntington Beach and shall not be officers or employees of the City and no member of the commission may have any interest in any contract with the City either during such member’s terms of office or for a period of one year after the cessation of such service. Members who are employees of firms which contract with the City shall be deemed to be interested in such contracts excepting when such interest is remote, as defined in Article 4, Chapter 2, Division 4, Title 1 of the California Government Code. (3318-2/96)

 

2.111.060 Appointment and Composition
All members shall serve without compensation, may hold no other office or employment in City government, and no other employment which is incompatible with Commission Service. Each City Councilmember shall appoint one member of the commission to serve the same term as the City Councilmember. The term shall coincide with the term of the City Councilmember making the appointment. The first two terms expiring shall be appointed by the two first term City Councilmembers. Thereafter, selection shall be made upon expiration of terms, and shall be by lot drawn among the remaining councilmembers. (3318-2/96, 3490-1/01)

 

2.111.080 Vacancies—Retirement
In the event a member retires or is unable to complete his or her term, an appointment shall be made to fill the remainder of such member’s unexpired term. (3318-2/96, 3490-1/01)

 

2.111.100 Quorum Proceedings
A.    A majority of the members of the commission in office shall constitute a quorum. A majority vote of the members present and voting, where a quorum is present at any regular or special meeting, is required to carry a motion, proposal or resolution.

B.     Upon demand of any member, the roll call shall be called for yeas and nays upon any questions before the Commission. Roberts’ Rules of Order Revised shall govern the procedure of meetings of the commission unless inconsistent with other provisions of this chapter. (3318-2/96)

 

2.111.110 Bylaws
The Public Works Commission shall adopt such bylaws and rules as it deems necessary to provide for its officers and their method of selection of time and place of meetings and for such other matters relative to its work and administration of its duties which are not otherwise provided for by statute or ordinance. (3318-2/96)

 

2.111.120 Advisors
The Public Works Commission may request of the Director of Public Works the attendance at its meetings of any officer or employee of the City to assist the commission in its deliberations in an advisory capacity but who shall not have the authority to vote upon any matter being considered by the commission. (3318-2/96)

 

2.111.130 Operating Policies
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the board shall conform to the operating policy for boards and commissions as set forth in Chapter 2.100 of this Code. (3318-2/96)

 

2.111.140 Brown Act
The board shall be governed by the provisions of the Brown Act (Government Code § 54950, et seq.). (3318-2/96)

 

Chapter 2.112 MOBILE HOME ADVISORY BOARD
2.112.010 Board Established
There is hereby established a Mobile Home Advisory Board. (3332-7/96)

 

2.112.020 Purpose
The purpose of the board shall be:

A.    To ensure the quality of life in mobile home parks and to review matters concerning mobile home parks in the City of Huntington Beach through healthy communication with park owners, manufactured home owners and the City Council.

B.     To act in an advisory capacity to the City Council on matters concerning the mobile home community. (3332-7/96)

 

2.112.030 Composition
The Mobile Home Advisory Board shall consist of nine members. All members shall be appointed by the City Council. The board shall be comprised of three Huntington Beach mobile home park owners or their designated nominees (who may or may not reside in Huntington Beach), three Huntington Beach mobile home resident owners, and three Huntington Beach independent citizens-at-large who have no affiliation or relationship with mobile home parks. (3332-7/96, 3924-12/11)

 

2.112.040 Removal of Members
Members of the board shall serve until their respective successors are appointed and qualified. The City Council shall have the power to fill any vacancies. Unless otherwise specified, terms of members of the board shall be four years, staggered so that the majority of terms shall end in odd-number years following the election of three councilmembers. Any member of the board may be removed by majority vote of the City Council present when such vote is taken. Any member who absents him or herself from three consecutive, regular meetings or more without the permission of the board chairperson shall be deemed to have resigned from the board and his or her office shall become vacant. Any vacancy shall be filled by appointment for the unexpired term by a majority vote of the Council present and voting. (3332-7/96)

 

2.112.050 Vacancies—Retirement
Members shall be privileged to retire voluntarily from the Board at any time; successors to be appointed in such case, or any other vacancy from whatever cause, by the Mayor, with the approval of the City Council, for the unexpired term of office. (3332-7/96)

 

2.112.060 Service Limitation
No person shall serve more than two consecutive four-year terms. (3332-7/96)

 

2.112.070 Secretary
The Director of Economic Development, or his/her designee, shall serve as secretary to the board without the power to vote, and shall keep permanent minutes of the board meetings. Accurate and permanent records of the acts of the board shall be kept, and such records shall have the same status as records of other departments of the City. (3332-7/96)

 

2.112.080 Meetings/Quorum
A.    The board shall meet at such time and place as it may fix by resolution. All meetings shall be open to the public and consistent with the provision of the Brown Act (open meetings law). A majority of the board shall constitute a quorum for transaction of business.

B.     Upon demand of any member, the roll call shall be called for yeas and nays upon any questions before the board. Roberts’ Rules of Order Revised shall govern the procedure of meetings of the board unless inconsistent with other provisions of this chapter. (3332-7/96)

 

2.112.090 Operating Policies
The board shall conform to the operation policies for boards and commissions as set forth in Chapter 2.100 of this Code with the exception of Section 2.100.050. (3332-7/96)

 

2.112.100 Bylaws
The Mobile Home Advisory Board shall adopt such bylaws and rules as it deems necessary to provide for its officers and their method of selection of time and place of meetings and for such other matters relative to its work and administration of its duties which are not otherwise provided for by statute or ordinance, subject to prior submission to and approval by the City Council. (3332-7/96)

 

2.112.110 Advisors
The Mobile Home Advisory Board may request of the Director of Economic Development the attendance at its meetings of any officer or employee of the City to assist the board in its deliberations in an advisory capacity but who shall not have the authority to vote upon any matter being considered by the board. (3332-7/96)

 

Chapter 2.114 DEPARTMENT OF INFORMATION SERVICES
2.114.010 Department Established
There is hereby created the Department of Information Services of the City of Huntington Beach. (3583-11/02)

 

2.114.020 Chief Information Officer—Appointment
The Chief Information Officer shall be the head of the department and such Chief Information Officer shall be appointed by the City Manager. (3583-11/02, 4086-5/16)

 

2.114.030 Department Objectives
The objectives of the department shall be as follows:

A.    Develop, implement, operate, and maintain technology systems for all City departments.

B.     Direct, plan, organize and coordinate programs and activities of the Department of Information Services. (3583-11/02)

 

2.114.040 Chief Information Officer—Powers and Duties
The Chief Information Officer shall have the following powers and duties:

A.    Plans, organizes and directs telecommunication and information services within the City of Huntington Beach.

B.     Develops, implements, and maintains a City technology plan.

C.     Implements, integrates, and administers technology hardware and software solutions.

D.    Establishes and maintains a system of procedures for use and control of City technology systems.

E.     Prepares and administers the department budget.

F.     Such other acts or duties, not inconsistent with the City Charter, as may be required by the City Council or the laws of the State of California. (3583-11/02, 4086-5/16)

 

2.114.050 Appointment of Subordinates
The Chief Information Officer, with the approval of the City Manager, shall appoint all other officers, assistants, deputies and employees of the Department of Information Services. (3583-11/02, 4086-5/16)

Title 3 REVENUE AND FINANCE
Chapter 3.02 PURCHASES OF GOODS AND SERVICES
3.02.010 Established
The Central Services Division is established for the purpose of providing for centralized purchasing of all supplies, services and equipment for the various agencies of the City. (2259-2/78, 2464-12/80, 3510-10/01, 3718-8/05)

 

3.02.015 Purpose
This chapter is adopted in order to provide a uniform procedure for contracting for goods and services by the City of Huntington Beach, to provide for fair and equitable treatment of all persons involved, to obtain the highest possible value in exchange for public funds, and to safeguard the quality and integrity of the purchasing and contract process. (3510-10/01)

 

3.02.020 Director—Duties
The Finance Director shall direct the activities of the Central Services Division. The Purchasing/Central Services Manager shall be responsible to the Finance Director. (2259-2/78, 2464-12/80, 3510-10/01, 3718-8/05, 3751-11/06)

 

3.02.025 Definitions
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions apply:

Bid or Proposal Documents. The documents, including their attachments and addenda, which set forth instructions to bidders or proposers, and are disseminated for the purpose of soliciting bids or proposals.

City Manager. The City Manager or his/her designee.

City Employee. An individual who performs services for the City in the capacity of an elected or appointed official, or as a compensated employee of the City or of a temporary services agency retained by the City. “City employee” does not include independent contractors.

Contract. Agreements, regardless of what they may be labeled, between the City and one or more other parties for the purchase or disposition of goods and/or services.

Contractor/Vendor/Supplier. Any person who has entered into an agreement with the City for the provision or disposition of goods and/or services.

Environmentally Preferred Purchasing (EPP). The current EPP Best Practices Guide to assist in the procurement of services, goods and materials that have the lowest life cycle cost; and provide the basis for securing environmentally friendly and sustainable purchasing practices.

Finance Director. The Finance Director or his or her designee.

Financial Interest.

1.     Ownership of any interest or involvement in any relationship from which, or as a result of which, a person has received compensation within the past year, or is entitled to, or is currently receiving compensation;

2.     Ownership, whether wholly or in part, of any property or business; or

3.     Status as an officer, director, trustee, partner, employee, or manager of a business.

Goods. Articles moveable at the time of sale, including but not limited to equipment, supplies and materials.

Gratuity. A gift, payment, loan, advance, deposit of money, or service, presented or promised in return for or in anticipation of favorable consideration in the procurement process. “Gratuity” does not include the compensation paid by or due from the City or from a temporary service agency under contract with the City to an employee in connection with the employee’s services for the City.

Immediate Family. Any spouse, child, stepchild, parent or stepparent of a City employee. The relationship of parent to child includes both natural and adoptive relationships.

Local Business. A business entity with one or more fixed offices and/or locally taxable distribution points within the boundaries of the City of Huntington Beach which holds a current and valid City business license with a Huntington Beach business street address.

Maintenance and Repair Services. Services intended to preserve and/or restore a public work to a clean, safe, efficient and/or continually usable condition. Maintenance and repair services may include, but are not limited to: carpentry, electrical, painting, plumbing, glazing and other craftwork to preserve a facility in the condition for which it was intended; repairs, cleaning and other operations on machinery and other equipment permanently attached to a facility as fixtures; the mowing, pruning, and trimming of lawns, grass, trees, shrubs, bushes and hedges; and the regular removal or relocation of by-products or waste products accumulated at City facilities as the result of ongoing environmental processes.

Person. Any individual, partnership, limited partnership, association, corporation, labor union, committee, club, or governmental, public or quasi-public entity.

Procurement. The acquisition of goods and/or services by the City, including but not limited to purchasing, rental or leasing, and all functions and procedures pertaining to such acquisitions.

Professional Services. Services that involve the exercise of professional discretion and independent judgment based on an advanced or specialized knowledge, expertise or training gained by formal studies or experience. Such services include, but are not limited to, those provided by appraisers, architects, attorneys, engineers, instructors, insurance advisors, physicians and other specialized consultants. The procurement of professional services is governed by Chapter 3.03.

Responsible Bidder. A bidder determined by the awarding authority:

1.     To have the ability, capacity, experience and skill to provide the goods and/or services in accordance with bid specifications;

2.     To have the ability to provide the goods and/or services promptly, or within the time specified, without delay;

3.     To have equipment, facilities and resources of such capacity and location to enable the bidder to provide the goods and/or services;

4.     To be able to provide future maintenance, repair, parts and service for the use of the goods purchased, if appropriate;

5.     To have a record of satisfactory or better performance under prior contracts with the City and other purchasers where such bidder has previously been awarded such contracts;

6.     To have complied with laws, regulations, guidelines and orders governing prior or existing contracts performed by the bidder, if applicable;

7.     To meet the City standards for environmentally preferable procurement.

Responsive Bidder. A bidder determined by the Purchasing/Central Services Manager to have submitted a bid or proposal which conforms in all material respects to the requirements of the bid or proposal documents.

Services. Work performed or labor, time and effort expended by an independent contractor.

Specifications. A description of the physical or functional characteristics or of the nature of the required goods and/or services.

Surplus Personal Property. Goods owned by the City which are no longer needed or which are obsolete or unserviceable, property that is a by-product (scrap metal, used tires and oil, etc.), or any unclaimed, seized or abandoned personal property in the possession or custody of the department of public safety which may be legally disposed of by the City. (3510-10/01, 3718-8/05, 3751-11/06, 3877-5/10)

 

3.02.030 Director—Exemption From Centralized Purchasing
The Finance Director may authorize in writing any agency to purchase or contract for specified supplies, services and equipment independently of the Purchasing Division; but he or she shall require that such purchases or contracts be made in conformity with the procedures established by this chapter, and shall further require periodic reports from the agency on the purchases and contracts made under such written authorization. (2259-2/78, 2464-12/80, 3510-10/01, 3718-8/05, 3751-11/06)

 

3.02.040 Procedures
Purchase of supplies, services, equipment and the sale of surplus personal property shall be by procedures provided for in this chapter. (2259-2/78)

 

3.02.050 Procurement and Disposition Responsibilities
A.    The director or his or her designee represented of the department requiring goods and services, other than professional services, shall:

1.     Identify its procurement needs and the availability of funding.

2.     Submit to the Purchasing/Central Services Manager specifications for the required goods and/or services.

3.     Participate in the evaluation of bids and proposals, as required.

4.     Inspect goods delivered and services, other than professional services, performed to determine conformity with the requirements set forth in the bid or proposal documents and with contractual obligations, authorize payment for conforming goods and/or services and notify the Purchasing/Central Services Manager of nonconforming goods and/or services.

5.     In developing plans, drawings, work statements, specifications, or other product descriptions, the department shall ensure, to the maximum intent economically feasible, the purchase of environmentally preferable products or services that comply with the City’s strategic plan goal and current EPP Best Practices Guide. This includes, but is not limited to, products that are durable, recyclable, reusable, readily biodegradable, energy efficient, made of recycled materials, and nontoxic. Furthermore, the department shall purchase products and services based on long-term environmental and operating costs, and find ways to include environmental and social cost in short-term prices.

B.     Finance Director. The Finance Director shall be responsible for the procurement of goods and/or services for the City in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. No procurement of goods and/or services shall be made by any City employee independently of the Finance Director except in cases of emergency, unless otherwise authorized in writing by the City Manager. The Finance Director shall:

1.     Prepare and recommend to the City Manager operational procedures and forms for the procurement of goods and/or services in cooperation with the department directors.

2.     Procure or supervise the procurement of all goods and/or services needed in coordination with the department.

3.     Process the contracts awarded.

4.     Whenever possible, establish standardized specifications and consolidation of requirements for goods and/or services required by two or more departments.

5.     Determine the types and amounts of bid security and any performance security acceptable for City procurements.

6.     Be the awarding authority for every procurement of goods and/or services for:

a.     Which the City has an approved budget and sufficient unencumbered appropriated funds; and

b.     Wherein the cost of which will be fully paid or reimbursed to the City, regardless of amount.

7.     Review the results of all formal competitive bid and proposal solicitations for which the City Council is the awarding authority.

8.     Assure compliance with the current Best Practices Guide to the extent practicable, and document exceptions to the EPP. (3510-10/01, 3718-8/05, 3751-11/06, 3877-5/10)

 

3.02.060 Equipment Leases
Upon approval of the City Attorney, the Finance Director may enter into contracts to lease equipment in the following circumstances:

A.    Budgeted Leases. There exists an unencumbered appropriation in the fund account for the amount of the lease payments for the current fiscal year.

B.     The annual budget for the fiscal year in which the lease is or was entered into provides that:

1.     The equipment may be leased;

2.     The useful life of the equipment;

3.     The lease term;

4.     The annual lease payment; and

5.     The interest rate. (2259-2/78, 2464-12/80, 3322-3/96, 3510-10/01, 3718-8/05, 3751-11/06)

 

3.02.070 Methods of Procurement
A.    Small Procurements. Procurements anticipated to cost $30,000.00 or less in one transaction shall be made using simplified and cost effective operational procedures and forms without use of formal or informal bids. Requirements shall not be artificially divided so as to constitute a small purchase under this subsection.

B.     Formal Competitive Bids. Procurements anticipated to cost more than $30,000.00 in one transaction shall be made by issuance of written invitations for bids. Bid documents include, at a minimum: instructions to bidders; specifications describing the required goods and/or services; bid forms and schedules; any required bond forms and proposed contract terms and conditions. The circumstances may require that a contract award be based on factors in addition to price.

C.     Competitive Negotiation. The Purchasing/Central Services Manager may establish, and the bid or proposal documents shall clearly define in a competitive negotiation procurement a two-tiered process in which bids or proposals, as first received, constitute preliminary offers only. Subject to the Purchasing/Central Services Manager’s judgment, the Purchasing/Central Services Manager shall have the authority to enter into negotiations with those persons reasonably likely of being considered for selection for contract award. Following such negotiations, best and final bids or proposals will be accepted by the Purchasing/Central Services Manager. Bidders or proposers shall be accorded fair and equal treatment with respect to any opportunity for discussion and revision of bids or proposals. During negotiation, there shall be no disclosure beyond the City staff evaluating the matter of any information derived from bids or proposals submitted by competing bidder or proposers. The contract award shall be made to the bidder or proposer whose bid or proposal offers the best value to the City, taking into consideration price and the evaluation criteria set forth in the bid or proposal documents. (3510-10/01, 3718-8/05)

 

3.02.080 Competitive Bidding Requirement—Exemptions
A.    Contracts for goods and/or services for which the cost to the City in one transaction will exceed $30,000.00 shall be let by formal competitive bidding or proposals pursuant to this chapter. Procurement requirements shall not be artificially divided so as to avoid the competitive bidding requirement.

B.     The following are exemptions to the competitive bidding requirements:

1.     Professional or specialized services, as defined by this chapter;

2.     Emergency procurements, as defined by this chapter;

3.     Situations where solicitations of bids or proposals would for any reason be impractical, unavailing or impossible;

4.     Sole source goods or services;

5.     Insurance and bonds;

6.     Public library collection materials or services for the provision of public library collection materials or other books or periodicals;

7.     Procurements funded by grants, donations or gifts when the special conditions attached to the grants, donations or gifts require the procurement of particular goods and/or services;

8.     Goods and/or services obtained from or through agreement with any governmental, public or quasi-public entity;

9.     Works of art, entertainment or performance;

10.   Surplus personal property owned by another governmental, public or quasi-public entity;

11.   Membership dues, conventions, training, and travel arrangements;

12.   Advertisements in magazines, newspapers, or other media;

13.   Goods procured from resale to the public; or

14.   Where competitive bids or proposals have been solicited and no bid or proposal has been received. In such a situation the Purchasing/Central Services Manager may proceed to have the services performed or the goods procured without further competitive bidding.

C.     The Purchasing/Central Services Manager shall conduct negotiations, as appropriate, as to price, delivery and terms and may require the submission of cost or pricing data in connection with the award of a contract which does not require competitive bidding.

D.    Nothing in this section shall preclude the solicitation of competitive bids or proposals, when possible. (3510-10/01, 3718-8/05)

 

3.02.090 Pre-Bid Conferences or Site Inspections
When deemed necessary the Purchasing/Central Services Manager is authorized to require bidders or proposers to attend pre-bid conferences or site inspections prior to the time and date set for receipt of bids or proposals and to consider bidders or proposers not in attendance as non-responsive. (3510-10/01, 3718-8/05)

 

3.02.100 Advertisement of Bidding Opportunities
A.    A notice inviting sealed formal competitive bids or proposals shall be advertised using one or more methods designed to provide reasonable public notice in a manner which will permit current information to be disseminated widely.

B.     The notice shall specify the time on or before which bids or proposals will be received; where and with whom bids or proposals shall be filed; the date, time and place where and when bids or proposals will be publicly opened and the bids of each bidder declared.

C.     At the bidder’s request, and where City deems feasible, bid documents may be transmitted to the bidder electronically. (3510-10/01)

 

3.02.110 Correction or Withdrawal of Bids
A.    Before Date and Time for Receipt of Bids. Bids or proposals which contain mistakes discovered by a bidder before the date and time for receipt of bids may be modified or withdrawn by written notice to the Purchasing/Central Services Manager received prior to the deadline.

B.     After Date and Time for Receipt of Bids. A bidder may not change its bid or proposal after the date and time set for receipt of bids.

C.     Withdrawal of Bid. A bidder alleging a mistake in a bid or proposal may be permitted to withdraw its bid or proposal provided that it establishes the following to the satisfaction of the awarding authority:

1.     A mistake was made;

2.     The bidder gave written notice of the mistake, and the manner in which it occurred, to the Purchasing/Central Services Manager within five calendar days following the deadline for receipt of bids;

3.     The mistake made the price materially different than the bidder intended it to be;

4.     The mistake was made in filling out the bid and not due to error in judgment or to carelessness in inspecting the site of the work or in reading the bid documents;

5.     If the awarding authority deems it to be in the best interest of the City, it may allow the lowest bidder to withdraw its bid and award a contract to the next lowest bidder. In the event that bid security was required and provided by the lowest bidder, the amount of the lowest bidder’s bid security shall be applied to the difference between the lowest bid and the next lowest bid and the surplus, if any, shall be returned to the lowest bidder or the bidder’s surety, as applicable. (3510-10/01, 3718-8/05)

 

3.02.120 Receipt of Bids or Proposals
A.    Formal Competitive Bids and Proposals. Sealed bids and proposals submitted in response to formal competitive bid or proposal solicitations shall be received by the Purchasing/Central Services Manager at a time, date and place designated in the bid or proposal documents. Said bids and proposals shall be identified as such on the outside cover.

B.     Public Opening. Formal competitive bids or proposals, timely received, will be publicly opened by the Purchasing/Central Services Manager in the presence of one or more witnesses at the location designated in the bid notice. If members of the public are present, the names of those submitting bids and the aggregate bid pricing shall be read aloud at or shortly following the deadline for receipt of formal competitive bids except those involving competitive negotiation.

C.     Late Receipt. Formal competitive bids or proposals received after the deadline for receipt of bids shall not be accepted and shall be returned to the bidder unopened unless necessary for identification purposes. The Purchasing/Central Services Manager shall submit written notification to the bidder stating what the deadline was, when the bid or proposal was actually received, and that it is being returned because it was received too late.

D.    No Receipt. If no bids or proposals are received in response to a competitive solicitation for goods and/or services, or if none of the bids or proposals meet the requirements as specified in the solicitation document, the Purchasing/Central Services Manager may reissue the solicitation or the awarding authority may authorize the procurement of the required goods and/or services without further complying with competitive bidding requirements, or the City may cease the procurement. An authorization to procure without bidding shall be documented and become part of the procurement records available for public inspection. (3510-10/01, 3718-8/05)

 

3.02.130 Evaluation of Bids or Proposals
A.    One Bid Received. In the event that a single bid or proposal is received, the Purchasing/Central Services Manager shall have the authority to require the bidder or proposer to submit cost or pricing data to assist in determining if the price is reasonable. If the awarding authority determines that a bid price for goods and/or services is not reasonable, it may either reject the bid or it may authorize the Purchasing/Central Services Manager to attempt to negotiate a reasonable price with the bidder or proposer, subject to the awarding authority’s acceptance. Negotiation shall be completed within a reasonable time, as specified by the awarding authority. Should such negotiation fail, the bid may be rejected.

B.     Tie Bids. In the event that an identical price is received from two or more responsive and responsible bidders, and in the judgment of the awarding authority the public interest will not be served by re-advertising for bids, the awarding authority may authorize the Purchasing/Central Services Manager to negotiate for the best possible price. If one of the bidders is a local business then the tie bid will be awarded to the local bidder without the negotiations.

C.     Irregularities. In considering bids or proposals for any goods and/or services contract, the awarding authority may waive, if it wishes to do so, minor defects or irregularities in the bids or proposals, provided that the discrepancy does not affect the bid or proposal amount or give the bidder or proposer an advantage over others. (3510-10/01, 3718-8/05)

 

3.02.140 Preparation of Bid or Proposal Documents
Any person, with whom the City has contracted to prepare, or assist in the preparation of, bid or proposal documents, is ineligible to submit a bid or proposal for the provision of the goods or the performance of the services so specified. (3510-10/01)

 

3.02.150 Cancellation of Solicitations—Rejection of Bids
A.    Cancellation of Solicitations. The Purchasing/Central Services Manager may cancel competitive bid or proposal solicitations before the date and time set for receipt of bids or proposals upon a written determination that such action is in the City’s best interest for reasons including, but not limited to any of the following:

1.     The City no longer requires the goods and/or services, as determined by the City;

2.     The City no longer can reasonably expect to fund the procurement, as determined by the Finance Director, City Manager or City Council;

3.     Proposed amendments to the solicitation would be of such magnitude that a new solicitation is desirable.

B.     Rejection of Bids. The Purchasing/Central Services Manager may reject, in whole or in part, bids or proposals received in response to informal competitive bid or proposal solicitations, and may reject, in whole or in part, bids or proposals received in response to formal competitive bid or proposal solicitations. If all bids are rejected, the City has the discretion to readvertise.

C.     Records. The fact that a solicitation was cancelled or bid or proposal rejected shall be made part of the procurement records. (3510-10/01, 3718-8/05, 3751-11/06)

 

3.02.160 Procurement Records—Public Inspection
A.    Records Maintenance. The Purchasing/Central Services Manager shall maintain records for each procurement which include, at a minimum, the procurement request from the department; the bid or proposal documents for the procurement, if any; any and all bids or proposals received; the basis on which contract award is made; and a copy of any and all contracts awarded. Such records shall be maintained for a period of time in compliance with state law and the City’s records retention schedule and shall be available for public inspection during normal City business hours.

B.     Public Inspection. Informal and formal competitive bids not involving competitive negotiation shall be available for public inspection following the date and time set for receipt of bids. Informal and formal competitive proposals and formal competitive bids involving competitive negotiation shall be available for public inspection following contract award or rejection. The City will not disclose any pricing agreements it may have during the bidding process. (3510-10/01, 3718-8/05)

 

3.02.170 Bonds and Other Security—Insurance Requirements
A.    When Required. The Purchasing/Central Services Manager shall have the authority to require bid, performance and payment security or specific types and amounts of insurance coverage for specific procurements to the extent required by state law or upon a determination that it is in the best interest of the City to do so.

B.     Bid Security. Bid security, if required, shall be submitted with the bid and shall be a certified check, cashier’s check or surety bond issued by an admitted surety insurer authorized to conduct business in the State of California. If a bidder fails to submit the required bid security with the bid, the bid shall be deemed non-responsive. After bids are opened, bid security is irrevocable for the period specified in the invitation for bids. If the successful bidder fails to execute the contract within the time specified, the total amount of the bid security shall be forfeited to the City. The security of an unsuccessful bidder shall be returned to the bidder no later than 60 calendar days from the date of contract award.

C.     Performance Security. Performance security, if required, shall be in the form of a bond acceptable to the City and issued by an admitted surety insurer authorized to operate in the State of California.

D.    Form of Bonds. The only bonds acceptable to the City shall be those executed on forms approved by the City Attorney and included with the bid or proposal documents. (3510-10/01, 3718-8/05)

 

3.02.180 Local Business Preference
A.    Subject to the limitations contained in this section, the Purchasing/Central Services Manager shall extend a bidding advantage to a local business in the form of a five percent preference in the evaluation of bids or proposals for the procurement of goods.

B.     The following contracts are exempt from the provisions of this section:

1.     Contracts funded in whole or in part from grants, donations or gifts to the City if the provisions of this section conflict with any special conditions attached to the grants, donations or gifts, provided the special conditions have been approved and accepted pursuant to the donations policy of the City.

2.     Emergency procurements.

3.     Sole source contracts.

C.     After a due process hearing, should the City Manager determine that a price preference was received under this section through an intentional misstatement, the recipient of any such price preference shall be subject to a civil penalty of treble the dollar price preference received or $5,000.00, whichever is greater. (3510-10/01, 3718-8/05, 3913-6/11, 4076-12/15)

 

3.02.190 Exempt and Emergency Procurements
The following purchases and procurements are exempted from the requirements of this chapter:

A.    Public Works Construction Contracts. Those public works construction contracts, and the separate procurement of materials and supplies therefor, that are governed by other applicable laws, including but not limited to the City Charter.

B.     Emergency Purchases and Procurements. An emergency shall be deemed to exist if:

1.     There is a great public calamity.

2.     There is immediate need to prepare for national or local defense.

3.     There is a breakdown in machinery or an essential service which requires an immediate procurement in order to safeguard the public health, safety or welfare.

4.     An essential, departmental operation affecting the public health, safety or welfare would be greatly hampered if the prescribed procurement procedure would cause an undue delay in the procurement of the needed service.

In case of an emergency which requires the immediate procurement of a commodity or service, the City Manager may authorize the Finance Officer to secure by the open-market procedure, at the lowest obtainable price, any service or commodity regardless of the amount of the expenditure.

 

C.     Interagency Purchase Agreements. Procurements utilizing agreements maintained by other public agencies for the provision of services or supplies to such agencies are exempt from the bidding and/or request for proposal process requirements of this chapter.

1.     Cooperative Procurement. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the Purchasing/Central Services Manager may authorize the City’s participation with one or more other governmental, public or quasi-public agencies in a cooperative agreement for the procurement of goods and/or services, provided that at least one of the agencies has solicited bids using methods similar to those set forth in this chapter.

2.     Use of Another Entity’s Contract. The Purchasing/Central Services Manager may authorize the procurement of goods and/or services through the use of a contract initiated by another governmental, public or quasi-public entity, provided that the original parties to the contract agree, the contract was awarded. The contract is for identical or nearly identical goods and/or services, and the contract resulted from a competitive bid using methods similar to those required by this chapter.

3.     Mutual Aid. The Purchasing/Central Services Manager may sell to, acquire from, or use goods belonging to another government, public or quasi-public agency independent of the requirements of this chapter and under the terms agreed upon between the parties, provided that such activity does not adversely affect City services and is approved in advance in writing by the City Manager.

D.    Sole-Source Procurements. In those cases where the procurement of any product or supply is obtainable only from a single or sole source, based upon the good faith review of available products and services by the Finance Director, the Finance Director, and with the assistance of the City Attorney, shall negotiate with the purveyor of such equipment, product, supply or service, to the end that the City receives the desired product, equipment, service or supply on fair and equitable terms. Examples of acceptable sole source purchases are equipment for which there is no comparable competitive product, a component or replacement part for which there is no commercially available substitute and which can be obtained only from the manufacturer, and an item where compatibility with items in use by the City is the overriding consideration. Purchases from regulated public utilities may be made pursuant to applicable tariff without regard to this section. (3510-10/01, 3718-8/05, 3751-11/06)

 

3.02.195 Right to Inspect Plant and Audit Records
A.    Right to Inspect Plant. The City may, at reasonable times, inspect the part of the plant, place of business or work site of a vendor/contractor or subcontractor at any tier which is pertinent to the performance of any contract awarded or to be awarded by the City.

B.     Right to Audit Records. The City shall be entitled to audit the books and records of a vendor/contractor or subcontractor at any tier to the extent that such books, documents, papers, and records are pertinent to the performance of such contract or subcontract. (3510-10/01)

 

3.02.200 Disqualification of Vendors
A.    The Finance Director may for good cause appearing:

1.     Decline to accept offers, bids or quotations from prospective vendors; and/or

2.     Deem a prospective bidder/vendor as non-responsive or non-responsible.

B.     A bidder/vendor whose offer, bid or quotation has been declined or has been deemed non-responsive or non-responsible shall have the right to appeal such decision of the Finance Director to the City Manager within a reasonable time after demand made in writing to the Finance Director to accept the proffered bid, offer or quotation. (3510-10/01, 3718-8/05, 3751-11/06)

 

3.02.210 Disposition of Surplus Personal Property
A.    Authority. The Purchasing/Central Services Manager is authorized to sell or dispose of surplus personal property having a salvage value in the open market, by public auction, by competitive sealed bids or by exchange or trade-in for new goods. The sale or lease of surplus personal property to a governmental, public or quasi-public agency may be without advertisement for or receipt of bids.

B.     Property With No Salvage Value. Surplus personal property with no salvage value, as determined by the Purchasing/Central Services Manager, shall be disposed of in a manner that salvages recyclable components, if practical.

C.     Unclaimed, Seized or Abandoned Property. The Purchasing/Central Services Manager is authorized to sell or dispose of all goods in the possession or custody of the Police Department which are unclaimed, seized and/or abandoned and may be legally disposed of by the City.

D.    Records. The Purchasing/Central Services Manager shall provide reports to the City Manager which indicate surplus personal property disposed of, the method of disposal, and the amounts recovered from its disposal and shall maintain records for public inspection relative to the disposal of surplus personal property for a period of time in compliance with state law and the City’s records retention schedule.

E.     Donations. Upon approval in advance in writing of the City Manager, surplus personal property may be donated to governmental, public or quasi-public agencies, charitable or non-profit organizations.

F.     Proceeds of Sale. Proceeds from the sale of surplus personal property shall be deposited into the appropriate City fund. (3510-10/01, 3718-8/05)

 

3.02.220 Ethics
A.    Statement of Policy. City employees shall discharge their duties impartially so as to ensure fair competitive access to City procurement opportunities by responsible contractors. Moreover, they shall conduct themselves in such a manner as to foster public confidence in the integrity of City procurement activities.

B.     Conflict of Interest. No City employee shall participate directly or indirectly in a City procurement when the employee knows that:

1.     The employee or any member of the employee’s immediate family has a financial interest pertaining to the procurement; or

2.     The employee or any member of the employee’s immediate family is negotiating or has an employment arrangement which is contingent upon or will be affected by the procurement.

C.     Withdrawal From Participation. Upon discovery of an actual or potential conflict of interest, an employee shall promptly withdraw from further participation in the procurement.

D.    Gratuities. No person shall offer, give or agree to give any City employee any gratuity or offer of employment in connection with a procurement by the City. No City employee shall solicit, demand, accept or agree to accept from any other person a gratuity or an offer of employment in connection with a procurement by the City. (3510-10/01)

 

Chapter 3.03 PROFESSIONAL SERVICES
Note
*       Note: §§ 3.03.010, 3.03.090 and 3.03.110 repealed by Ord. 3511-10/01; §§ 3.03.030, 3.03.050 and 3.03.070 repealed by Ord. 2590-1/83.

 

3.03.020 Definitions
“Consultant” means any provider of services under this chapter as an individual, partnership, corporation or otherwise.

“Director” means the department head or his or her designee as approved by City Council resolution, vested with the authority to administer the provisions of this chapter with respect to contracting for services.

“Expert services” means uniquely and singularly qualified legal experts, medical experts, or other experts retained to assist with legal matters handled in-house by the City Attorney’s office.

“Professional services” means those services that involve the exercise of professional discretion and independent judgment based on an advanced or specialized knowledge, expertise or training gained by formal studies or experience or services which are not readily or efficiently procured by competitive bidding pursuant to Chapter 3.02. Such services shall include, but not be limited to, those services provided by appraisers, architects, law firms retained for general legal counsel for the handling of lawsuits externally (“Retained Law Firm”), engineers, instructors, insurance advisors, physicians and other specialized consultants. (2047-5/76, 2590-1/83, 3375-11/97, 3511-10/01, 3604-6/03, 4169-2/19)

 

3.03.040 Selection Guidelines
In all cases, the final selection of a consultant shall include consideration of the following factors:

A.    Actual capability to complete the project in conformance with the specifications, conditions and other requirements of the City of Huntington Beach.

B.     Demonstrated ability to prepare professional, accurate and timely-finished products irrespective of unusual or difficult circumstances.

C.     A reasonable contract price in relation to the size, quality and time restraints of the proposed project with due consideration of competitive proposals.

D.    Consultant status will be verified through state and federal registries to identify debarment, suspension, ineligibility or voluntary exclusion actions.

E.     Businesses within the City of Huntington Beach will receive up to five extra points on a 100-point scale when scoring proposals pursuant to this chapter, as local vendor preference. (2047-5/76, 3878-5/10, 3914-6/11)

 

3.03.060 Procedure
The procedure for the contracting of services is as follows:

A.    The director of the department primarily responsible for the particular project shall prepare a written statement defining the necessity and scope of the project, and submit it to the Director of Finance. Upon approval by the City Manager and the Director of Finance, the director shall prepare a written statement of the specifications, conditions and other requirements for the requested services and provide a copy to consultants who may wish to perform the service.

B.     Except as identified in Section 3.03.080, the director, or his or her designee, shall request written proposals from not less than three available qualified consultants. He or she shall thereafter conduct discussions with them regarding the project if such discussions are indicated by the complexity of the project, and based upon the selection guidelines established in Section 3.03.040 and the criteria established by him or her, select the consultant from the responsible proposals submitted to him or her, deemed to be the most highly qualified to provide the services required.

C.     If the procurement has been budgeted, contractual agreement shall be negotiated with the consultant subject to final approval as to form by the City Attorney, and as to content by the City Manager.

D.    If the procurement has not been budgeted, then the director shall prepare a request for appropriation for the City Manager to submit to the City Council in the usual prescribed manner.

E.     The City Attorney shall counsel and advise City officials in the implementation of this chapter.

F.     Retained Law Firm, Professional Services Agreements. The procurement of agreements for retained law firms for handling lawsuits externally shall follow the bid processes set forth in this Chapter and any Administrative Regulations related thereto as outlined in Sections 3.03.040 and 3.03.060(A) through (E) of this Code.

To best protect the City’s interests and confidentiality in legal matters, the following procedures will be utilized for procurement:

1.     Any such agreement that exceeds $100,000.00 shall require City Council authorization, which may be obtained in Closed Session pursuant to the Ralph M. Brown Act.

2.     Prior to submission to the City Council for review and approval in Closed Session, proposed agreements exceeding $100,000.00 must first obtain approval from the Director of Finance to ensure availability of funds pursuant to the administrative regulations regarding professional services contracts. Executed agreements for Retained Law Firms for general counsel for the handling of lawsuits externally require authorized signatures from the Mayor and City Clerk just as with other professional services agreements that exceed $100,000.00.

3.     The City Attorney will provide a quarterly report with a list of all Retained Law Firms and Expert Services contracts entered into for that quarter, in Closed Session, pursuant to the Ralph M. Brown Act, in a format and manner consistent with the quarterly reporting of other professional services contracts for the City. To ensure the protection of the City’s interests and confidentiality in all legal matters, such quarterly reports will remain in a secure location and deemed Confidential.

4.     To ensure the protection of the City’s interests and confidentiality in all legal matters, executed Retained Law Firm and Expert Services agreements will remain in a secure location by the City Attorney, City Clerk and Director of Finance. (2047-5/76, 2590-1/83, 3375-11/97, 3511-10/01, 3734-5/06, 3853-2/10, 4169-2/19)

 

3.03.080 Exempt and Emergency Procedures
The need for certain budgeted and emergency and exempted procurements are recognized.

A.    An emergency shall be deemed to exist if:

1.     There is a great public calamity.

2.     There is immediate need to prepare for national or local defense.

3.     There is a breakdown in machinery or an essential service which requires the immediate attention of a professional in order to protect the public health, safety or welfare.

4.     An essential, departmental operation affecting the public health, safety or welfare would be greatly hampered if the prescribed procedure would cause an undue delay in the procurement of the needed services.

In the case of an emergency which requires the immediate retention of a professional consultant, the City Manager may authorize the department director to secure by the open-market procedure, at the lowest obtainable price consistent with professional standards, any professional service regardless of the amount of the expenditure.

B.     Other Interagency Agreements. Procurements utilizing contractual agreements maintained by other public agencies for the provision of professional services to such agencies are exempt from the requirements of this chapter except that the provisions of Section 3.03.060(C) shall apply in every case and so long as such other agency complied with its own professional services contract requirements as approved by the department director.

C.     All contracts for performance of professional services for the City which exceed $30,000.00 shall be awarded in accordance with the procedures of this Code. All contracts for professional services which do not exceed $30,000.00, with prior approval of the Director of Finance or his or her designee, may be let without competitive bidding or negotiation.

D.    Contracts for Expert Services.

1.     The City Attorney is authorized to enter into Expert Service Agreements on behalf of the City, for which an appropriation has been made, and subject to approval by the City Manager and Director of Finance. Such procurements may be let without competitive bidding or negotiation, not to exceed $100,000.00, for the contracting of Experts Services to assist with legal matters handled in-house by the City Attorney’s office, with supporting documentation justifying the need for a waiver of competitive bidding requirements for each Expert Service.

2.     For procurements with Expert Services exceeding $100,000.00, City Council approval is required. City Council approval may be obtained during Closed Session, pursuant to the Ralph M. Brown Act. Executed agreements for Expert Services require authorized signatures from the Mayor and City Clerk just as with other professional services agreements that exceed $100,000.00. (2047-5/76, 3375-11/97, 3511-10/01, 3734-5/06, 3853-2/10, 4169-2/19)

 

3.03.100 Authorization by Department Directors
A.    The director of any department for which such services are required may contract directly for any professional services when procurement of such services has been budgeted and there are sufficient unencumbered appropriated funds available, or wherein the cost of which will be fully paid or reimbursed to the City. The annual budget for the fiscal year in which the agreement is entered into shall provide a general description of the work to be performed.

B.     The complete original of the executed agreement and the names of the consultants who submitted proposals shall be forwarded to the City Clerk. A complete copy of all approved insurance certificates and subsequent renewals shall be filed with the risk manager. (2047-5/76, 2945-7/88, 3375-11/97, 3511-10/01)

 

3.03.120 Existing Agreements
The terms and conditions of any existing professional services agreement may be modified so as to increase or decrease the term, compensation, scope of work or otherwise, by mutual agreement of the City and the consultant selected. The City Manager may authorize, in writing, that professional service agreements be amended to extend an agreement beyond three years from receipt of the original request for proposals, not to exceed four years, without compliance with the bid procedure established by Huntington Beach Municipal Code Section 3.03.060. Any amendments as provided herein must comply with all other requirements of the City Charter, this chapter, administrative regulations and municipal corporation contracting laws. (2390-9/79, 3511-10/01, 3989-10/13)

 

Chapter 3.06 SURPLUS REAL PROPERTY
3.06.010 Disposition of Surplus Real Property
A.    The City Manager shall inform the Council when real property belonging to the City is surplus to the needs of the City and recommend to the Council that a resolution be adopted directing the disposition of such surplus real property.

B.     Resolutions directing the disposition of surplus real property shall declare that the public interest and necessity require the disposition of surplus real property, and shall direct that the surplus real property be disposed of by sale or exchange and shall specify the procedures to be followed in each case. Sales may be made for all cash or on terms. The resolution shall provide that independent appraisals be obtained to establish fair market value of properties being disposed of except in circumstances where the value of the surplus real properties does not justify the expense of the appraisal. Fair market value is the amount that would in all probability have been arrived at between owner willing to sell and purchaser willing to buy. The fair market value appraisal shall have added to it all of City’s costs of preparing land for sale including appraisal fees. The resolution shall contain a statement as to how and in what manner the City acquired the property.

C.     Dispositions of surplus real properties shall be in accordance with the provisions of Articles 8 and 8.5 of Chapter 5 of Part 1 of Division 2 of Title 5 (commencing with Section 54220) of the California Government Code when such statutes are applicable and may be made for cash or upon such terms as the Council in its resolution shall direct. When the Council determines that disposition of surplus real property to the owner of the real property adjacent or contiguous to the surplus real property is in the public interest, then, the surplus real property shall first be offered to such property owner on such terms as the Council shall deem just. No surplus real property shall be disposed of in violation of any land use regulation of the City, and insofar as possible dispositions shall be made to implement and further such regulations.

No surplus real property shall be transferred or sold which in itself, as a separate parcel, may not be developed in accordance with provisions of the state Map Act and the subdivision and other applicable ordinances of the City unless such surplus real property is transferred or offered for sale to an adjacent property owner. In the event more than one property owner, adjacent to said surplus real property, desires to acquire ownership of said surplus real property, then the City shall decide the manner in which to divide said surplus real property for transfer or sale to said adjacent property owners.

D.    The City Council, by resolution, shall declare when it is in the best interest of the City to exchange City-owned surplus real property for other real property.

E.     Sales, conveyances, and leases of real property to the Redevelopment Agency of the City of Huntington Beach for a redevelopment project shall be exempt from the provisions of this section.

F.     Sales, conveyances, and leases of real property to a public agency empowered to acquire and own real property must comply with Articles 8 and 8.5 of Chapter 5 of Part 1 of Division 2 of Title 5 (commencing with Section 54220) of the California Government Code when such statutes are applicable, but are otherwise exempt from the provisions of this section. (2500-8/81, 2986-3/89, 3804-6/08)

 

3.06.020 Retention of Mineral Rights
In all instances where the City disposes of surplus real property when the City owns the mineral rights, the instrument of conveyance shall contain the following reservation, retaining for the City such rights:

EXCEPTING therefrom all oil, gas and other hydrocarbon substances and minerals lying below a depth of 500 feet from the surface of said land, but without the right of surface entry at any time upon said land or within the top 500 feet thereof, for the purpose of exploiting, developing, producing, removing and marketing said substances.

(2636-9/83)

 

Chapter 3.07 RETIREMENT TAX CAP
3.07.010 Retirement Tax Cap
The tax sufficient to meet all obligations of the City for the retirement system in which the City participates, due and unpaid or to become due during the ensuing fiscal year as provided in Huntington Beach Charter Section 607(b)(2), shall be set at the rate adopted for fiscal year 2012/13, which is $0.01500 per $100.00 of assessed valuation. (3954-9/12)

 

Chapter 3.08 CAPITAL OUTLAY FUND
3.08.010 Created
A fund is created for capital outlay for public improvements under the provisions of Division 2, Article 4 of the California Government Code (Sections 53730 et seq.). (529-5/48)

 

3.08.020 Name Designated
Such fund shall be known as “special fund for capital outlay.” (529-6/48)

 

3.08.030 Purpose
It shall remain inviolate for the making of any capital outlays for public improvements. (529-5/48)

 

3.08.040 Expenditures From Fund
No moneys shall be disbursed therefrom excepting for such a purpose, excepting upon consent of the electors obtained as provided in said act. (529-5/48)

 

3.08.050 Levying for Fund
Taxes may be levied upon the taxable property in the City for the raising of moneys for said fund; but no levy so made shall exceed the limitation imposed by the Charter of the City upon the right of the City to impose taxes, without the assent of two-thirds of the qualified electors of said City voting at any general or special election at which such proposition may be submitted. (529-5/48)

 

3.08.060 Transfer of Surplus Funds
The Council may transfer to such fund any unencumbered surplus funds remaining on hand in the City at the end of any fiscal year. (529-5/48)

 

3.08.070 Master Planned Drainage Facilities Fund
There is created a fund to be known as the “master planned drainage facilities fund” and all fees received by the City for the planned drainage facilities shall be deposited in such fund and shall be expended only for the construction or reimbursement for construction of drainage facilities within the master planned drainage area from which the fees comprising the funds were collected. (789-8/60, 2673-2/84)

 

Chapter 3.12 GAS TAX FUND
3.12.010 Created
To comply with the provisions of Sections 2113 et seq. of Chapter 3 of Division 3 of the Streets and Highways Code, there is created in the City treasury a special fund to be known as the “special gas tax street improvement fund.” (388-1/36)

 

3.12.020 Payments Into Fund
All moneys received by the City from the state under the provisions of the Streets and Highways Code for the acquisition of real property or interests therein for, or the construction, maintenance or improvement of streets or highways other than state highways, shall be paid into the fund. (388-1/36)

 

3.12.030 Expenditures From Fund
All moneys in the fund shall be expended exclusively for the purpose authorized by and subject to all of the provisions of the Streets and Highways Code Sections 2113 et seq. (388-1/36)

 

Chapter 3.14 SELF-INSURANCE LIABILITY CLAIMS LOSS RESERVE
3.14.010 Self-Insurance Liability Claims Loss Reserve—Creation
There is hereby created a self-insurance liability claims loss reserve. Such reserve shall be in such amount which is the greater of $750,000.00 or an amount equal to the combined incurred and reserved liability losses of the City during the maintenance of the City’s excess liability insurance policy in force after December 15, 1978. (2260-2/78, 2354-4/79)

 

3.14.020 Reserve—Duration
The reserve created in this chapter, shall be maintained in effect for the period of the City’s excess liability insurance and for a period of three years thereafter. (2260-2/78)

 

Chapter 3.16 DETERMINATION OF CITY TAX RATE
3.16.010 Charter Mandate
The City Charter provides that the City Council shall prescribe by ordinance for the assessment, levy and collection of taxes upon property which is taxable for municipal purposes, including the setting of the tax rate. (2437-7/80)

 

3.16.020 Procedure to Fix Annual Tax Rate
The City Council shall set the tax rate each year at any regular, adjourned regular or special meeting which is held prior to August 31st of such year by resolution adopted by majority vote of those members present at such meeting. (2437-7/80)

 

3.16.030 Assessment
The City elects that the duties of the assessment of City property for City taxes, the equalization and correction of the assessment, the collection, payment and enforcement of taxes, including delinquent taxes, and the redemption of the property from sale or other penalty for non-payment of City taxes, provided by law to be assessed by the assessor and collected by the Tax Collector and equalized by the City Council, shall be performed by the County Assessor, the County Tax Collector, the County Auditor and the Board of Supervisors of Orange County when acting as the Board of Equalization. (2437-7/80)

 

Chapter 3.20 DOCUMENTARY TRANSFER TAX
3.20.010 Title
This chapter shall be known as the “Documentary Transfer Tax Chapter” of the City of Huntington Beach. It is adopted pursuant to the authority contained in Part 6.7 (commencing with Section 11901) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the State of California. (1925-8/74, 1993-6/75)

 

3.20.020 Tax Imposed
There is hereby imposed on each deed, instrument or writing by which any lands, tenements, or other realty sold within the City of Huntington Beach shall be granted, assigned, transferred or otherwise conveyed to, or vested in, the purchaser or purchasers, or any other person or persons, by his or her or their direction, when the consideration or value of the interest or property conveyed (exclusive of the value of any lien or encumbrances remaining thereon at the time of sale) exceeds $100.00, a tax at the rate of twenty-seven and one-half cents ($0.275) for each $500.00 or fractional part thereof. (1925-8/74, 1993-6/75)

 

3.20.030 Payment of Tax
Any tax imposed pursuant to Section 3.20.020 hereof shall be paid by any person who makes, signs, or issues any document or instrument subject to the tax or for whose use or benefit the same is made, signed or issued. (1925-8/74, 1993-6/75)

 

3.20.040 Exceptions
The tax imposed by Section 3.20.020 hereof shall not apply to:

A.    Any instrument in writing given to secure a debt.

B.     The United States or any agency or instrumentality thereof, or the District of Columbia for any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter with respect to any deed, instrument, or writing to which it is a party, but the tax may be collected by assessment from any other party liable therefor.

C.     The making, delivering or filing of conveyance to make effective any plan of reorganization or adjustment:

1.     Confirmed under the Federal Bankruptcy Act, as amended;

2.     Approved in an equity receivership proceeding in a court involving a railroad corporation, as defined in subdivision (m) of Section 205 of Title 11 of the United States Code, as amended;

3.     Approved in an equity receivership proceeding in a court involving a corporation, as defined in subdivision (3) of Section 506 of Title 11 of the United States Code, as amended; or

4.     Whereby a mere change in identity, form or place of organization is effected.

Subsections (C)(1) to (4) inclusive of this section shall only apply if the making, delivery or filing of instruments of transfer or conveyance occurs within five years from the date of such confirmation, approval or change.

D.    The making or delivery of conveyances to make effective any order of the Securities and Exchange Commission, as defined in subdivision 1083 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954; but only if:

1.     The order of the Securities and Exchange Commission in obedience to which such conveyance is made recites that such conveyance is necessary or appropriate to effectuate the provisions of Section 79k of Title 15 of the United States Code, relating to the Public Utility Holding Company Act of 1935;

2.     Such order specifies the property which is ordered to be conveyed;

3.     Such conveyance is made in obedience to such order. (1925-8/74, 1993-6/75)

 

3.20.050 Exception—Partnership
The following exception shall apply to partnerships:

A.    In the case of any realty held by a partnership, no levy shall be imposed pursuant to this chapter by reason of any transfer of an interest in a partnership or otherwise, if:

1.     Such partnership (or another partnership) is considered a continuing partnership within the meaning of Section 708 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954; and

2.     Such continuing partnership continues to hold the realty concerned.

B.     If there is a termination of any partnership within the meaning of Section 708 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, for purposes of this chapter, such partnership shall be treated as having executed an instrument whereby there was conveyed, for fair market value (exclusive of the value of any lien or encumbrance remaining thereon), all realty held by such partnership at the time of such termination.

C.     Not more than one tax shall be imposed pursuant to this chapter by reason of a termination described in subsection B of this section, and any transfer pursuant thereto, with respect to the realty held by such partnership at the time of such termination. (1925-8/74, 1993-6/75)

 

3.20.060 Administration
The County Recorder shall administer this chapter in conformity with the provisions of Part 6.7 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code and the provisions of any county ordinance adopted pursuant thereto. (1925-8/74, 1993-6/75)

 

Chapter 3.24 UNIFORM LOCAL SALES AND USE TAX
Note
*       Note: § 3.24.300 repealed by Ord. 2669-1/84.

 

3.24.010 Short Title
This chapter shall be known as the Uniform Local Sales and Use Tax. (1896-12/73)

 

3.24.020 Rate
The rate of sales and use tax imposed by this chapter shall be one cent per dollar. (1896-12/73)

 

3.24.030 Operative Date
This chapter shall be operative on January 1, 1974. (1896-12/73)

 

3.24.040 Purpose
The City Council declares that this chapter is adopted to achieve the following, among other purposes and directs that the provisions hereof be interpreted in order to accomplish those purposes:

A.    To adopt provisions for a sales and use tax which comply with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code;

B.     To adopt provisions for a sales and use tax which incorporate provisions identical to those of the sales and use tax of the law of the State of California insofar as those provisions are not inconsistent with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code;

C.     To adopt provisions for a sales and use tax which imposes a tax and provides a measure therefor that can be administered that adopts itself as fully as practicable to, and requires the least possible deviation from the existing statutory and administrative procedures followed by the State Board of Equalization in administering and collecting the California state sales and use taxes;

D.    To adopt provisions for a sales and use tax which can be administered in a manner that will, to the degree possible, be consistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, minimize the cost of collecting City sales and use taxes and at the same time minimize the burden of record keeping upon persons subject to taxation under the provisions of this chapter. (1896-12/73)

 

3.24.100 Contract with State
Prior to the operative date, the City shall contract with the State Board of Equalization to perform all functions incident to the administration and operation of the sales and use tax provided for herein; provided that if this City shall not have contracted with the State Board of Equalization prior to the operative date, it shall nevertheless so contract and in such a case the operative date shall be the first day of the first calendar quarter following the execution of such a contract rather than the first day of the first calendar quarter following the adoption of this chapter. (1896-12/73)

 

3.24.110 Sales Tax
For the privilege of selling tangible property at retail a tax is hereby imposed upon all retailers in the City at the rate stated in Section 3.24.020 of the gross receipts of the retailer from the sale of all tangible personal property sold at retail in this City on and after the operative date. (1896-12/73)

 

3.24.120 Place of Sale
For the purposes of this chapter, all retail sales are consummated at the place of business of the retailer unless the tangible personal property sold is delivered by the retailer or his or her agent to an out-of-state destination or to a common carrier for delivery to an out-of-state destination. The gross receipts from such sales shall include delivery charges, when such charges are subject to the state sales and use tax, regardless of the place to which delivery is made. In the event a retailer has no permanent place of business in the state or has more than one place of business, the place or places at which the retail sales are consummated shall be determined under rules and regulations to be prescribed and adopted by the State Board of Equalization. (1896-12/73)

 

3.24.130 Use Tax
An excise tax is hereby imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in this City of tangible personal property purchased from any retailer on and after the operative date for storage, use or other consumption in this City at the rate stated in Section 3.24.020 of the sales price of the property. The sales price shall include delivery charges when such charges are subject to state sale or use taxes regardless of the place to which delivery is made. (1896-12/73)

 

3.24.200 Adoption of Provisions of State Law
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter and except insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, all of the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code are hereby adopted and made a part of this chapter as though fully set forth herein. (1896-12/73)

 

3.24.210 Limitations on Adoption of State Law
In adopting the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, wherever the State of California is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the name of this City shall be substituted therefor. The substitution, however, shall not be made when the word “state” is used as part of the title of the State Controller, the State Treasurer, the State Board of Control, the State Board of Equalization, the State Treasury, or the Constitution of the State of California; the substitution shall not be made when the result of that substitution would require action to be taken by or against the City, or any agency thereof rather than by or against the State Board of Equalization, in performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of this chapter; the substitution shall not be made in those sections, including but not necessarily limited to, sections referring to the exterior boundaries of the State of California, where the result of the substitution would be to provide an exemption from this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not otherwise be exempt from this tax while such sales, storage, use or other consumption remain subject to tax by the state under the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, or to impose this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not be subject to tax by the state under the same provisions of that code; the substitution shall not be made in Sections 6701, 6702 (except in the last sentence thereof), 6711, 6715, 6737, 6797 or 6828 of the Revenue and Taxation Code; and the substitution shall not be made for the word “state” in the phrase “retailer engaged in business in this state” in Section 6203 or in the definition of that phrase in Section 6203. (1896-12/73)

 

3.24.220 Permit Not Required
If a seller’s permit has been issued to a retailer under Section 6067 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, an additional seller’s permit shall not be required by reason of this section. (1896-12/73)

 

3.24.230 Exclusions and Exemptions
A.    The amount subject to tax shall not include any sales or use tax imposed by the State of California upon a retailer or consumer.

B.     The storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property, the gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to tax under a sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code by any city and county, county, or city, in this state shall be exempt from the tax due under this chapter.

C.     There are exempted from the computation of the amount of the sales tax the gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the City in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government.

D.    In addition to the exemptions provided in Sections 6366 and 6366.1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, the storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government is exempted from the use tax. (1896-12/73, 2669-1/84)

 

3.24.240 Exclusions and Exemptions
A.    The amount subject to tax shall not include any sales or use tax imposed by the State of California upon a retailer or consumer.

B.     The storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property, the gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to tax under a sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code by any city and county, county or city in this state shall be exempt from the tax due under this chapter.

C.     There are exempted from the computation of the amount of the sales tax the gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators of waterborne vessels to be used or consumed principally outside the City in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the carriage of persons or property in such vessels for commercial purposes.

D.    The storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators of waterborne vessels and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the carriage of persons or property of such vessels for commercial purposes is exempted from the use tax.

E.     There are exempted from the computation of the amount of the sales tax the gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the City in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government.

F.     In addition to the exemptions provided in Sections 6366 and 6366.1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, the storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government is exempted from the use tax.

This section shall be effective on the operative date of any act of the Legislature of the State of California which amends Section 7202 of the Revenue and Taxation Code or which repeals and reenacts Section 7202 of the Revenue and Taxation Code to provide an exemption from City sales and use taxes for operators of waterborne vessels in the same, or substantially the same, language as that existing in subdivisions (i)(7) and (i)(8) of Section 7202 as those subdivisions read on October 1, 1983. (1896-12/73, 2669-1/84)

 

3.24.310 Amendments
All subsequent amendments of the Revenue and Taxation Code which relate to the sale and use tax and which are not inconsistent with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code shall automatically become a part of this chapter. (1896-12/73)

 

3.24.320 Enjoining Collection Forbidden
No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall issue in any suit, action or proceeding in any court against the state or this City, or against any officer of the state or this City, to prevent or enjoin the collection under this chapter, or Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected. (1896-12/73)

 

Chapter 3.28 UNIFORM TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY TAX
3.28.010 Purpose
The City Council of the City of Huntington Beach hereby declares that this chapter, which shall be known as the Uniform Transient Occupancy Tax, is adopted to provide a tax on the rent charged in a hotel by the operator of said hotel. (1068-7/64, 2015-11/75)

 

3.28.020 Definitions
Except where the context otherwise requires, the definitions given in this section govern the construction of this chapter:

“Hotel” means any structure, or any portion of any structure which is occupied or intended or designed for occupancy by transients for dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes, and includes any hotel, inn, tourist home or house, motel, studio hotel, bachelor hotel, lodging house, rooming house, apartment house, dormitory, public or private club, mobile home or house trailer at a fixed location, or other similar structure or portion thereof.

“Occupancy” means the use or possession or the right to the use or possession of any room or rooms or portion thereof, in any hotel for dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes.

“Operator” means the person who is proprietor of the hotel, whether in the capacity of owner, lessee, sublessee, mortgagee in possession, licensee, or any other capacity. Where the operator performs his or her functions through managing agent of any type or character other than an employee, the managing agent shall also be deemed an operator for the purposes of this chapter and shall have the same duties and liabilities as his or her principal. Compliance with the provisions of this chapter by either the principal or the managing agent shall, however, be considered to be compliance by both.

“Person” means any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit.

“Rent” means the consideration charged, whether or not received, for the occupancy of space in a hotel valued in money, whether to be received in money, goods, labor or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits and property and services of any kind or nature, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever.

“Transient” means any person who exercises occupancy or is entitled to occupancy by reason of concession, permit, right of access, license or other agreement for a period of 30 consecutive calendar days or less, counting portions of calendar days as full days. Any such person so occupying space in a hotel shall be deemed to be a transient until the period of 30 days has expired unless there is an agreement in writing between the operator and the occupant providing for a longer period of occupancy. In determining whether a person is a transient, uninterrupted periods of time extending both prior and subsequent to the effective date of this chapter may be considered. (1068-7/64)

 

3.28.030 Tax Imposed
For the privilege of occupancy in any hotel, each transient is subject to and shall pay a tax on the rent charged by the operator at a rate equal to the current, combined state and local use tax rate. Said rate shall be declared by the City Council by resolution from time to time. Said tax constitutes a debt owed by the transient to the City which is extinguished only by payment to the operator or to the City. The transient shall pay the tax to the operator of the hotel at the time the rent is paid. If the rent is paid in installments, a proportionate share of the tax shall be paid with each installment. The unpaid tax shall be due upon the transient’s ceasing to occupy space in the hotel. If for any reason the tax due is not paid to the operator of the hotel, the City Treasurer may require that such tax be paid directly to the City Treasurer. (1068-7/64, 1590-8/70, 2015-11/75, Res. 5859-5/88)

 

3.28.040 Exemptions
No tax shall be imposed upon:

A.    Any person as to whom, or any occupancy as to which it is beyond the power of the City to impose the tax herein provided;

B.     Any federal or State of California officer or employee when on official business;

C.     Any officer or employee of a foreign government who is exempt by reason of express provision of federal law or international treaty.

No exemption shall be granted except upon a claim therefor made at the time rent is collected and under penalty of perjury upon a form prescribed by the City Treasurer. (1068-7/64, 2015-11/75)

 

3.28.050 Operator’s Duties
Each operator shall collect the tax imposed by this chapter to the same extent and at the same time as the rent is collected from every transient. The amount of tax shall be separately stated from the amount of the rent charged, and each transient shall receive a receipt for payment from the operator. No operator of a hotel shall advertise or state in any manner, whether directly or indirectly, that the tax or any part thereof will be assumed or absorbed by the operator, or that it will not be added to the rent, or that, if added, any part will be refunded except in the manner hereinafter provided. (1068-7/64, 2015-11/75)

 

3.28.060 Register
Every owner, keeper or proprietor of any lodging house, rooming house, motel or hotel shall keep a register wherein he or she shall require all guests, roomers or lodgers to inscribe their names upon their procuring lodging of a room or accommodations. Said register shall also show the day of the month and year when said name was inscribed, and the room occupied, or to be occupied by said lodger, or roomer or guest in such lodging house, rooming house, motel or hotel. Said register shall be kept in a conspicuous place in said lodging house, rooming house, motel or hotel, and shall at all times be open to inspection by any peace officer of the State of California. (1226-7/66, 2015-11/75)

 

3.28.070 Guests Must Register
Before any lodging for hire to any person(s) in any lodging house, or before renting any room to any person(s) in any rooming house, or before furnishing any accommodations to any guest(s) at any motel or hotel, the proprietor, manager or owner thereof shall require the person(s) to whom such lodgings are furnished, or room is rented, or accommodations furnished, to inscribe his or her or their name(s) in such register kept for that purpose as hereinabove provided, and shall set opposite said name(s) the time when said name(s) was/were so inscribed, the room occupied by such lodger(s), roomer(s), or guest(s), and the license number and description of the vehicle said lodger(s), roomer(s) or guest(s) drove. (1226-7/66, 2015-11/75)

 

3.28.080 Registration
Within 30 days after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, or within 30 days after commencing business, whichever is later, each operator of any hotel renting occupancy to transients shall register said hotel with the Finance Director and obtain from him or her a “Transient Occupancy Registration Certificate” to be at all times posted in a conspicuous place on the premises. Said certificate shall, among other things, state the following:

A.    The name of the operator;

B.     The address of the hotel;

C.     The date upon which the certificate was issued.

D.    “This Transient Occupancy Registration Certificate signifies that the person named on the face hereof has fulfilled the requirements of Chapter 3.28 by registering with the Finance Director for the purpose of collecting from transients the Transient Occupancy Tax and remitting said tax to the City Treasurer. This certificate does not authorize any person to conduct any unlawful business or to conduct any lawful business in an unlawful manner, nor to operate a hotel without strictly complying with all local applicable laws, including but not limited to those requiring a permit from any board, commission, department or office of this City. This certificate does not constitute a permit.” (1068-7/64, 3751-11/06)

 

3.28.090 Reporting and Remitting
Each operator shall file a report each month on forms provided by the Finance Director of the total rents charged and received and the amount of tax collected for transient occupancies for the preceding month. The full amount of tax collected shall be remitted to the City Treasurer. Said tax collected by each operator during a calendar month, is due and payable and must be received by the City by the last business day of the first month following and shall be delinquent and subject to the penalties noted in Section 3.28.100 of this chapter on the first day of the second month following. Said report shall be filed at the same time the tax is remitted. Returns are due and payable and delinquent immediately upon cessation of business for any reason. All taxes collected by operators pursuant to this chapter shall be held in trust for the account of the City until payment is made to the City Treasurer. (1068-7/64, 2098-9/76, 3751-11/06)

 

3.28.100 Penalties and Interest
The following shall give rise to penalties and interest:

A.    Original Delinquency. Any operator who fails to remit any tax imposed by this chapter within the time required shall pay a penalty of 10% of the amount of the tax in addition to the amount of the tax.

B.     Continued Delinquency. Any operator who fails to meet any delinquent remittance on or before a period of 30 days following the date on which the remittance first became delinquent shall pay a second delinquency penalty of 10% of the amount of the tax in addition to the amount of the tax and the 10% penalty first imposed.

C.     Fraud. If the Finance Director determines that the non-payment of any remittance due under this chapter is due to fraud, a penalty of 25% of the amount of the tax shall be added thereto in addition to the penalties stated in subsections A and B of this section.

D.    Interest. In addition to the penalties imposed, any operator who fails to remit any tax imposed by this chapter shall pay interest at the rate of one-half of one percent per month, or fraction thereof, on the amount of the tax, exclusive of penalties, from the date on which the remittance first became delinquent until paid.

E.     Penalties Merged With Tax. Every penalty imposed and such interest as accrues under the provisions of this section shall become a part of the tax herein required to be paid. (1068-7/64, 3751-11/06)

 

3.28.110 Failure to Collect and Report Tax—Determination of Tax by Finance Director
If any operator shall fail or refuse to collect said tax and to make, within the time provided in this chapter, any report and remittance of said tax or any portion thereof required by this chapter, the Finance Director shall proceed in such manner as he or she may deem best to obtain facts and information on which to base his or her estimate of the tax due. As soon as the Finance Director shall procure such facts and information as he or she is able to obtain upon which to base the assessment of any tax imposed by this chapter and payable by any operator who has failed or refused to collect the same and to make such report and remittance, he or she shall proceed to determine and assess against such operator the tax, interest and penalties provided for by this chapter. In case such determination is made, the Finance Director shall give a notice of the amount so assessed by serving it personally or by depositing it in the United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the operator so assessed at his or her last known place of address. Such operator may within 10 days after the serving or mailing of such notice make application in writing to the Finance Director for a hearing on the amount assessed. If application by the operator for a hearing is not made within the time prescribed, the tax, interest and penalties, if any, determined by the Finance Director shall become final and conclusive and immediately due and payable to the City Treasurer. If such application is made, the Finance Director shall give not less than five days written notice in the manner prescribed herein to the operator to show cause at a time and place fixed in said notice why said amount specified therein should not be fixed for such tax, interest and penalties. At such hearing, the operator may appear and offer evidence why such specified tax, interest and penalties should not be so fixed. After such hearing the Finance Director shall determine the proper tax to be remitted and shall thereafter give written notice to the person and in the manner prescribed herein of such determination and the amount of such tax, interest and penalties. The amount determined to be due shall be payable to the City Treasurer after 15 days unless an appeal is taken as provided in Section 3.28.120. (1068-7/64, 2015-11/75, 3751-11/06)

 

3.28.120 Appeal
Any operator aggrieved by any decision of the Finance Director with respect to the amount of such tax, interest and penalties, if any, may appeal to the City Council by filing a notice of appeal with the City Clerk within 15 days of the serving or mailing of the determination of tax due. The Council shall fix a time and place for hearing such appeal, and the City Clerk shall give notice in writing to such operator at his or her last known place of address. The findings of the Council shall be final and conclusive and shall be served upon the appellant in the manner prescribed above for service of notice of hearing. Any amount found to be due shall be immediately due and payable upon the service of notice.

No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall issue in any suit, action or proceeding in any court against the City or an officer thereof to prevent or enjoin the collection of taxes sought to be collected pursuant to this chapter and payment of all tax, interest and penalties shall be required as a condition precedent to seeking judicial review of any tax liability. (1068-7/74, 2015-11/75, 3751-11/06, 3841-11/09)

 

3.28.130 Records
It shall be the duty of every operator liable for the collection and payment to the City of any tax imposed by this chapter to keep and preserve, for a period of three years, all records as may be necessary to determine the amount of such tax as he or she may have been liable for the collection of and payment to the City, which records the Finance Director shall have the right to inspect at all reasonable times. (1068-7/64, 3751-11/06)

 

3.28.140 Refunds
The following shall warrant a refund:

A.    Whenever the amount of any tax, has been overpaid or paid more than once or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the City Treasurer under this chapter, it may be refunded as provided in this section.

B.     The City Treasurer may refund any tax that has been overpaid, paid more than once, or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the City Treasurer under this chapter, provided that no refund shall be paid under the provisions of the section unless the claimant or his or her guardian, conservator, executor or administrator has submitted a written claim, under penalty of perjury, to the City Clerk within one year of the overpayment or erroneous or illegal collection of said tax. Such claim must clearly establish claimant’s right to the refund by written records showing entitlement thereto. Nothing herein shall permit the filing of a refund claim on behalf of a class or group of taxpayers. Where the amount of any individual refund claim is in excess of $5,000.00, City Council approval shall be required.

C.     It is the intent of the City that the one-year written claim requirement of this section be given retroactive effect; provided, however, that any claims which arose prior to the enactment of the one-year claims period of this section, and which are not otherwise barred by a then-applicable statute of limitations or claims procedure, must be filed with the City Clerk as provided in subsection B of this section within 90 days following the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section.

D.    The City Treasurer, or the City Council where the claim is in excess of $5,000.00 and the City Treasurer has approved the claim, shall act upon the refund claim within 45 days of the initial receipt of the refund claim. Said decision shall be final. If the Treasurer/City Council fails or refuses to act on a refund claim within the 45-day period, the claim shall be deemed to have been rejected by the City Treasurer/City Council on the 45th day. The treasurer shall give notice of the action in a form which substantially complies with that set forth in Government Code Section 913.

E.     The filing of a written claim is a prerequisite to any suit thereon. Any action brought against the City pursuant to this section shall be subject to the provisions of Government Code Sections 945.6 and 946. (1068-7/64, 2015-11/75, 3751-11/06)

 

3.28.150 Actions to Collect
Any tax required to be paid by any transient under the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a debt owed by the transient to the City. Any such tax collected by an operator which has not been paid to the City shall be deemed a debt owed by the operator to the City. Any person owing money to the City under the provisions of this chapter shall be liable to an action brought in the name of the City of Huntington Beach for the recovery of such amount. (1068-7/64, 2015-11/75)

 

3.28.160 Failure to Register
Any operator or other person who fails or refuses to register as required herein, or to furnish any return required to be made, or who fails or refuses to furnish a supplemental return or other data required by the Finance Director, or who renders a false or fraudulent return or claim, is guilty of a misdemeanor. Any person required to make, render, sign or verify any report or claim or who makes any false or fraudulent report or claim with intent to defeat or evade the determination of any amount due required by this chapter to be made, is guilty of a misdemeanor. (1068-7/64, 2015-11/75, 3751-11/06)

 

3.28.170 Credit for Transient Occupancy Taxes Paid to Huntington Beach Redevelopment Agency
Any person or persons subject to the transient occupancy tax under this chapter shall be entitled to a credit against the payment of such taxes due in the amount of any transient occupancy taxes due from that person or persons to the Huntington Beach Redevelopment Agency pursuant to Ordinance No. 2, adopted by the Agency on July 1, 2002, which affects any persons occupying a room or rooms in any hotels, inns, tourist homes or houses, motels, or other lodging within the Main-Pier Redevelopment sub-area of the Huntington Beach Redevelopment Project. (See Ordinance No. 3559 for additional information regarding termination, or amendment, or modification of § 3.28.170.) (2974-12/88, 3558-7/02, 3559-7/02)

 

Chapter 3.32 CIGARETTE TAX
3.32.010 Definitions
Except where the context otherwise requires, the following definitions shall govern the construction of this chapter:

“Cigarette” means any roll for smoking, made wholly or in part of tobacco, irrespective of size or shape and irrespective of whether the tobacco is flavored, adulterated or mixed with any other ingredient, where such roll has a wrapper or cover made of paper or any other material, except where such wrapper is wholly or in any greater part made of tobacco and such roll weighs over three pounds per thousand.

“Retailer” means any domestic or foreign corporation, association, syndicate, joint venture, joint stock company, partnership of any kind, club, Massachusetts business or common law trust, society or individual who sells cigarettes for any purpose other than resale. Where cigarettes are offered for sale through the means of a vending machine, the person holding title to the cigarettes in the machine shall be deemed the retailer.

“Use or consumption” includes the exercise of any right or power over cigarettes incident to the ownership thereof other than the sale of the cigarettes or the keeping or retention thereof for the purpose of sale. (1247-10/66, 1350-10/67)

 

3.32.020 Tax Imposed
An excise tax is imposed upon the use or consumption in the City of cigarettes purchased from a retailer for use or consumption within the City at the rate of one and one-half mill per cigarette. (1247-10/66, 1350-10/67)

 

3.32.030 Tax Paid to Retailer
The tax constitutes a debt owed by the purchaser to the City which is extinguished only by payment of the tax to the Director of Finance or to the retailer. When a purchase from a retailer is made within the City, the tax shall be paid to the retailer at the time the purchase price is paid. The tax collected or required to be collected by the retailer constitutes a debt owed by the retailer to the City. Should any remittance of tax be made by a retailer prior to sale of cigarettes to a consumer, such remittance shall be considered as an advance payment to be reimbursed by adding the amount of the tax to the price of the cigarettes at the time of sale to the user or consumer. (1247-10/66, 1350-10/67)

 

3.32.040 Retailer Remits Quarterly
Each retailer selling cigarettes within the City shall collect the tax imposed under Section 3.32.020, and on or before the last day of the month following the close of a calendar quarter remit the total amount so collected to the Director of Finance together with a statement on a form provided by the Director of Finance showing the number of cigarettes sold to purchasers, the amount of tax collected, and such other information as the Director of Finance shall require. Where the Director of Finance determines that efficiency in the administration of the tax would be promoted, he or she may establish reporting periods greater than quarterly, but not to exceed one year. The Director of Finance may establish shorter reporting periods for any retailer if he or she deems it necessary in order to ensure collection of the tax. Statements and payments are due immediately upon cessation of the business of selling cigarettes for any reason. All taxes collected by retailers pursuant to this chapter shall be held in trust for the account of the City until payment thereof is made to the Director of Finance. (1247-10/66, 1350-10/67)

 

3.32.050 Registration
Within 30 days after the operative date of this chapter, or within 30 days after commencing business, whichever is later, each retailer shall register with the Director of Finance and obtain from him or her a “cigarette tax registration certificate” to be at all times posted in a conspicuous place on the premises; provided, however, each retailer who does not operate from a fixed place of business shall keep the registration certificate upon his or her person at all times while engaging in the business of being a retailer. No person shall engage in the business of being a retailer without obtaining a registration certificate therefor. Said certificate shall, among other things, state the following:

A.    The name of the operator;

B.     The address of the retailer’s place of business;

C.     The date upon which the certificate was issued;

D.    “This cigarette tax registration certificate signifies that the person named on the face hereof has fulfilled the requirements of the cigarette tax ordinance by collecting the cigarette tax from purchasers of cigarettes and remitting said tax to the Director of Finance. This certificate does not authorize any person to conduct any lawful business in an unlawful manner, nor to operate a cigarette retailing business without complying with all state and local applicable laws, including but not limited to those requiring a permit from any board, commission, department or office of this City. This certificate does not constitute a permit.” (1247-10/66, 1350-10/67)

 

3.32.060 Registration for Each Place of Business
A retailer having more than one place of business within the City at which cigarettes are sold shall be required to obtain a separate registration for each such place of business. (1247-10/66, 1350-10/67)

 

3.32.070 Penalties and Interest
The following shall give rise to penalties and interest:

A.    Original Delinquency Period. Any retailer who fails to remit any tax imposed by this chapter within the time required shall pay a penalty of 10% of the amount of the tax in addition to the amount of the tax.

B.     Continued Delinquency. Any retailer who fails to remit any delinquent remittance within one month following the date on which the remittance first became delinquent shall pay a second delinquency penalty of 10% of the amount of the tax in addition to amount of the tax and the 10% penalty first imposed.

C.     Fraud. If the Director of Finance determines that the nonpayment of any remittance due under this chapter is due to fraud, a payment of 25% of the amount of the tax shall be added thereto in addition to the penalties stated in subsections A and B of this section.

D.    Interest. In addition to the penalties imposed, any retailer who fails to remit any tax imposed by this chapter shall pay interest at the rate of one-half of one percent per month or fraction thereof on the amount of the tax, exclusive of penalties, from the date on which the remittance first became delinquent until paid.

E.     Penalties Merged with Tax. Every penalty imposed and such interest as accrues under the provisions of this section shall become a part of the tax herein required to be paid.

F.     Penalties During Pendency of Hearing of Appeal. No penalty provided under the terms of this chapter shall be imposed during the pendency of any hearing which is provided for in Section 3.32.090 nor during the pendency of any appeal to the City Council which is provided for in Section 3.32.090 of this chapter. (1247-10/66, 1350-10/67)

 

3.32.080 Failures to Report and Collect Tax—Determination
If any retailer fails or refuses, within the time provided for in this chapter, to make any report and remittance of said tax or any portion thereof required by this chapter, the Director of Finance shall proceed to obtain facts and information on which to base his or her estimate of the tax due. As soon as the Director of Finance shall procure such facts and information as he or she is able to obtain upon which to base the assessment of any tax imposed by this chapter and payable by any retailer who has failed or refused to make such report and remittance, he or she shall proceed to determine and assess against such retailer the tax interest and penalties provided for. In case such determination is made, the Director of Finance shall give a notice of the amount so assessed by serving it personally or by depositing it in the United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the distributor so assessed at his or her last known place of address. Such retailer may within 10 days after the serving or mailing of such notice make application in writing to the Director of Finance for a hearing on such amount assessed. If application by the retailer for a hearing is not made within the time prescribed, the tax, interest and penalties, if any, determined by the Director of Finance shall become final and conclusive and immediately due and payable. If such application is made, the Director of Finance shall give not less than five days written notice in the manner prescribed herein to the retailer to show cause at a time and place fixed in said notice why said amount specified therein should not be fixed for such tax, interest and penalties. At such hearing, the retailer may appear and offer evidence why such specified tax, interest and penalties should not be so fixed. After the hearing, the Director of Finance shall determine the proper tax to be remitted and shall thereafter give written notice to the retailer in the manner prescribed herein of such determination and the amount of such tax, interest and penalties. The amount determined to be due shall be payable after 15 days unless an appeal is taken as provided in Section 3.32.090. (1247-10/66, 1350-10/67)

 

3.32.090 Appeal
Any retailer aggrieved by a decision by the Director of Finance with respect to the amount of such tax, interest and penalties, if any, may appeal to the Council by filing a notice of appeal with the City Clerk within 15 days of the serving or mailing of the determination of tax due. The Council shall fix a time and place for hearing such appeal and the City Clerk shall give notice in writing to such retailer at his or her last known place of address. The findings of the Council shall be final and conclusive and shall be served upon the appellant in the manner prescribed above in the service of notice of hearing. Any amount found to be due shall be immediately due and payable upon the service of notice. (1247-10/66, 1350-10/67)

 

3.32.100 Refund
The following shall give rise to refunds:

A.    Whenever the amount of any tax has been overpaid or paid more than once or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the City Treasurer under this chapter, it may be refunded as provided in this section.

B.     The City Treasurer may refund any tax that has been overpaid, paid more than once, or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the Treasurer under this chapter, provided that no refund shall be paid under the provisions of this section unless the claimant or his or her guardian, conservator, executor or administrator has submitted a written claim, under penalty of perjury, to the City Clerk within one year of the overpayment or erroneous or illegal collection of said tax. Such claim must clearly establish claimant’s right to the refund by written records showing entitlement thereto. Nothing herein shall permit the filing of a refund claim on behalf of a class or group of taxpayers. Where the amount of any individual refund claim is in excess of $5,000.00, City Council approval shall be required.

C.     It is the intent of the City that the one year written claim requirement of this section be given retroactive effect; provided, however, that any claims which arose prior to the enactment of the one year claims period of this section, and which are not otherwise barred by a then-applicable statute of limitations or claims procedure, must be filed with the City Clerk as provided in subsection B of this section within 90 days following the effective date of this section.

D.    The City Treasurer, or the City Council where the claim is in excess of $5,000.00, and the City Treasurer has approved the claim, shall act upon the refund claim within 45 days of the initial receipt of the refund claim. Said decision shall be final. If the City Treasurer/City Council fails or refuses to act on a refund claim within the 45-day period, the claim shall be deemed to have been rejected by the City Treasurer/City Council on the 45th day. The treasurer shall give notice of the action in a form which substantially complies with that set forth in Government Code Section 913.

E.     The filing of a written claim is a prerequisite to any suit thereon. Any action brought against the City pursuant to this section shall be subject to the provisions of Government Code Sections 945.6 and 946. (1247-10/66, 1350-10/67, 3751-11/06)

 

3.32.110 Actions to Collect
Any tax required to be paid by a retailer under the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a debt owed to the City. Any person owing taxes under the provisions of this chapter shall be liable to an action brought in the name of the City for the recovery of such amount. (1247-10/66, 1350-10/67)

 

3.32.120 Records
It shall be the duty of every retailer liable for the collection and payment to the City of any tax imposed by this chapter to keep and preserve, for a period of four years, all records as may be necessary to determine the amount of such tax as he or she may have been liable for the collection of and payment to the City, which records the Director of Finance shall have the right to inspect at all reasonable times. (1247-10/66, 1350-10/67)

 

3.32.130 Violations—Misdemeanor
Any retailer who fails to furnish any required return to be made or who fails to furnish or refuses to furnish other data required by the Director of Finance, or who renders a false or fraudulent return or claim, is guilty of a misdemeanor, and punishable as aforesaid. Any person required to make, render, sign or verify any report or claim who makes a false or fraudulent report or claim with intent to defeat or evade the determination of any amount due required by this chapter to be made is guilty of a misdemeanor and is punishable as aforesaid. (1247-10/66, 1350-10/67)

 

3.32.140 Application of Provisions
In order to comply with the requirement of those provisions of Chapter 963 of the Statutes of 1967 which provide that state cigarette tax revenues may not be allocated to any city imposing a selective local tax on, or with respect to, the sale, distribution, use, consumption, or holding of cigarettes or any other tobacco produce, after October 1, 1967, the provisions of Chapter 3.32 and all sections thereof of the Huntington Beach Municipal Code, relating to the imposition, collection and enforcement of a cigarette tax shall be suspended on and after October 1, 1967, and shall remain suspended and thereafter be of no force and effect so long as the provisions of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the State of California, as modified by Chapter 963 and pursuant to which the City is entitled to receive the allocation specified therein of the state cigarette tax revenues, are effective; provided, however, that in the event said Revenue and Taxation Code shall be further amended so that the City is not entitled to receive the allocation of the state cigarette tax revenues specified in said Chapter 963, then the said provisions of Chapter 3.32 and all sections thereof of the Huntington Beach Municipal Code shall upon the effective date of such amendment become operative and effective; and further provided that in the event the provisions of said Revenue and Taxation Code, as added by said Chapter 963 and pursuant to which the City is entitled to receive the allocation specified therein of the state cigarette tax revenues, are for any reason declared invalid, then and in that event the said provisions of Chapter 3.32 and all sections thereof of the Huntington Beach Municipal Code shall not be deemed to have been suspended but shall be deemed to have been in full force and effect continuously from and after October 1, 1967. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as relieving any person of the obligation to pay the City of Huntington Beach any cigarette tax accrued and owing by reason of said provisions of Chapter 3.32 and all sections thereof in force and effect prior to and including September 30, 1967. (1350-10/67)

 

Chapter 3.36 UTILITIES TAX
Note
*       Note: §§ 3.36.100 and 3.36.260—3.36.340 repealed by Ord. 3610-8/03.

 

3.36.010 Definitions
Except where the context otherwise requires, the definitions given in this section govern the construction of this chapter:

“Billing address” means the mailing address of the service user where the service supplier submits invoices or bills for payment by the customer.

“Charges for mobile telecommunications services” has the same meaning and usage as set forth in the Mobile Telecommunications Sourcing Act (4 U.S.C. Sections 116 and 124) and the regulations thereunder.

“City” means the City of Huntington Beach.

“City Manager” means the City Manager, or his or her authorized representative.

“Exempt wholesale generator” has the same meaning as set forth in the Federal Power Act (15 U.S.C. Section 79z-5a) and regulations thereunder.

“Gas” means natural or manufactured gas or any alternate hydrocarbon fuel, which may be substituted therefor.

“Mobile telecommunications service” has the same meaning and usage as set forth in the Mobile Telecommunications Sourcing Act (4 U.S.C. Section 124) and the regulations thereunder.

“Month” means a calendar month.

“Non-utility service supplier” means:

1.     A service supplier, other than a supplier of electric distribution services to all or a significant portion of the City, which generates electricity for sale to others, and shall include, but is not limited to any publicly-owned electric utility, investor-owned utility, cogenerator, distributed generation provider, exempt wholesale generator, municipal utility district, federal power marketing agency, electric rural cooperative, or other supplier or seller of electricity;

2.     An electric service provider (“ESP”), electricity broker, marketer, aggregator, pool operator, or other electricity supplier other than a supplier of electric distribution services to all or a significant portion of the City, which sells or supplies electricity or supplemental services to electricity users within the City; and

3.     A gas service supplier, aggregator, marketer or broker, other than a supplier of gas distribution services to all or a significant portion of the City, which sells or supplies gas or supplemental services to gas users within the City.

“Person” means, without limitation, any domestic, non-profit or foreign corporation, firm, association, syndicate, joint stock company, partnership of any kind, limited liability company, joint venture, club, trust, Massachusetts business or common law trust, estate, society, cooperative, receiver, trustee, guardian or other representative appointed by order of any court, any natural individual, municipal district or municipal corporation (other than the City).

“Place of primary use” has the same meaning and usage as set forth in the Mobile Telecommunications Sourcing Act (4 U.S.C. Section 116 et seq.) and the regulations thereunder.

“Received” as that term is used in connection with receipt of taxes by the treasurer means actual receipt by the treasurer. A tax is not received when it has been postmarked and/or mailed.

“Service address” means the residential street address or the business street address of the service user, and in the case of mobile telecommunications service, the service user’s place of primary use.

“Service supplier” means any person, including the City, that provides telephone communication, electric, gas, water or video service to a user of such services within the City. The term shall include any person required to collect, or self-collect under Section 3.36.050 of this chapter, and remit a tax as imposed by this chapter, including its billing agent in the case of electric, gas, water or video service suppliers.

“Service user” means a person required to pay a tax imposed by this chapter.

“State” means the State of California.

“Tax administrator” means the Finance Officer of the City, or his or her authorized representative.

“Telephone communication services” means “communications services” as defined in Sections 4251 and 4252 of the Internal Revenue Code, and the regulations thereunder, and shall include any service that is capable of transmitting telephonic quality communications (including the use of Internet Protocol (IP) or other similar means of digitization and/or packetization of telephonic quality communications for transmission over digital networks) by analog, digital, electronic, radio or similar means through “interconnected service” with the “public switched network” (as these terms are commonly used in the Federal Communications Act and the regulations of the Federal Communications Commission - see 47 U.S.C.A. Section 332(d)), whether such transmission occurs by wire, cable, cable modem or digital subscriber line (DSL), internet, fiber-optic, light wave, laser, microwave, radio wave (including, but not limited to, mobile telecommunications service, cellular service, commercial mobile service, and commercial mobile radio service (see 47 U.S.C. Section 332(d)(1) and Part 20.3 of Title 47 of the Code of Federal Regulations), personal communications service (PCS), specialized mobile radio (SMR), and other similar services regardless of radio spectrum used), or other similar facilities.

“Telephone corporation,” “electrical corporation,” and “water corporation” have the same meanings as defined in Sections 234, 218, and 241 respectively, of the Public Utilities Code of the State of California, as said sections existed on January 1, 1970. “Electrical corporation” and “water corporation” include any organization, municipality or agency engaged in the selling or supplying of electricity or water to a service user; however, as specified by Public Utilities Code Section 218, does not include a corporation or person employing cogeneration technology or producing power from other than a conventional power source for the generation of electricity.

“Treasurer” means the City Treasurer of Huntington Beach or his or her authorized representative.

“Video service supplier” means any person, company, or service which provides one or more channels of video programming, including any communications that are ancillary, necessary or common to the use or enjoyment of the video programming, to or from an address in the City, including to or from a business, home, condominium, or apartment, where some fee is paid, whether directly or included in dues or rental charges for that service, whether or not public rights-of-way are utilized in the delivery of the video programming or communications. A “video service supplier” includes, but is not limited to, multichannel video programming distributors (as defined in 47 U.S.C.A. Section 522(13)), open video systems (OVS) suppliers, suppliers of cable television, master antenna television, satellite master antenna television, multichannel multipoint distribution services (MMDS), direct broadcast satellite (to the extent federal law permits taxation of its video services, now or in the future), and other suppliers of video programming or communications (including two-way communications), whatever their technology.

“Video services” means any and all services related to the providing of video programming (including origination programming), including any communications that are ancillary, necessary or common to the use or enjoyment of the video programming, regardless of the content of such video programming or communications. “Video services” does not include services for which a tax is paid under Section 3.36.020 of this chapter. (1598-10/70, 2933-8/88, 3610-8/03)

 

3.36.020 Telephone Users Tax
A.    There is hereby imposed a tax upon every person, other than a telephone corporation, using international, interstate, and intrastate telephone communication services. The tax imposed by this section shall be at the rate of five percent of all charges made for such services, and shall be collected from the service user by the telephone communication services supplier or its billing agent. There is a rebuttable presumption that telephone communication services, which are billed to a billing or service address in the City, are used, in whole or in part, within the City’s boundaries, and such services are subject to taxation under this chapter. If the billing address of the service user is different from the service address, the service address of the service user shall be used for purposes of imposing the tax. Charges for mobile telecommunications services are subject to taxation under this article if the customer’s place of primary use is in the City, regardless of where the mobile telecommunications service may originate, terminate, or pass through.

B.     As used in this section, the term “charges” shall include the value of any other services, credits, property of every kind or nature, or other consideration provided by the service user in exchange for the telephone communication services. As used in this section, the term “charges” shall not include charges for services paid for by inserting coins in coin-operated telephones; provided that, where such coin-operated telephone service is furnished for a guaranteed amount, the amounts paid under such guarantee plus any fixed monthly or other periodic charge shall be included in the base for computing the amount of tax due.

C.     The tax administrator, from time to time, may issue and disseminate to service suppliers which are subject to the tax collection requirements of this chapter, an administrative ruling identifying those telephone communication services that are subject to the tax of Section 3.36.020. This administrative ruling shall not impose a new tax, revise an existing tax methodology, or increase an existing tax. An administrative ruling shall not constitute a new tax, a revision of an existing tax methodology, or an increase in an existing tax if such administrative ruling is:

1.     Consistent with the existing ordinance language; and

2.     Merely reflects a change in, clarification to, or new rendition of:

a.     The definition, interpretation, or application of substantial nexus by a court of competent jurisdiction or by preemptive state or federal law, for purposes of taxation, or

b.     The definition, interpretation, or application of the federal excise tax rules, regulations, and laws pertaining to “communications services” (Sections 4251, 4252 and 4253 of the Internal Revenue Code) by the Internal Revenue Service, or by a state or local agency that assumes an interpretative role of those rules, regulations, and laws in the event that the federal excise tax on telecommunications is repealed.

D.    As used in this section, the term “telephone communication services” shall not include “private mobile radio service” (as defined in Part 20.3 of Title 47 of the Code of Federal Regulations) or “private mobile service” (as defined in 47 U.S.C.A. Section 332 (d)(3)) which is not interconnected to the public switched network. The tax imposed under subsection A of this section, shall not be imposed upon any person for using telephone communication services to the extent that, pursuant to Sections 4252 and 4253 of the Internal Revenue Code, the amounts paid for such communication services are not subject to or are exempt from the tax imposed under Section 4251 of the Internal Revenue Code. In the event that the federal excise tax on “communication services” as provided in Sections 4251, 4252 and 4253 of the Internal Revenue Code is subsequently repealed, any reference in this section and in Section 3.36.010 (Telephone communication services) to such law, including any related federal regulations, private letter rulings, case law, and other opinions interpreting these sections, shall refer to that body of law that existed immediately prior to the date of repeal, as well as to any judicial or administrative decision interpreting such federal excise tax law which is published or rendered after the date of repeal.

E.     To prevent actual multi-jurisdictional taxation of telephone communication services subject to tax under this section, any service user, upon proof to the tax administrator that the service user has previously paid the same tax in another state or city on such telephone communication services, shall be allowed a credit against the tax imposed to extent of the amount of such tax legally imposed in such other state or city; provided, however, the amount of credit shall not exceed the tax owed to the City under this section.

F.     The tax on telephone communication services imposed by this section shall be collected from the service user by the service supplier. The amount of tax collected in one month shall be remitted to the treasurer, and must be received by the treasurer on or before the 20th day of the following month. (1598-10/70, 3096-4/91, 3162-9/92, 3610-8/03)

 

3.36.030 Electricity Tax
A.    There is hereby imposed a tax upon every person using electricity in the City. The tax imposed by this section shall be at the rate of five percent of the charges made for such electricity, and for any supplemental services or other associated activities directly related to and/or necessary for the provision of electricity to the service user, which are provided by a service supplier or non-utility service supplier to a service user. The tax shall be collected from the service user by the service supplier or non-utility service supplier, or its billing agent.

B.     As used in this section, the term “charges” shall apply to all services, components and items that are: (1) necessary or common to the receipt, use and enjoyment of electric service; or (2) currently, or historically have been, included in a single or bundled rate for electric service by a local distribution company to a class of retail customers. The term “charges” shall include, but is not limited to, the following charges:

1.     Energy charges;

2.     Distribution or transmission charges;

3.     Metering charges;

4.     Stand-by, reserves, firming, ramping, voltage support, regulation, emergency, or other similar charges for supplemental services to self-generation service users;

5.     Customer charges, late charges, service establishment or reestablishment charges, demand charges, fuel or other cost adjustments, power exchange charges, independent system operator (ISO) charges, stranded investment or competitive transition charges (CTC), public purpose program charges, nuclear decommissioning charges, trust transfer amounts (bond financing charges), franchise fees, franchise surcharges, annual and monthly charges, and other charges, fees and surcharges which are necessary to or common for the receipt, use and enjoyment of electric service; and

6.     Charges, fees, or surcharges for electricity services or programs, which are mandated by the California Public Utilities Commission or the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, whether or not such charges, fees, or surcharges appear on a bundled or line items basis on the customer billing.

C.     As used in this section, the term “charges” shall include the value of any other services, credits, property of every kind or nature, or other consideration provided by the service user in exchange for the electricity or services related to the provision of such electricity.

D.    The tax administrator, from time to time, may survey the electric service suppliers to identify the various unbundled billing components of electric retail service that they commonly provide to residential and commercial/industrial customers in the City, and the charges therefor, including those items that are mandated by state or federal regulatory agencies as a condition of providing such electric service. The tax administrator, thereafter, may issue and disseminate to such electric service suppliers an administrative ruling identifying those components and items which are: (1) necessary or common to the receipt, use or enjoyment of electric service; or (2) currently, or historically have been, included in a single or bundled rate for electric service by a local distribution company to a class of retail customers. Unbundled charges for such components and items shall be subject to the tax of subsection A of this section.

E.     As used in this section, the term “using electricity” shall not be construed to include electricity used in water pumping by water corporations; nor shall the term include the mere receiving of such electricity by an electrical corporation or governmental agency at a point within the City for resale.

F.     The tax on electricity provided by self-production or by a non-utility service supplier not under the jurisdiction of this chapter shall be collected and remitted in the manner set forth in Section 3.36.050 of this chapter. All other taxes on charges for electricity imposed by this section shall be collected from the service user by the electric service supplier or its billing agent. The amount of tax collected in one month shall be remitted to the treasurer, and must be received during normal business hours by the treasurer on or before the 20th day of the following month; or, at the option of the person required to collect and/or remit the tax, such person shall remit an estimated amount of tax measured by the tax billed in the previous month or upon the payment pattern of the service user, which must be received by the treasurer on or before the 20th day of the following month, provided that the service user shall submit an adjusted payment or request for credit, as appropriate, within 60 days following each calendar quarter. The credit, if approved by the tax administrator, may be applied against any subsequent tax bill that becomes due. (1598-10/70, 2933-8/88, 3610-8/03)

 

3.36.040 Gas Users
A.    There is hereby imposed a tax upon every person using gas in the City which is delivered through a pipeline distribution system. The tax imposed by this section shall be at the rate of five percent of the charges made for such gas, including all services related to the storage, transportation and delivery of such gas. The tax shall be collected from the service user by the service supplier or non-utility service supplier, or its billing agent.

B.     As used in this section, the term “charges” shall apply to all services, components and items for gas service that are: (1) necessary for or common to the receipt, use and enjoyment of gas service; or, (2) currently, or historically have been, included in a single or bundled rate for gas service by a local distribution company to a class of retail customers. The term “charges” shall include, but is not limited to, the following charges:

1.     The commodity charges for purchased gas, or the cost of gas owned by the service user (including the actual costs attributed to drilling, production, lifting, storage, gathering, trunkline, pipeline, and other operating costs associated with the production and delivery of such gas), which is delivered through a gas pipeline distribution system;

2.     Gas transportation charges (including interstate charges to the extent not included in commodity charges);

3.     Storage charges; provided, however, that the service supplier shall not be required to apply the tax to any charges for gas storage services when the service supplier cannot, as a practical matter, determine the jurisdiction where such stored gas is ultimately used; but it shall be the obligation of the service user to self-collect the amount of tax not applied to any charge for gas storage by the service supplier and to remit the tax to the appropriate jurisdiction;

4.     Capacity or demand charges, late charges, service establishment or reestablishment charges, transition charges, customer charges, minimum charges, annual and monthly charges, and any other charges which are necessary or common to the receipt, use and enjoyment of gas service; and

5.     Charges, fees, or surcharges for gas services or programs, which are mandated by the California Public Utilities Commission or the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, whether or not such charges, fees, or surcharges appear on a bundled or line item basis on the customer billing.

C.     As used in this section, the term “charges” shall include the value of any other services, credits, property of every kind or nature, or other consideration provided by the service user in exchange for the gas or services related to the delivery of such gas.

D.    The tax administrator, from time to time, may survey the gas service suppliers to identify the various unbundled billing components of gas retail service that they commonly provide to residential and commercial/industrial customers in the City, and the charges therefor, including those items that are mandated by state or federal regulatory agencies as a condition of providing such gas service. The tax administrator, thereafter, may issue and disseminate to such gas service suppliers an administrative ruling identifying those components and items which are: (1) necessary or common to the receipt, use or enjoyment of gas service; or, (2) currently, or historically have been, included in a single or bundled rate for gas service by a local distribution company to a class of retail customers. Unbundled charges for such components and items shall be subject to the tax of subsection A of this section.

E.     There shall be excluded from the base on which the tax imposed in this section is computed:

1.     Charges made for gas which is to be resold and delivered through a pipeline distribution system;

2.     Charges made for gas to be used in the generation of electricity by an electrical corporation;

3.     Charges made by a gas public utility for gas used and consumed in the conduct of the business of gas public utilities; and

4.     Charges for gas used in water pumping by a water corporation.

F.     The tax on gas provided by self-production or by a non-utility service supplier not under the jurisdiction of this chapter shall be collected and remitted in the manner set forth in Section 3.36.050 of this chapter. All other taxes on charges for gas imposed by this section shall be collected from the service user by the gas service supplier or its billing agent. The amount of tax collected in one month shall be remitted to the treasurer, and must be received during normal business hours by the treasurer, on or before the 20th day of the following month; or, at the option of the person required to collect and/or remit the tax, such person shall remit an estimated amount of tax measured by the tax billed in the previous month or upon the payment pattern of the service user, which must be received by the treasurer on or before the 20th day of the following month, provided that the service user shall submit an adjusted payment or request for credit, as appropriate, within 60 days following each calendar quarter. The credit, if approved by the tax administrator, may be applied against any subsequent tax bill that becomes due. (1598-10/70, 3610-8/03)

 

3.36.050 Collection of Tax From Service Users Receiving Direct Purchase of Gas or Electricity
A.    Any service user subject to the tax imposed by Section 3.36.030 or by Section 3.36.040 of this chapter, which (1) produces gas or electricity for self-use, (2) receives gas or electricity, including any related supplemental services, directly from a non-utility service supplier not under the jurisdiction of this chapter, or (3) for any other reason, is not having the full tax collected and remitted by its service supplier, a non-utility service supplier, or its billing agent on the use of gas or electricity in the City, including any related supplemental services, shall report said fact to the tax administrator and shall remit the tax due directly to the treasurer. All taxes owed pursuant to this subsection must be received during normal business hours by the treasurer on or before the 20th day of the month following the gas or electricity usage. In lieu of paying said actual tax, the service user may, at its option, remit to the treasurer within 30 days of such use an estimated amount of tax measured by the tax billed in the previous month, or upon the payment pattern of similar customers of the service supplier using similar amounts of gas or electricity, provided that the service user shall submit an adjusted payment or request for credit, as appropriate, within 60 days following each calendar quarter. The credit, if approved by the tax administrator, may be applied against any subsequent tax bill that becomes due.

B.     The tax administrator may require said service user to identify its non-utility service supplier and provide, subject to audit: invoices; books of account; or other satisfactory evidence documenting the quantity of gas or electricity used, including any related supplemental service, and the cost or price thereof. If the service user is unable to provide such satisfactory evidence, or, if the administrative cost of calculating the tax in the opinion of the tax administrator is excessive, the tax administrator may determine the tax by applying the tax rate to the equivalent charges the service user would have incurred if the gas or electricity used, including any related supplemental services, had been provided by the service supplier that is the primary supplier of gas or electricity within the City. Rate schedules for this purpose shall be available from the City. (3610-8/03)

 

3.36.060 Water Users Tax—Imposed
A.    There is hereby imposed a tax upon every person using water in the City which is delivered through a pipeline distribution system. The tax imposed by this section shall be at the rate of five percent of the charges made for such water and shall be collected from the service user by the service supplier, or its billing agent.

B.     As used in this section, the term “charges” shall apply to all services, components and items that are: (1) necessary or common to the receipt, use and enjoyment of water service; or, (2) currently, or historically have been, included in a single or bundled rate for water service by a local distribution company to a class of retail customers. The term “charges” shall include, but is not limited to, the following charges:

1.     Water commodity charges (potable and non-potable);

2.     Distribution or transmission charges;

3.     Metering charges;

4.     Customer charges, late charges, service establishment or reestablishment charges, franchise fees, franchise surcharges, capital improvement surcharges, annual and monthly charges, and other charges, fees and surcharges which are necessary for or common to the receipt, use and enjoyment of water service; and

5.     Charges, fees, or surcharges for water services or programs, which are mandated by a water district or a state or federal agency, whether or not such charges, fees, or surcharges appear on a bundled or line item basis on the customer billing.

C.     As used in this section, the term “charges” shall include the value of any other services, credits, property of every kind or nature, or other consideration provided by the service user in exchange for the water services.

D.    The tax administrator, from time to time, may survey the water service suppliers in the City to identify the various unbundled billing components of water retail service that they commonly provide to residential and commercial/industrial customers in the City, and the charges therefor, including those items that are mandated by a water district or a state or federal agency as a condition of providing such water service. The tax administrator, thereafter, may issue and disseminate to such water service suppliers an administrative ruling identifying those components and items which are: (1) necessary or common to the receipt, use or enjoyment of water service; or (2) currently, or historically have been, included in a single or bundled rate for water service by a local distribution company to a class of retail customers. Unbundled charges for such components and items shall be subject to the tax of subsection A of this section.

E.     There shall be excluded from the base on which the tax imposed in this section is computed charges made for water which is to be resold and delivered through a pipeline distribution system, and charges made by a municipal water department, public utility or a county or municipal water district for water used and consumed by such department, utility or district in the conduct of the business of such department, utility or district.

F.     The tax on water service imposed by this section shall be collected from the service user by the service supplier or its billing agent. The amount of tax collected in one month shall be remitted to the treasurer, and must be received during normal business hours by the treasurer on or before the 20th day of the following month. (1598-10/70, 3610-8/03)

 

3.36.070 Video Users Tax
A.    There is hereby imposed a tax upon every person in the City using video services from a video service supplier. The tax imposed by this section shall be at the rate of five percent of the charges made for such video services. The tax shall be collected from the service user by the video service supplier, or its billing agent.

B.     As used in this section, the term “charges” shall apply to all services, components and items that are: (1) necessary or common to the receipt, use and enjoyment of video service; or (2) currently, or historically have been, included in a single or bundled rate for video service by a local video service supplier to a class of retail customers. The term “charges” shall include, but is not limited to, the following charges:

1.     Franchise fees and access fees (PEG), whether designated on the customer’s bill or not;

2.     Initial installation of equipment necessary for provision and receipt of video services;

3.     Late fees, collection fees, bad debt recoveries, and return check fees;

4.     Activation fees, reactivation fees, and reconnection fees;

5.     All programming services (e.g., basic services, premium services, audio services, videogames, pay-per-view services, and electronic program guide services);

6.     Equipment leases (e.g., converters, remote devices);

7.     Service calls, service protection plans, name changes, changes of services, and special services; and

8.     The leasing of channel access.

C.     As used in this section, the term “charges” shall include the value of any other services, credits, property of every kind or nature, or other consideration provided by the service user in exchange for the video services.

D.    The tax administrator, from time to time, may survey the video service suppliers in the City to identify the various components of video service that are being offered to customers within the City, and the charges therefor. The tax administrator, thereafter, may issue and disseminate to such video service suppliers an administrative ruling identifying those components: (1) that are necessary or common to the receipt, use or enjoyment of video service; or (2) which currently are, or historically have been, included in a bundled rate for video service by a local distribution company. Charges for such components shall be subject to the tax of subsection A of this section.

E.     The tax imposed by this section shall be collected from the service user by the video service supplier, its billing agent, or a reseller of such services. In the case of video service, the service user shall be deemed to be the purchaser of the bulk video service (e.g., an apartment owner), unless such service is resold to individual users, in which case the service user shall be the ultimate purchaser of the video service. The amount of tax collected in one month shall be remitted to the treasurer, and must be received during normal business hours by the treasurer on or before the 20th day of the following month. (3118-7/91, 3610-8/03)

 

3.36.080 Effect of Commingling Non-Taxable With Taxable Items
If one or more non-taxable items are bundled or billed together with one or more taxable items (as provided for by this chapter) under a single charge on a service user’s bill, the entire single charge shall be deemed taxable. (3610-8/03)

 

3.36.090 Constitutional Exemption
A.    Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as imposing a tax upon: (1) any person or service if imposition of such tax upon that person or service would be in violation of a federal or California statute, the Constitution of the United States or the Constitution of the State of California; and (2) the City.

B.     Any service user that is exempt from the tax imposed by this chapter pursuant to subsection A shall file an application with the tax administrator for an exemption; provided, however, this requirement shall not apply to a service user that is a state or federal agency or subdivision with a commonly recognized name, or is a service user of telephone communication services that has received a federal excise tax exemption certificate for such service. Said application shall be made upon a form approved by the tax administrator and shall state those facts, declared under penalty of perjury, which qualify the applicant for an exemption, and shall include the names of all service suppliers serving that service user. If deemed exempt by the tax administrator, such service user shall give the tax administrator timely written notice of any change in its service suppliers so that the tax administrator can properly notify the new service suppliers of the service user’s tax exempt status. A service user that fails to comply with this section shall not be entitled to a refund of the utility tax collected and remitted to the tax administrator from such service user as a result of such non-compliance. Upon request of the tax administrator, a services supplier or non-utility service supplier, or its billing agent, shall provide a list of the names and addresses of those customers which, according to its billing records, are deemed exempt from the utilities tax. With respect to a service user of telephone communication services, a service supplier of such telephone communication services doing business in the City, upon request of the tax administrator, shall provide a copy of the federal exemption certificate for each exempt customer with the City that is served by such service supplier.

C.     The decision of the tax administrator on a tax exemption application may be appealed pursuant to Section 3.36.210 of this chapter. Filing an application with the tax administrator pursuant to this section and an appeal to the City Manager pursuant to Section 3.36.210 of this chapter is a prerequisite to a suit thereon. (1598-10/70, 3610-8/03)

 

3.36.110 Substantial Nexus—Minimum Contacts
For purposes of imposing a tax or establishing a duty to collect and remit a tax under this chapter, “substantial nexus” and “minimum contacts” shall be construed broadly in favor of the imposition, collection and/or remittance of the utility users tax to the fullest extent permitted by state and federal law, and as it may change from time to time by judicial interpretation or by statutory enactment. (3610-8/03)

 

3.36.120 Duty to Collect and Remit—Procedures
The duty of service suppliers to collect and remit the taxes imposed by the provisions of this chapter shall be performed as follows:

A.    The tax shall be collected insofar as practicable at the same time as, and along with the charges made in accordance with the regular billing practice of the service supplier. Where the amount paid by a service user to a service supplier is less than the full amount of the charge and tax which was accrued for the billing period, a proportionate share of both the charge and the tax shall be deemed to have been paid. In those cases where a service user has notified the service supplier of refusal to pay the tax imposed on said charges, Section 3.36.160 of this chapter shall apply.

B.     The duty of a service supplier to collect the tax from a service user shall commence with the beginning of the first regular billing period applicable to the service user where all charges normally included in such regular billing are subject to the provisions of this chapter. Where a person receives more than one billing, one or more being for different periods than another, the duty to collect shall arise separately for each billing period. (3610-8/03)

 

3.36.130 Filing Return and Payment
Each person required by this chapter to remit a tax shall file a return with the treasurer, on forms approved by the tax administrator, on or before the due date. The full amount of the tax owed shall be included with the return and remitted to the treasurer, who will forward the return to the tax administrator. The tax administrator is authorized to require such further information as he or she deems necessary to properly determine if the tax herein imposed is being levied, collected and remitted in accordance with this chapter. Returns and tax remittances are due immediately upon cessation of business for any reason. Pursuant to Revenue and Tax Code Section 7284.6, the tax administrator, and its agents, shall maintain such filing returns as confidential information, and not subject to the Public Records Act. (1598-10/70, 2211-8/77, 3390-5/98, 3610-8/03)

 

3.36.140 Collection Penalties—Service Suppliers or Self-Collectors
A.    Taxes collected from a service user, or self-collected by a service user subject to Section 3.36.050 of this chapter, are delinquent if not received by the treasurer on or before the due date during normal business hours. Should the due date occur on a weekend or legal holiday, the return must be received by the treasurer during normal business hours on the first regular working day following the weekend or legal holiday. A direct deposit, including electronic fund transfers and other similar methods of electronically exchanging monies between financial accounts, made by a service supplier in satisfaction of its obligations under this section shall be considered timely if the transfer is initiated on or before the due date, and the transfer settles into the City’s account on the following business day.

B.     If a service supplier, or a service user subject to Section 3.36.050 of this chapter, fails to remit any tax collected, on or before the due date, said person shall pay a penalty for such delinquencies at the rate of 10% of the total tax that is delinquent in the remittance.

C.     If payment is not received by the treasurer within 30 days following the date on which the remittance first became delinquent, the service supplier or service user, shall pay a second delinquency penalty of 10% of the amount of tax in addition to the amount of the tax and the penalty first imposed.

D.    The tax administrator shall have the power to impose additional penalties upon persons required to collect and/or remit taxes pursuant to the provisions of this chapter for fraud or gross negligence in reporting or remitting at the rate of 25% of the amount of the tax collected and/or required to be remitted, or as recomputed by the treasurer.

E.     In addition to any other penalties imposed by this chapter, any service supplier required to collect and/or remit any tax imposed by the provisions of this chapter who fails to collect the tax (by failing to properly assess the tax on one or more services or charges on the service user’s billing) or fails to remit the tax collected on or before the due date, or, in the case of a service user that fails to properly self-collect and remit the tax under Section 3.36.050 of this chapter on or before the due date, shall pay interest at the rate of one and one-half percent per month, or any fraction thereof, on the amount of the tax, exclusive of penalties, from the date on which the remittance first became delinquent, until paid.

F.     For collection purposes only, every penalty imposed and such interest that is accrued under the provisions of this section shall become a part of the tax herein required to be paid. (3390-5/98, 3610-8/03)

 

3.36.150 Deficiency Determination and Assessment—Tax Application Errors
A.    The tax administrator shall make a deficiency determination if he or she determines that any person required to collect or self-collect taxes pursuant to the provisions of this chapter has failed to collect and remit the proper amount of tax by improperly or failing to apply the tax to one or more taxable services or charges.

B.     The tax administrator shall mail a notice of such deficiency determination to the person required to pay or remit the tax, which notice shall refer briefly to the amount of the taxes owed, plus interest at the rate of one and one-half percent per month, or any fraction thereof, on the amount of the tax from the date on which the tax should have been received by the City. Within 14 calendar days after the date of service of such notice, the person may request in writing to the tax administrator for a hearing on the matter. If the person fails to request a hearing within the prescribed time period, the amount of the deficiency determination shall become a final assessment, and shall immediately be due and owing to the City.

C.     If the person requests a hearing, the tax administrator shall cause the matter to be set for hearing not later than 14 days after receipt of the written request for hearing. Notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be mailed by the tax administrator to such person at least 10 calendar days prior to the hearing, and, if the tax administrator desires said person to produce specific records at such hearing, such notice may designate the records requested to be produced.

D.    At the time fixed for the hearing, the tax administrator shall hear all relevant testimony and evidence, including that of any other interested parties. At the discretion of the tax administrator, the hearing may be continued from time to time for the purpose of allowing the presentation of additional evidence. Within a reasonable time following the conclusion of the hearing, the tax administrator shall issue a final assessment (or non-assessment), thereafter, by confirming, modifying or rejecting the original deficiency determination, and shall mail a copy of such final assessment to person owing the tax. The decision of the tax administrator may be appealed pursuant to Section 3.36.210 of this chapter. Filing an application with the tax administrator and appeal to the City Manager pursuant to Section 3.36.210 of this chapter is a prerequisite to a suit thereon.

E.     Payment of the final assessment shall become delinquent if not received by the tax administrator on or before the 30th day following the date of receipt of the notice of final assessment. The penalty for delinquency shall be that set forth at Section 3.36.140. The applicable statute of limitations regarding a claim by the City seeking payment of a tax assessed under this section shall commence from the date of delinquency as provided in this subsection.

F.     All notices under this section may be sent by regular mail, postage prepaid, and shall be deemed received on the third calendar day following the date of mailing, as established by a proof of mailing. (3610-8/03)

 

3.36.160 Administrative Remedy—Nonpaying Service Users
A.    Whenever the tax administrator determines that a service user has deliberately withheld the amount of the tax owed by the service user from the amounts remitted to a person required to collect the tax, or whenever the tax administrator deems it in the best interest of the City, he or she may relieve such person of the obligation to collect the taxes due under this chapter from certain named service users for specific billing periods. Whenever the service user has failed to pay the amount of tax owed for a period of two or more billing periods, the service supplier shall be relieved of the obligation to collect taxes due. The service supplier shall provide the City with the names and addresses of such service users and the amounts of taxes owed under the provisions of this chapter.

B.     In addition to the tax owed, the service user shall pay a delinquency penalty at the rate of 10% of the total tax that is owed, and shall pay interest at the rate of one and one-half percent per month, or any fraction thereof, on the amount of the tax, exclusive of penalties, from the due date, until paid.

C.     The tax administrator shall notify the non-paying service user that the tax administrator has assumed the responsibility to collect the taxes due for the stated periods and demand payment of such taxes, including penalties and interest. The notice shall be served on the service user by personal delivery or by deposit of the notice in the United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the service user at the address to which billing was made by the person required to collect the tax; or, should the service user have a change of address, to his or her last known address.

D.    If the service user fails to remit the tax to the tax administrator within 30 days from the date of the service of the notice upon him or her, the tax administrator may impose an additional penalty of 10% of the amount of the total tax that is owed. (3610-8/03)

 

3.36.170 Actions to Collect
A.    Any tax required to be paid by a service user under the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a debt owed by the service user to the City. Any such tax collected from a service user which has not been remitted to the treasurer shall be deemed a debt owed to the City by the persons required to collect and pay and shall no longer be a debt of the service user. Any person owing money to the City under the provisions of this chapter shall be liable to an action brought in the name of the City for the recovery of such amount, including penalties and interest as provided for in this chapter, along with any collection costs incurred by the City as a result of the person’s noncompliance with this chapter, including, but not limited to, reasonable attorneys fees.

B.     The treasurer may compromise a collection action and any penalty or interest imposed pursuant to Section 2.16.030(E) of the Municipal Code. (1598-10/70, 2211-8/77, 3390-5/98, 3610-8/03)

 

3.36.180 Additional Powers and Duties of Tax Administrator
A.    The tax administrator shall have the power and duty, and is hereby directed to enforce each and all of the provisions of this chapter.

B.     The tax administrator shall have the power to adopt rules and regulations not inconsistent with provisions of this chapter for the purpose of interpreting, clarifying, carrying out and enforcing the payment, collection and remittance of the taxes herein imposed. A copy of such rules and regulations shall be on file in the tax administrator’s office.

C.     Upon a proper showing of good cause, the tax administrator may make administrative agreements, with appropriate conditions, to vary the strict requirements of this chapter and thereby: (1) conform to the billing procedures of a particular service supplier (or service user subject to Section 3.36.050 of this chapter) so long as said agreements result in collection of the tax in conformance with the general purpose and scope of this chapter; or (2) to avoid a hardship where the administrative costs of collection and remittance greatly outweigh the tax benefit. A copy of each such agreement shall be on file in the tax administrator’s office and are voidable by the tax administrator or the City at any time.

D.    The tax administrator may conduct an audit, to ensure proper compliance with the requirements of this chapter, of any person required to collect and/or remit a tax pursuant to this chapter. The tax administrator shall notify said person of the initiation of an audit in writing. In the absence of fraud or other intentional misconduct, the audit period of review shall not exceed a period of three years next preceding the date of receipt of the written notice by said person from the tax administrator. Upon completion of the audit, the tax administrator may make a deficiency determination pursuant to Section 3.36.150 of this chapter for all taxes, penalties and interest owed and not paid, as evidenced by information provided by such person to the tax administrator. If said person is unable or unwilling to provide sufficient records to enable the tax administrator to verify compliance with this chapter, the tax administrator is authorized to make a reasonable estimate of the deficiency. Said reasonable estimate shall be entitled to a rebuttable presumption of correctness.

E.     Upon receipt of a written request of a taxpayer, and for good cause, the tax administrator may extend the time for filing any statement required pursuant to this chapter for a period not to exceed 45 days, provided that the time for filing the required statement has not already passed when the request is received. No penalty for delinquent payment shall accrue by reason of such extension. Interest shall accrue during said extension at the rate of one and one-half percent per month, prorated for any portion thereof.

F.     The tax administrator shall determine the eligibility of any person who asserts a right to exemption from, or a refund of, the tax imposed by this chapter. (3610-8/03)

 

3.36.190 Records
A.    It shall be the duty of every person required to collect and/or remit to the City any tax imposed by this chapter to keep and preserve, for a period of three years, all records as may be necessary to determine the amount of such tax as he or she may have been liable for the collection of and remittance to the treasurer, which records the tax administrator shall have the right to inspect at a reasonable time.

B.     The City may issue an administrative subpoena to compel a person to deliver, to the tax administrator, copies of all records deemed necessary by the tax administrator to establish compliance with this chapter, including the delivery of records in a common electronic format on readily available media if such records are kept electronically by the person in the usual and ordinary course of business. As an alternative to delivering the subpoenaed records to the tax administrator on or before the due date provided in the administrative subpoena, such person may provide access to such records outside the City on or before the due date, provided that such person shall reimburse the City for all reasonable travel expenses incurred by the City to inspect those records, including travel, lodging, meals, and other similar expenses, but excluding the normal salary or hourly wages of those persons designated by the City to conduct the inspection.

C.     The tax administrator, or the tax administrator’s designated representative, is authorized to execute a non-disclosure agreement approved by the City Attorney to protect the confidentiality of customer information pursuant to California Revenue and Tax Code Sections 7284.6 and 7284.7. The tax administrator, may request from a person providing transportation or distribution services of gas or electricity to service users within the City, a list of the names, billing address and service addresses, quantities of gas or electricity delivered, and other pertinent information, of its transportation customers within the City pursuant to Section 6354(e) of the California Public Utilities Code.

D.    If a service supplier uses a billing agent or billing aggregator to bill, collect, and/or remit the tax, the service supplier shall: (1) provide to the tax administrator the name, address and telephone number of each billing agent and billing aggregator currently authorized by the service supplier to bill, collect, and/or remit the tax to the City; and, (2) upon request of the tax administrator, deliver, or effect the delivery of, any information or records in the possession of such billing agent or billing aggregator that, in the opinion of the tax administrator, is necessary to verify the proper application, calculation, collection and/or remittance of such tax to the City.

E.     If any person subject to record-keeping under this section unreasonably denies the tax administrator, or the tax administrator’s designated representative, access to such records, or fails to produce the information requested in an administrative subpoena within the time specified, the tax administrator or the tax administrator’s designated representative may impose a penalty of $500.00 on such person for each day following: (1) the initial date that the person refuses to provide such access; or (2) the due date for production of records as set forth in the administrative subpoena. This penalty shall be in addition to any other penalty imposed under this chapter. (1598-10/70, 3390-5/98, 3610-8/03)

 

3.36.200 Refunds
A.    Whenever the amount of any tax has been overpaid or paid more than once or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the treasurer under this chapter, it may be refunded as provided in this section.

B.     The tax administrator may refund any tax that has been overpaid, paid more than once, or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the tax administrator under this chapter, provided that no refund shall be paid under the provisions of this section unless the claimant or his or her guardian, conservator, executor or administrator has submitted a written claim, under penalty of perjury, to the tax administrator within one year of the overpayment or erroneous or illegal collection of said tax. Such claim must clearly establish claimant’s right to the refund by written records showing entitlement thereto. Nothing herein shall permit the filing of a refund claim on behalf of a class or group of taxpayers. Where the amount of any individual refund claim is in excess of $5,000.00, City Council approval shall be required.

C.     It is the intent of the City that the one year written claim requirement of this section be given retroactive effect; provided, however, that any claims which arose prior to the enactment of the one year claims period of this section, and which are not otherwise barred by a then-applicable statute of limitations or claims procedure, must be filed with the tax administrator as provided in this subsection within 90 days following the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter.

D.    The tax administrator, or the City Council where the claim is in excess of $5,000.00 and the tax administrator has approved the claim, shall act upon the refund claim within 45 days of the initial receipt of the refund claim. Said decision shall be final. If the tax administrator/City Council fails or refuses to act on a refund claim within the 45-day period, the claim shall be deemed to have been rejected by the tax administrator/City Council on the 45th day. The tax administrator shall give notice of the action in a form which substantially complies with that set forth in Government Code Section 913.

E.     The filing of a written claim is a prerequisite to any suit thereon. Any action brought against the City pursuant to this section shall be subject to the provisions of Government Code Sections 945.6 and 946.

F.     Notwithstanding other provisions of this section, whenever a service supplier, pursuant to an order of the California Public Utilities Commission or a court of competent jurisdiction, makes a refund to service users of charges for past utility services, the taxes paid pursuant to this chapter on the amount of such refunded charges shall also be refunded to such service users, and the service supplier shall be entitled to claim a credit for such refunded taxes against the amount of tax which is due upon the next monthly returns.

G.    Notwithstanding subsections B and C of this section, a service supplier shall be entitled to take any overpayment as a credit against an underpayment whenever such overpayment has been received by the City within the three years next preceding a notice of tax deficiency or assessment by the tax administrator, or during any year for which the service supplier, at the request of the tax administrator, has executed a waiver of the defense of the statute of limitations with regard to any claim the City may have for a utilities tax. A service supplier shall not be entitled to said credit unless it clearly establishes the right to the credit by written record showing entitlement thereto. Under no circumstances shall an overpayment taken as a credit against an underpayment pursuant to this subsection qualify a service supplier for a refund to which it would not otherwise be entitled under the one-year written claim requirement of this section. (1598-10/70, 3390-5/98, 3610-8/03)

 

3.36.210 Appeals
A.    The provisions of this section apply to any assessment, decision or administrative ruling of the tax administrator, other than a decision relating to a refund pursuant to Section 3.36.200 of this chapter. Any person aggrieved by any assessment, decision or administrative ruling of the tax administrator (other than a decision relating to a refund pursuant to Section 3.36.200 of this chapter), deficiency determination, assessment, or administrative ruling of the tax administrator, shall be required to comply with the appeals procedure of this section. Compliance with this section shall be a prerequisite to a suit thereon. (See Government Code Section 935(b).) Nothing herein shall permit the filing of a claim or action on behalf of a class or group of taxpayers.

B.     If any person aggrieved by any decision (other than a decision relating to a refund pursuant to Section 3.36.200 of this chapter), deficiency determination, assessment, or administrative ruling of the tax administrator, he or she may appeal to the City Manager by filing a notice of appeal with the City Clerk within 14 days of the date of the decision, deficiency determination, assessment or administrative ruling of the tax administrator which aggrieved the service user or service supplier. The City Manager may appoint a hearing officer to hear the appeal.

C.     The matter shall be set for hearing no more than 30 days from the receipt of the appeal. The appellant shall be served with notice of the time and place of the hearing, as well as any relevant materials, at least five calendar days prior to the hearing. The hearing may be continued from time to time upon mutual consent. At the time of the hearing, the appealing party, the tax administrator, and any other interested person may present such relevant evidence as he or she may have relating to the determination from which the appeal is taken.

D.    Based upon the submission of such evidence and the review of the City’s files, the City Manager shall issue a written notice and order upholding, modifying or reversing the determination from which the appeal is taken. The notice shall be given 30 days after the conclusion of the hearing and shall state the reasons for the decision. If the City Manager fails or refuses to act on a refund claim within the 14-day period, the claim shall be deemed to have been rejected by the City Manager on the 14th day.

E.     An appeal from a decision by the City Manager may be filed with the City Clerk no later than 14 calendar days after the date of the decision. The notice of appeal shall be accompanied by the fee fixed by resolution of the City Council. The City Clerk shall set the matter for hearing before the City Council at the next regularly scheduled City Council meeting and shall give notice of the hearing to the appellant. The City Council shall issue a written notice and order upholding, modifying or reversing the City Manager’s determination. The notice shall specify that the decision is final and that any petition for judicial review shall be filed within 90 days from the date of the decision in accordance with Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.6.

F.     All notices under this section may be sent by regular mail, postage prepaid, and shall be deemed received on the third calendar day following the date of mailing, as established by a proof of mailing. (3610-8/03)

 

3.36.220 No Injunction/Writ of Mandate
No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall issue in any suit, action, or proceeding in any court against this City or against any officer of the City to prevent or enjoin the collection under this chapter of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected and/or remitted. (3610-8/03)

 

3.36.230 Remedies Cumulative
All remedies and penalties prescribed by this chapter or which are available under any other provision of law or equity, including but not limited to the California False Claims Act (Government Code Section 12650 et seq.) and the California Unfair Practices Act (Business and Professions Code Section 17070 et seq.) are cumulative. The use of one or more remedies by the City shall not bar the use of any other remedy for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter. (3610-8/03)

 

3.36.240 Notice of Changes to Chapter
If a tax under this chapter is added, repealed, increased, reduced, changes the tax base or makes any other charges or interpretation to the tax that would effect the collection or remittance of the tax, (such as administrative rulings from the tax administrator), the tax administrator shall follow the notice requirements of Public Utilities Code Section 799. Prior to the effective date of the ordinance change, the service supplier shall provide the tax administrator with a copy of any written procedures describing the information that the service supplier needs to implement the ordinance change. If the service supplier fails to provide such written instructions, the tax administrator, or its agent, shall send, by first class mail, a copy of the ordinance change to all collectors and remitters of the City’s utilities taxes according to the latest payment records of the tax administrator. (1598-10/70, 3610-8/03)

 

3.36.250 Senior Citizen’s Exemption
A.    The tax imposed by this chapter shall not apply to any individual service user 62 years of age or older who uses telephone, electric, water or gas services, in or upon any premises occupied by such individual, provided the combined adjusted gross income as used for federal income tax reporting purposes of all members of the household in which such service user resides does not exceed the “HUD Income Guidelines - Very Low Income Category” currently on file at the City’s Office of the Housing Rehabilitation Administrator, for the calendar year prior to the fiscal year (July 1st through June 30th) for which the exemption provided by this chapter is applied.

B.     Any service user, meeting the requirements for the senior citizen’s exemption, may file a verified application with the tax administrator on a form furnished by him or her. The tax administrator shall review all applications and certify those service users as exempt who meet the requirements for the exemption provided by this chapter.

C.     The tax administrator shall compile a list of all service users entitled to the senior citizen’s exemption, together with the addresses, account numbers, if any, of such service users, and such other information as may be necessary for service suppliers to remove exempt service users from their tax billings.

D.    No service supplier shall be required to bill any exempt senior citizen for any tax imposed by this chapter after receipt of notice from the tax administrator that such service user has met the requirements for exempt status established by the provisions of this chapter.

E.     The senior citizen’s exemption provided for in this chapter shall continue and be renewed automatically from year to year except as hereinafter provided. An exempt service user shall notify the tax administrator within 10 days of a change of address, or of any other fact or circumstance which might disqualify him or her or otherwise affect his or her exempt status. All exempt service users shall file with the tax administrator new verified applications in order to receive exempt service at a new address or location.

F.     All service suppliers shall remove exempt service users from their tax billings for the first regular full billings dated on or before October 15, 1980, and thereafter within 60 days after notice from the tax administrator to do so.

G.    It is unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person knowingly to receive, the exemption provided by this chapter when such person has not met the requirements on which such exemption is based, or when such person can no longer meet the requirements on which such exemption is based, and upon conviction thereof shall be subject to a fine of $500.00 or imprisonment in the county jail for a period not to exceed six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each such person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which a violation is committed or continued. (2452-10/80, 2470-2/81, 2886-12/86, 3095-4/91, 3610-8/03)

 

Chapter 3.38 COMMUNICATION USERS’ TAX
3.38.010 Short Title
This chapter shall be known as the “Communication Users’ Tax Law” of the City of Huntington Beach. (3883-12/10)

 

3.38.020 Definitions
The following words and phrases whenever used in this chapter shall be construed as defined in this section.

“Ancillary telecommunication services” means services that are associated with or incidental to the provision, use or enjoyment of telecommunications services, including but not limited to the following services:

1.     “Conference bridging service” means an ancillary service that links two or more participants of an audio or video conference call and may include the provision of a telephone number. Conference bridging service does not include the telecommunications services used to reach the conference bridge.

2.     “Detailed telecommunications billing service” means an ancillary service of separately stating information pertaining to individual calls on a customer’s billing statement.

3.     “Directory assistance” means an ancillary service of providing telephone number information and/or address information.

4.     “Vertical service” means an ancillary service that is offered in connection with one or more telecommunications services, which offers advanced calling features that allow customers to identify callers and to manage multiple calls and call connections, including conference bridging services.

5.     “Voice mail service” means an ancillary service that enables the customer to store, send or receive recorded messages. Voice mail service does not include any vertical services that the customer may be required to have in order to utilize the voice mail service.

“Ancillary video services” means services that are associated with or incidental to the provision or delivery of video services, including but not limited to electronic program guide services, recording services, search functions, or other interactive services or communications that are associated with or incidental to the provision, use or enjoyment of video services.

“Billing address” means the mailing address of the service user where the service supplier submits invoices or bills for payment by the customer.

“City” means the City of Huntington Beach.

“Communication services” means: “telecommunications services,” “ancillary telecommunication services,” “video services” and “ancillary video services.”

“Mobile telecommunications service” has the meaning and usage as set forth in the Mobile Telecommunications Sourcing Act (4 U.S.C. Section 124) and the regulations thereunder.

“Month” means a calendar month.

“Paging service” means a “telecommunications service” that provides transmission of coded radio signals for the purpose of activating specific pagers; such transmissions may include messages and/or sounds.

“Person” means, without limitation, any natural individual, firm, trust, common law trust, estate, partnership of any kind, association, syndicate, club, joint stock company, joint venture, limited liability company, corporation (including foreign, domestic, and non-profit), municipal district or municipal corporation (other than the City), cooperative, receiver, trustee, guardian, or other representative appointed by order of any court.

“Place of primary use” means the street address representative of where the customer’s use of the communications service primarily occurs, which must be the residential street address or the primary business street address of the customer.

“Post-paid telecommunication service” means the telecommunication service obtained by making a payment on a communication-by-communication basis either through the use of a credit card or payment mechanism such as a bank card, travel card, credit card, or debit card, or by charge made to a service number which is not associated with the origination or termination of the telecommunication service.

“Prepaid telecommunication service” means the right to access telecommunication services, which must be paid for in advance and which enables the origination of communications using an access number or authorization code, whether manually or electronically dialed, and that is sold in predetermined units or dollars of which the number declines with use in a known amount.

“Private telecommunication service” means a telecommunication service that entitles the customer to exclusive or priority use of a communications channel or group of channels between or among termination points, regardless of the manner in which such channel or channels are connected, and includes switching capacity, extension lines, stations, and any other associated services that are provided in connection with the use of such channel or channels. A communications channel is a physical or virtual path of communications over which signals are transmitted between or among customer channel termination points (i.e., the location where the customer either inputs or receives the communications).

“Service address” means either:

1.     The location of the service user’s communication equipment from which the communication originates or terminates, regardless of where the communication is billed or paid; or

2.     If the location in paragraph 1 of this definition is unknown (e.g., mobile telecommunications service or VoIP service), the service address means the location of the service user’s place of primary use.

3.     For prepaid telecommunication service, “service address” means the location associated with the service number or, if not known, the point of sale of the services.

“Service supplier” means any entity or person, including the City, that provides communication service to a user of such service within the City.

“Service user” means a person required to pay a tax imposed under the provisions of this chapter.

“State” means the State of California.

“Streamlined Sales and Use Tax Agreement” means the multi-state agreement commonly known and referred to as the Streamlined Sales and Use Tax Agreement, as it is amended from time to time.

“Tax administrator” means the Finance Director, or his or her designee.

“Telecommunications service” means the transmission, conveyance, or routing of voice, data, audio, video, or any other information or signals to a point, or between or among points, whatever the technology used. The term “telecommunications services” includes such transmission, conveyance, or routing in which computer processing applications are used to act on the form, code or protocol of the content for purposes of transmission, conveyance or routing without regard to whether such services are referred to as voice over Internet Protocol (VoIP) services or are classified by the Federal Communications Commission as enhanced or value added, and includes video and/or data services that is functionally integrated with “telecommunication services.” “Telecommunications services” include, but are not limited to the following services, regardless of the manner or basis on which such services are calculated or billed: ancillary telecommunication services; intrastate, interstate, and international telecommunication services; mobile telecommunications service; prepaid telecommunication service; post-paid telecommunication service; private telecommunication service; paging service; 800 service (or any other toll-free numbers designated by the Federal Communications Commission); 900 service (or any other similar numbers designated by the Federal Communications Commission for services whereby subscribers call in to pre-recorded or live service).

“Video programming” means those programming services commonly provided to subscribers by a “video service supplier” including but not limited to basic services, premium services, audio services, video games, pay-per-view services, video on demand, origination programming, or any other similar services, regardless of the content of such video programming, or the technology used to deliver such services, and regardless of the manner or basis on which such services are calculated or billed.

“Video services” means “video programming” and any and all services related to the providing, recording, delivering, use or enjoyment of “video programming” (including origination programming and programming using Internet Protocol, e.g., IP-TV and IP-Video) using one or more channels by a “video service supplier,” regardless of the technology used to deliver, store or provide such services, and regardless of the manner or basis on which such services are calculated or billed, and includes ancillary video services, data services, “telecommunication services,” or interactive communication services that are functionally integrated with “video services.”

“Video service supplier” means any person, company, or service which provides or sells one or more channels of video programming, or provides or sells the capability to receive one or more channels of video programming, including any communications that are ancillary, necessary or common to the provision, use or enjoyment of the video programming, to or from a business or residential address in the City, where some fee is paid, whether directly or included in dues or rental charges for that service, whether or not public rights-of-way are utilized in the delivery of the video programming or communications. A “video service supplier” includes, but is not limited to, multichannel video programming distributors [as defined in 47 U.S.C.A. Section 522(13)]; open video systems (OVS) suppliers; and suppliers of cable television; master antenna television; satellite master antenna television; multichannel multipoint distribution services (MMDS); video services using Internet Protocol (e.g., IP-TV and IP-Video, which provide, among other things, broadcasting and video on demand), direct broadcast satellite to the extent federal law permits taxation of its video services, now or in the future; and other suppliers of video services (including two-way communications), whatever their technology.

“VoIP (Voice Over Internet Protocol)” means the digital process of making and receiving real-time voice transmissions over any Internet Protocol network.

“800 service” means a “telecommunications service” that allows a caller to dial a toll-free number without incurring a charge for the call. The service is typically marketed under the name “800,” “855,” “866,” “877” and “888” toll-free calling, and any subsequent numbers designated by the Federal Communications Commission.

“900 service” means an inbound toll “telecommunications service” purchased by a subscriber that allows the subscriber’s customers to call in to the subscriber’s prerecorded announcement or live service. “900 service” does not include the charge for: collection services provided by the seller of the “telecommunications services” to the subscriber, or service or product sold by the subscriber to the subscriber’s customer. The service is typically marketed under the name “900” service, and any subsequent numbers designated by the Federal Communications Commission. (3883-12/10)

 

3.38.030 Constitutional, Statutory, and Other Exemptions
A.    Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as imposing a tax upon any person or service when the imposition of such tax upon such person or service would be in violation of a federal or state statute, the Constitution of the United States or the Constitution of the State.

B.     Any service user that is exempt from the tax imposed by this chapter pursuant to subsection A of this section shall file an application with the tax administrator for an exemption; provided, however, this requirement shall not apply to a service user that is a state or federal agency or subdivision with a commonly recognized name for such service. Said application shall be made upon a form approved by the tax administrator and shall state those facts, declared under penalty of perjury, which qualify the applicant for an exemption, and shall include the names of all communication service suppliers serving that service user. If deemed exempt by the tax administrator, such service user shall give the tax administrator timely written notice of any change in communication service suppliers so that the tax administrator can properly notify the new communication service supplier of the service user’s tax exempt status. A service user that fails to comply with this section shall not be entitled to a refund of a communication users’ tax collected and remitted to the tax administrator from such service user as a result of such noncompliance.

The decision of the tax administrator may be appealed pursuant to Section 3.38.150 of this chapter. Filing an application with the tax administrator and appeal to the City Manager pursuant to Section 3.38.150 of this chapter is a prerequisite to a suit thereon.

C.     The City Council may, by resolution, establish one or more classes of persons or one or more classes of utility service otherwise subject to payment of a tax imposed by this chapter and provide that such classes of persons or service shall be exempt, in whole or in part from such tax for a specified period of time.

D.    The senior citizen’s exemption of Section 3.36.250 shall apply to the tax imposed under Section 3.38.040. (3883-12/10)

 

3.38.040 Communication Users’ Tax
A.    There is hereby imposed a tax upon every person in the City using communication services. The tax imposed by this section shall be at the rate of four and nine-tenths percent of the charges made for such services and shall be collected from the service user by the communication services supplier or its billing agent. There is a rebuttable presumption that communication services, which are billed to a billing or service address in the City, are used, in whole or in part, within the City’s boundaries, and such services are subject to taxation under this chapter. There is also a rebuttable presumption that prepaid telecommunication services sold within the City are used, in whole or in part, within the City and are therefore subject to taxation under this chapter. If the billing address of the service user is different from the service address, the service address of the service user shall be used for purposes of imposing the tax. As used in this section, the term “charges” shall include the value of any other services, credits, property of every kind or nature, or other consideration provided by the service user in exchange for the communication services.

B.     “Mobile telecommunications service” shall be sourced in accordance with the sourcing rules set forth in the Mobile Telecommunications Sourcing Act (4 U.S.C. Section 124). The tax administrator may issue and disseminate to communication service suppliers, which are subject to the tax collection requirements of this chapter, sourcing rules for the taxation of other communication services, including but not limited to post-paid communication services, prepaid communication services, VoIP and private communication services, provided that such rules are based upon custom and common practice that further administrative efficiency and minimize multi-jurisdictional taxation (e.g., Streamlined Sales and Use Tax Agreement).

C.     The tax administrator may issue and disseminate to communication service suppliers, which are subject to the tax collection requirements of this chapter, an administrative ruling identifying those communication services, or charges therefor, that are subject to or not subject to the tax of subsection A of this section.

D.    As used in this section, the term “telecommunication services” shall include, but is not limited to, charges for: connection, reconnection, termination, movement, or change of telecommunication services; late payment fees; detailed billing; central office and custom calling features (including but not limited to call waiting, call forwarding, caller identification and three-way calling); voice mail and other messaging services; directory assistance; access and line charges; universal service charges; regulatory, administrative and other cost recovery charges; local number portability charges; and text and instant messaging. “Telecommunication services” shall not include digital downloads that are not “ancillary telecommunication services,” such as music, ringtones, games, and similar digital products.

E.     Charges for communication services (video) shall include, but are not limited to, charges for the following:

1.     Regulatory fees and surcharges, franchise fees and access fees (PEG);

2.     Initial installation of equipment necessary for provision and receipt of video services;

3.     Late fees, collection fees, bad debt recoveries, and return check fees;

4.     Activation fees, reactivation fees, and reconnection fees;

5.     Video programming and video services;

6.     Ancillary video services (e.g., electronic program guide services, recording functions, search functions, or other interactive services or communications that are ancillary, necessary or common to the use or enjoyment of video services);

7.     Equipment leases (e.g., remote, recording or search devices, converters, remote devices); and,

8.     Service calls, service protection plans, name changes, changes of services, and special services.

F.     To prevent actual multi-jurisdictional taxation of communication services subject to tax under this section, any service user, upon proof to the tax administrator that the service user has previously paid the same tax in another state or city on such communication services, shall be allowed a credit against the tax imposed to the extent of the amount of such tax legally imposed in such other state or city; provided, however, the amount of credit shall not exceed the tax owed to the City under this section.

G.    The tax on communication services imposed by this section shall be collected from the service user by the service supplier. In the case of video service, the service user shall be deemed to be the purchaser of the bulk video service (e.g., an apartment owner), unless such service is resold to individual users, in which case the service user shall be the ultimate purchaser of the video service. The amount of tax collected in one month shall be remitted to the tax administrator, and must be received by the tax administrator on or before the 20th day of the following month. (3883-12/10)

 

3.38.050 Bundling Taxable Items With Non-Taxable Items
If any nontaxable charges are combined with and not separately stated from taxable service charges on the customer bill or invoice of a service supplier, the combined charge is subject to tax unless the service supplier identifies, by reasonable and verifiable standards, the portions of the combined charge that are nontaxable and taxable through the service supplier’s books and records kept in the regular course of business, and in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, and not created and maintained for tax purposes. The service supplier has the burden of proving the proper valuation and apportionment of taxable and non-taxable charges. If the service supplier offers a combination of taxable and non-taxable services, and the charges are separately stated, then for taxation purposes, the values assigned the taxable and non-taxable services shall be based on its books and records kept in the regular course of business and in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, and not created and maintained for tax purposes. The service supplier has the burden of proving the proper valuation of the taxable and non-taxable services. (3883-12/10)

 

3.38.060 Substantial Nexus/Minimum Contacts
For purposes of imposing a tax or establishing a duty to collect and remit a tax under this chapter, “substantial nexus” and “minimum contacts” shall be construed broadly in favor of the imposition, collection and/or remittance of the communication users’ tax to the fullest extent permitted by state and federal law, and as it may change from time to time by judicial interpretation or by statutory enactment. Any communication service (including VoIP) used by a person with a service address in the City, which service is capable of terminating a call to another person on the general telephone network, shall be subject to a rebuttable presumption that “substantial nexus/minimum contacts” exists for purposes of imposing a tax, or establishing a duty to collect and remit a tax, under this chapter. A service supplier shall be deemed to have sufficient activity in the City for tax collection and remittance purposes if its activities include, but are not limited to, any of the following: maintains or has within the City, directly or through an agent or subsidiary, a place of business of any nature; solicits business in the City by employees, independent contractors, resellers, agents or other representatives; solicits business in the City on a continuous, regular, seasonal or systematic basis by means of advertising that is broadcast or relayed from a transmitter with the City or distributed from a location with the City; or advertises in newspapers or other periodicals printed and published within the City or through materials distributed in the City by means other than the United States mail; or if there are activities performed in the City on behalf of the service supplier that are significantly associated with the service supplier’s ability to establish and maintain a market in the City for the provision of communication services that are subject to a tax under this chapter. (3883-12/10)

 

3.38.070 Duty to Collect—Procedures
A.    Collection by Service Suppliers. The duty of service suppliers to collect and remit the taxes imposed by the provisions of this chapter shall be performed as follows:

1.     The tax shall be collected by service suppliers insofar as practicable at the same time as, and along with, the collection of the charges made in accordance with the regular billing practice of the service supplier. Where the amount paid by a service user to a service supplier is less than the full amount of the charge and tax which was accrued for the billing period, a proportionate share of both the charge and the tax shall be deemed to have been paid. In those cases where a service user has notified the service supplier of refusal to pay the tax imposed on said charges, Section 3.38.110 shall apply.

2.     The duty of a service supplier to collect the tax from a service user shall commence with the beginning of the first regular billing period applicable to the service user where all charges normally included in such regular billing are subject to the provisions of this chapter. Where a service user receives more than one billing, one or more being for different periods than another, the duty to collect shall arise separately for each billing period.

B.     Filing Return and Payment. Each person required by this chapter to remit a tax shall file a return to the tax administrator, on forms approved by the tax administrator, on or before the due date. The full amount of the tax collected shall be included with the return and filed with the tax administrator. The tax administrator is authorized to require such additional information as he or she deems necessary to determine if the tax is being levied, collected, and remitted in accordance with this chapter. Returns are due immediately upon cessation of business for any reason. Pursuant to Revenue and Tax Code Section 7284.6, the tax administrator, and its agents, shall maintain such filing returns as confidential information that is exempt from the disclosure provisions of the Public Records Act. (3883-12/10)

 

3.38.080 Collection Penalties—Service Suppliers
A.    Taxes collected from a service user are delinquent if not received by the tax administrator on or before the due date. Should the due date occur on a weekend or legal holiday, the return must be received by the tax administrator on the first regular working day following the weekend or legal holiday. A direct deposit, including electronic fund transfers and other similar methods of electronically exchanging monies between financial accounts, made by a service supplier in satisfaction of its obligations under this subsection shall be considered timely if the transfer is initiated on or before the due date, and the transfer settles into the City’s account on the following business day.

B.     If the person required to collect and/or remit the communication users’ tax fails to collect the tax (by failing to properly assess the tax on one or more services or charges on the customer’s billing) or fails to remit the tax collected on or before the due date, the tax administrator shall attach a penalty for such delinquencies or deficiencies at the rate of 15% of the total tax that is delinquent or deficient in the remittance, and interest at the rate of 75/100ths percent (0.75%) per month, or any fraction thereof, on the amount of the tax, exclusive of penalties, from the date on which the remittance first became delinquent, until paid.

C.     The tax administrator shall have the power to impose additional penalties upon persons required to collect and remit taxes pursuant to the provisions of this chapter for fraud or gross negligence in reporting or remitting at the rate of 15% of the amount of the tax collected and/or required to be remitted, or as recomputed by the tax administrator.

D.    For collection purposes only, every penalty imposed and such interest that is accrued under the provisions of this section shall become a part of the tax herein required to be paid.

E.     Notwithstanding the foregoing, the tax administrator may, in his or her discretion, modify the due dates of this chapter to be consistent with any uniform standards or procedures that are mutually agreed upon by other public agencies imposing a utility users tax, or otherwise legally established, to create a central payment location or mechanism. (3883-12/10)

 

3.38.090 Actions to Collect
Any tax required to be paid by a service user under the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a debt owed by the service user to the City. Any such tax collected from a service user which has not been remitted to the tax administrator shall be deemed a debt owed to the City by the person required to collect and remit and shall no longer be a debt of the service user. Any person owing money to the City under the provisions of this chapter shall be liable to an action brought in the name of the City for the recovery of such amount, including penalties and interest as provided for in this chapter, along with any collection costs incurred by the City as a result of the person’s noncompliance with this chapter, including, but not limited to, reasonable attorneys fees. Any tax required to be collected by a service supplier or owed by a service user is an unsecured priority excise tax obligation under 11 U.S.C.A. Section 507(a)(8)(C). Service suppliers who seek to collect charges for service in bankruptcy proceedings shall also include in any such claim the amount of taxes due the City for those services, unless the tax administrator determines that such duty is in conflict with any federal or state law, rule, or regulation or that such action would be administratively impractical. (3883-12/10)

 

3.38.100 Deficiency Determination and Assessment—Tax Application Errors
A.    The tax administrator shall make a deficiency determination if he or she determines that any person required to pay or collect taxes pursuant to the provisions of this chapter has failed to pay, collect, and/or remit the proper amount of tax by improperly or failing to apply the tax to one or more taxable services or charges. Nothing herein shall require that the tax administrator institute proceedings under this Section 3.38.100 if, in the opinion of the tax administrator, the cost of collection or enforcement likely outweighs the tax benefit.

B.     The tax administrator shall mail a notice of such deficiency determination to the person required to pay or remit the tax, which notice shall refer briefly to the amount of the taxes owed, plus interest at the rate of 75/100ths percent (0.75%) per month, or any fraction thereof, on the amount of the tax from the date on which the tax should have been received by the City. Within 14 calendar days after the date of service of such notice, the person may request in writing to the tax administrator for a hearing on the matter.

C.     If the person fails to request a hearing within the prescribed time period, the amount of the deficiency determination shall become a final assessment, and shall immediately be due and owing to the City. If the person requests a hearing, the tax administrator shall cause the matter to be set for hearing, which shall be scheduled within 30 days after receipt of the written request for hearing. Notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be mailed by the tax administrator to such person at least 10 calendar days prior to the hearing, and, if the tax administrator desires said person to produce specific records at such hearing, such notice may designate the records requested to be produced.

D.    At the time fixed for the hearing, the tax administrator shall hear all relevant testimony and evidence, including that of any other interested parties. At the discretion of the tax administrator, the hearing may be continued from time to time for the purpose of allowing the presentation of additional evidence. Within a reasonable time following the conclusion of the hearing, the tax administrator shall issue a final assessment (or non-assessment), thereafter, by confirming, modifying or rejecting the original deficiency determination, and shall mail a copy of such final assessment to person owing the tax. The decision of the tax administrator may be appealed pursuant to Section 3.38.150 of this chapter. Filing an application with the tax administrator and appeal to the City Manager pursuant to Section 3.38.150 of this chapter is a prerequisite to a suit thereon.

E.     Payment of the final assessment shall become delinquent if not received by the tax administrator on or before the 30th day following the date of receipt of the notice of final assessment. The penalty for delinquency shall be 15% on the total amount of the assessment, along with interest at the rate of 75/100ths percent (0.75%) per month, or any fraction thereof, on the amount of the tax, exclusive of penalties, from the date of delinquency, until paid. The applicable statute of limitations regarding a claim by the City seeking payment of a tax assessed under this chapter shall commence from the date of delinquency as provided in this subsection.

F.     All notices under this section may be sent by regular mail, postage prepaid, and shall be deemed received on the third calendar day following the date of mailing, as established by a proof of mailing. (3883-12/10)

 

3.38.110 Administrative Remedy—Non-Paying Service Users
A.    Whenever the tax administrator determines that a service user has deliberately withheld the amount of the tax owed by the service user from the amounts remitted to a person required to collect the tax, or whenever the tax administrator deems it in the best interest of the City, he or she may relieve such person of the obligation to collect the taxes due under this chapter from certain named service users for specific billing periods. To the extent the service user has failed to pay the amount of tax owed for a period of two or more billing periods, the service supplier shall be relieved of the obligation to collect taxes due. The service supplier shall provide the City with the names and addresses of such service users and the amounts of taxes owed under the provisions of this chapter. Nothing herein shall require that the tax administrator institute proceedings under this section if, in the opinion of the tax administrator, the cost of collection or enforcement likely outweighs the tax benefit.

B.     In addition to the tax owed, the service user shall pay a delinquency penalty at the rate of 15% of the total tax that is owed, and shall pay interest at the rate of 75/100ths percent (0.75%) per month, or any fraction thereof, on the amount of the tax, exclusive of penalties, from the due date, until paid.

C.     The tax administrator shall notify the non-paying service user that the tax administrator has assumed the responsibility to collect the taxes due for the stated periods and demand payment of such taxes, including penalties and interest. The notice shall be served on the service user by personal delivery or by deposit of the notice in the United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the service user at the address to which billing was made by the person required to collect the tax; or, should the service user have a change of address, to his or her last known address.

D.    If the service user fails to remit the tax to the tax administrator within 30 days from the date of the service of the notice upon him or her, the tax administrator may impose an additional penalty of 15% of the amount of the total tax that is owed. (3883-12/10)

 

3.38.120 Additional Powers and Duties of the Tax Administrator
A.    The tax administrator shall have the power and duty, and is hereby directed, to enforce each and all of the provisions of this chapter.

B.     The tax administrator may adopt administrative rules and regulations consistent with provisions of this chapter for the purpose of interpreting, clarifying, carrying out and enforcing the payment, collection and remittance of the taxes herein imposed. The administrative ruling shall not impose a new tax, revise an existing tax methodology as stated in this section, or increase an existing tax, except as allowed by California Government Code Section 53750(h)(2). A copy of such administrative rules and regulations shall be on file in the tax administrator’s office. To the extent that the tax administrator determines that the tax imposed under this chapter shall not be collected in full for any period of time from any particular service supplier or service user, that determination shall be considered an exercise of the tax administrator’s discretion to settle disputes and shall not constitute a change in taxing methodology for purposes of Government Code Section 53750 or otherwise. The tax administrator is not authorized to amend the City’s methodology for purposes of Government Code Section 53750 and the City does not waive or abrogate its ability to impose the communication users’ tax in full as a result of promulgating administrative rulings or entering into agreements.

C.     Upon a proper showing of good cause, the tax administrator may make administrative agreements, with appropriate conditions, to vary from the strict requirements of this chapter and thereby: (1) conform to the billing procedures of a particular service supplier so long as said agreements result in the collection of the tax in conformance with the general purpose and scope of this chapter; or, (2) to avoid a hardship where the administrative costs of collection and remittance greatly outweigh the tax benefit. A copy of each such agreement shall be on file in the tax administrator’s office, and are voidable by the tax administrator or the City at any time.

D.    The tax administrator may conduct an audit, to ensure proper compliance with the requirements of this chapter, of any person required to collect and/or remit a tax pursuant to this chapter. The tax administrator shall notify said person of the initiation of an audit in writing. In the absence of fraud or other intentional misconduct, the audit period of review shall not exceed a period of three years next preceding the date of receipt of the written notice by said person from the tax administrator. Upon completion of the audit, the tax administrator may make a deficiency determination pursuant to Section 3.38.100 of this chapter for all taxes (and applicable penalties and interest) owed and not paid, as evidenced by information provided by such person to the tax administrator. If said person is unable or unwilling to provide sufficient records to enable the tax administrator to verify compliance with this chapter, the tax administrator is authorized to make a reasonable estimate of the deficiency. Said reasonable estimate shall be entitled to a rebuttable presumption of correctness.

E.     Upon receipt of a written request of a taxpayer, and for good cause, the tax administrator may extend the time for filing any statement required pursuant to this chapter for a period not to exceed 45 days, provided that the time for filing the required statement has not already passed when the request is received. No penalty for delinquent payment shall accrue by reason of such extension. Interest shall accrue during said extension at the rate of 75/100ths percent (0.75%) per month, prorated for any portion thereof.

F.     The tax administrator shall determine the eligibility of any person who asserts a right to exemption from, or a refund of, the tax imposed by this chapter.

G.    Notwithstanding any provision in this chapter to the contrary, the tax administrator may waive any penalty or interest imposed upon a person required to collect and/or remit for failure to collect the tax imposed by this chapter if the non-collection occurred in good faith. In determining whether the non-collection was in good faith, the tax administrator shall take into consideration the uniqueness of the product or service, industry practice or other precedence. The tax administrator may also participate with other UUT public agencies in conducting coordinated compliance reviews with the goal of achieving administrative efficiency and uniform tax application determinations, where possible. To encourage full disclosure and on-going cooperation on annual compliance reviews, the tax administrator, and its agents, may enter into agreements with the tax-collecting service providers and grant prospective only effect on any changes regarding the taxation of services or charges that were previously deemed by the service provider, in good faith and without gross negligence, to be non-taxable. In determining whether the non-collection was in good faith and without gross negligence, the tax administrator shall take into consideration the uniqueness of the product or service, industry practice or other precedence. (3883-12/10)

 

3.38.130 Records
A.    It shall be the duty of every person required to collect and/or remit to the City any tax imposed by this chapter to keep and preserve, for a period of at least three years, all records as may be necessary to determine the amount of such tax as he or she may have been liable for the collection of and remittance to the tax administrator, which records the tax administrator shall have the right to inspect at a reasonable time.

B.     The City may issue an administrative subpoena to compel a person to deliver, to the tax administrator, copies of all records deemed necessary by the tax administrator to establish compliance with this chapter, including the delivery of records in a common electronic format on readily available media if such records are kept electronically by the person in the usual and ordinary course of business. As an alternative to delivering the subpoenaed records to the tax administrator on or before the due date provided in the administrative subpoena, such person may provide access to such records outside the City on or before the due date, provided that such person shall reimburse the City for all reasonable travel expenses incurred by the City to inspect those records, including travel, lodging, meals, and other similar expenses, but excluding the normal salary or hourly wages of those persons designated by the City to conduct the inspection.

C.     The tax administrator is authorized to execute a non-disclosure agreement approved by the City Attorney to protect the confidentiality of customer information pursuant to California Revenue and Tax Code Sections 7284.6 and 7284.7.

D.    If a service supplier uses a billing agent or billing aggregator to bill, collect, and/or remit the tax, the service supplier shall: (1) provide to the tax administrator the name, address and telephone number of each billing agent and billing aggregator currently authorized by the service supplier to bill, collect, and/or remit the tax to the City; and, (2) upon request of the tax administrator, deliver, or effect the delivery of, any information or records in the possession of such billing agent or billing aggregator that, in the opinion of the tax administrator, is necessary to verify the proper application, calculation, collection and/or remittance of such tax to the City.

E.     If any person subject to record-keeping under this section unreasonably denies the tax administrator access to such records, or fails to produce the information requested in an administrative subpoena within the time specified, then the tax administrator may impose a penalty of $500.00 on such person for each day following: (1) the initial date that the person refuses to provide such access; or, (2) the due date for production of records as set forth in the administrative subpoena. This penalty shall be in addition to any other penalty imposed under this chapter. (3883-12/10)

 

3.38.140 Refunds
Whenever the amount of any tax has been overpaid or paid more than once or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the tax administrator under this chapter from a person or service supplier, it may be refunded as provided in this section as follows:

A.    Written Claim for Refund. The tax administrator may refund any tax that has been overpaid or paid more than once or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the tax administrator under this chapter from a person or service supplier, provided that no refund shall be paid under the provisions of this section unless the claimant or his or her guardian, conservator, executor, or administrator has submitted a written claim to the tax administrator within one year of the overpayment or erroneous or illegal collection of said tax. Such claim must clearly establish claimant’s right to the refund by written records showing entitlement thereto. Nothing herein shall permit the filing of a claim on behalf of a class or group of taxpayers unless each member of the class has submitted a written claim under penalty of perjury as provided by this subsection.

B.     Compliance with Claims Act. The filing of a written claim pursuant to Government Code Section 935 is a prerequisite to any suit thereon. Any action brought against the City pursuant to this section shall be subject to the provisions of Government Code Sections 945.6 and 946. The tax administrator, or the City Council where the claim is in excess of $5,000.00, shall act upon the refund claim within the time period set forth in Government Code Section 912.4. If the tax administrator/City Council fails or refuses to act on a refund claim within the time prescribed by Government Section 912.4, the claim shall be deemed to have been rejected by the City Council on the last day of the period within which the City Council was required to act upon the claim as provided in Government Code Section 912.4. The tax administrator shall give notice of the action in a form which substantially complies with that set forth in Government Code Section 913.

C.     Refunds to Service Suppliers. Notwithstanding the notice provisions of subsection A of this section, the tax administrator may, at his or her discretion, give written permission to a service supplier, who has collected and remitted any amount of tax in excess of the amount of tax imposed by this chapter, to claim credit for such overpayment against the amount of tax which is due the City upon a subsequent monthly return(s) to the tax administrator, provided that: (1) such credit is claimed in a return dated no later than one year from the date of overpayment or erroneous collection of said tax; (2) the tax administrator is satisfied that the underlying basis and amount of such credit has been reasonably established; and, (3) in the case of an overpayment by a service user to the service supplier that has been remitted to the City, the tax administrator has received proof, to his or her satisfaction, that the overpayment has been refunded by the service supplier to the service user in an amount equal to the requested credit. (3883-12/10)

 

3.38.150 Appeals
A.    The provisions of this section apply to any decision (other than a decision relating to a refund pursuant to Section 3.38.140 of this chapter), deficiency determination, assessment, or administrative ruling of the tax administrator. Any person aggrieved by any decision (other than a decision relating to a refund pursuant to Section 3.38.140 of this chapter), deficiency determination, assessment, or administrative ruling of the tax administrator, shall be required to comply with the appeals procedure of this section. Compliance with this section shall be a prerequisite to a suit thereon. [See Government Code Section 935(b)]. Nothing herein shall permit the filing of a claim or action on behalf of a class or group of taxpayers.

B.     If any person is aggrieved by any decision (other than a decision relating to a refund pursuant to Section 3.38.140 of this chapter), deficiency determination, assessment, or administrative ruling of the tax administrator, he or she may appeal to the City Manager by filing a notice of appeal with the City Clerk within 14 days of the date of the decision, deficiency determination, assessment, or administrative ruling of the tax administrator which aggrieved the service user or service supplier.

C.     The matter shall be scheduled for hearing before an independent hearing officer selected by the City Manager, no more than 30 days from the receipt of the appeal. The appellant shall be served with notice of the time and place of the hearing, as well as any relevant materials, at least five calendar days prior to the hearing. The hearing may be continued from time to time upon mutual consent. At the time of the hearing, the appealing party, the tax administrator, and any other interested person may present such relevant evidence as he or she may have relating to the determination from which the appeal is taken.

D.    Based upon the submission of such evidence and the review of the City’s files, the hearing officer shall issue a written notice and order upholding, modifying or reversing the determination from which the appeal is taken. The notice shall be given within 14 days after the conclusion of the hearing and shall state the reasons for the decision. The notice shall specify that the decision is final and that any petition for judicial review shall be filed within 90 days from the date of the decision in accordance with Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.6.

E.     All notices under this section may be sent by regular mail, postage prepaid, and shall be deemed received on the third calendar day following the date of mailing, as established by a proof of mailing. (3883-12/10)

 

3.38.160 No Injunction/Writ of Mandate
No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall issue in any suit, action, or proceeding in any court against this City or against any officer of the City to prevent or enjoin the collection under this chapter of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected and/or remitted. (3883-12/10)

 

3.38.170 Notice of Changes to Ordinance
If a tax under this chapter is added, repealed, increased, reduced, or the tax base is changed, the tax administrator shall follow the notice requirements of California Public Utilities Code Section 799. (3883-12/10)

 

3.38.180 Effect of State and Federal Reference/Authorization
A.    Unless specifically provided otherwise, any reference to a state or federal statute in this chapter shall mean such statute as it may be amended from time to time, provided that such reference to a statute herein shall not include any subsequent amendment thereto, or to any subsequent change of interpretation thereto by a state or federal agency or court of law with the duty to interpret such law, to the extent that such amendment or change of interpretation would require voter approval under California law, or to the extent that such change would result in a tax decrease (as a result of excluding all or a part of a communication service, or charge therefor, from taxation). Only to the extent voter approval would otherwise be required or a tax decrease would result, the prior version of the statute (or interpretation) shall remain applicable; for any application or situation that would not require voter approval or result in a decrease of a tax, provisions of the amended statute (or new interpretation) shall be applicable to the maximum possible extent.

B.     To the extent that the City’s authorization to collect or impose any tax imposed under this chapter is expanded or limited as a result of changes in state or federal law, no amendment or modification of this chapter shall be required to conform the tax to those changes, and the tax shall be imposed and collected to the full extent of the authorization up to the full amount of the tax imposed under this chapter. (3883-12/10)

 

3.38.190 Independent Audit of Tax Collection, Exemption, Remittance, and Expenditure
The City shall annually verify that the taxes owed under this chapter have been properly applied, exempted, collected, and remitted in accordance with this chapter, and properly expended according to applicable municipal law. The annual verification shall be performed by a qualified independent third party and the review shall employ reasonable, cost-effective steps to ensure compliance, including the use of sampling audits. The verification shall not be required of tax remitters where the cost of the verification may exceed the tax revenues to be reviewed. (3883-12/10)

 

3.38.200 Interaction with Prior Tax
A.    Satisfaction of Tax Obligation by Service Users. Any person who pays the tax levied pursuant to Section 3.38.040 of this chapter with respect to any charge for a communication service shall be deemed to have satisfied his or her obligation to pay the tax levied pursuant to Sections 3.36.020 and 3.36.070 of this Code with respect to that charge. Likewise, prior to April 1, 2011, any person who pays the tax levied pursuant to Sections 3.36.020 and 3.36.070 of this Code with respect to any charge for a service subject to taxation pursuant to this chapter shall be deemed to have satisfied his or her obligation to pay the tax levied pursuant to Section 3.38.040 of this chapter with respect to that charge. The intent of this paragraph is to prevent the imposition of multiple taxes upon a single utility charge during the transition period from the prior telephone users tax and cable television users tax to the new communication users’ tax (which transition period ends April 1, 2011) and to permit communications service providers, during that transition period, to satisfy their collection obligations by collecting either tax.

B.     Collection of Tax by Service Providers. Service providers shall begin to collect the tax imposed by this chapter as soon as feasible after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, but in no event later than permitted by Section 799 of the California Public Utilities Code.

C.     Judicial Determinations. In the event that a final court order should determine that the election enacting this chapter is invalid for whatever reason, or that any tax imposed under this chapter is invalid in whole or in part, then the taxes imposed under Sections 3.36.020 and 3.36.070 (unless repealed) shall automatically continue to apply with respect to any service for which the tax levied pursuant to this chapter has been determined to be invalid. Such automatic continuation shall be effective beginning as of the first date of service (or billing date) for which the tax imposed by this chapter is invalid. However, in the event of an invalidation, any tax (other than a tax that is ordered refunded by the court or is otherwise refunded by the City) paid by a person with respect to a service and calculated pursuant to this chapter shall be deemed to satisfy the tax imposed under Sections 3.36.020 and 3.36.070 on that service, so long as the tax is paid with respect to a service provided no later than six months subsequent to the date on which the final court order is published. (3883-12/10)

 

Chapter 3.40 COMMUNITY ENRICHMENT LIBRARY FEE
3.40.010 Declaration of Necessity
A.    The City Council finds that the rapid development of land in the City of Huntington Beach has created a need for improvements and facilities for the public City libraries, which cannot be met by the ordinary revenues of the City. The need for such improvements results directly from the increase in density in the City by the development of land that has heretofore been vacant and by construction of additional residential, commercial and industrial units on land heretofore developed. The most practical and equitable method of collecting the funds necessary to provide such public improvements is to impose an excise tax upon the construction of new residential, commercial and industrial units or buildings in the City.

B.     The City Council of the City of Huntington Beach hereby declares that this chapter shall be known as the “Community Enrichment Library Fee” and is adopted to provide a tax upon the construction of new residential, commercial and industrial units or buildings in the City. (2297-6/78, 3827-4/09, 3879-6/10)

 

3.40.020 Definitions
For the purpose of this chapter, the words defined in this section shall have the meanings assigned to them unless from the context it appears that a different meaning is intended. Words not defined in this section shall have the definitions as given in the Huntington Beach Building Code.

“Commercial unit” shall mean any space in a building or structure designed or intended to be occupied or used for business or commercial purposes, including sleeping rooms in hotels and motels without kitchens or kitchen facilities.

“Industrial unit” shall mean any space in a building or structure designed or intended for manufacturing, processing, research, warehousing and similar use.

“Mobile home park” shall mean any area where one or more lots or spaces are owned or rented or held out for rent to be occupied by a house trailer, mobile home, camper or similar vehicle.

“Residential unit” shall mean a single-family dwelling, a dwelling unit in a duplex, apartment house or dwelling group, and any other place designed for human occupancy which contains a kitchen, and any space in a mobile home park designed or intended for a house trailer, mobile home, camper or similar vehicle. (2324-11/78, 3827-4/09, 3879-6/10)

 

3.40.030 Excise Tax
A.    Tax Imposed. An excise tax is hereby imposed upon the construction of any such residential, commercial and industrial unit, and mobile home park in the City as such groups of construction may be established by resolution. The amount of the excise tax shall be established by resolution of the City Council and shall not exceed $0.15 per square foot of floor area, as defined in the Huntington Beach Building Code, for all classes of new construction, including any area in a building designed for the parking of vehicles except for square footage within a parking structure containing required on-site parking. For mobile home parks, the square footage of floor area shall be calculated as only that portion of the lot indicated on the original construction plans for the mobile home proper and its carport.

B.     Due Date. The amount of tax due hereunder shall be due and payable at the time of issuance of the building permit for the construction of residential, commercial or industrial units or buildings, or for the construction or reconstruction of any mobile home park. If such tax is not fully paid on or before the due date the permit is issued, the tax or the amount thereof not paid shall thereupon become delinquent.

C.     Delinquency, Penalty, Interest. There shall be added to the tax for any unit or so much of the tax as becomes delinquent a penalty of 25% which shall thereupon become payable in the same manner as the tax. The tax and penalty shall bear interest at the rate of 0.60 of one percent per month until paid.

D.    Tax Credit. The City Council may in its discretion grant a total or partial credit against the building excise tax where a dedication of land and/or improvements thereto is offered in conjunction with the construction of the residential, commercial or industrial units.

E.     Exemption. The effective date for the issuance of any building permit otherwise subject to imposition of the tax imposed by this section shall relate to the date that actual construction was commenced or to the date any foundation permit was actually issued by the City, whichever event first occurred. Building permits so issued prior to the enactment of this section are exempt from the tax imposed hereby. (2297-6/78, 2324-11/78, 2720-9/84, 3827-4/09, 3879-6/10)

 

3.40.040 Operative Date
The tax imposed by this chapter shall apply to the construction of all residential, commercial and industrial units, and mobile home parks for which a building or construction permit is issued on or after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. (2297-6/78, 3827-4/09, 3879-6/10)

 

3.40.050 Exemptions
The following are excluded from the tax imposed by this chapter:

A.    The construction of any building by a nonprofit corporation exclusively for religious, educational, hospital or charitable purposes.

B.     Any residential unit structural additions or modifications which cause less than a 50% increase in the existing gross floor space. Such additions or modifications which cause a 50% or more increase in the existing gross floor space shall subject all of the added gross floor space to the tax imposed by this chapter.

C.     The construction of any building or unit by any bank, including national banking associations, pursuant to Article XIII, Section 27 of the Constitution of the State of California.

D.    The construction of any building by an “insurer,” as that term is defined in Article XIII, Section 28 of the Constitution of the State of California.

E.     The construction and occupancy of any building by the United States or any department or agency thereof; by the State of California or any department, agency or political subdivision thereof. (2297-6/78, Ord. 2299-7/78, 3827-4/09, 3879-6/10)

 

3.40.060 Tax Liability—Enforcement
The taxes imposed by this chapter are due from the person by or on behalf of whom a residential, commercial or industrial unit or building or a mobile home park is constructed, whether such person is the owner or a lessee of the land upon which the construction is to occur. The City Treasurer shall collect the tax and any penalty and interest due hereunder. The full amount due under this chapter shall constitute a debt to the City of Huntington Beach. An action for the collection thereof may be commenced in the name of the City in any court having jurisdiction of the cause. (2297-6/78, 3751-11/06, 3827-4/09, 3879-6/10)

 

3.40.070 Payment Required for Commencing Construction
No person shall begin the construction of any residential, commercial or industrial unit or building or any mobile home park in the City without first having paid the tax and any penalty and interest due the City or if any fees or taxes are due to the City under this chapter. (2297-6/78, 3751-11/06, 3827-4/09, 3879-6/10)

 

3.40.080 Payment Required for Occupancy
No occupancy shall be issued for, and no person shall occupy or offer for occupancy, any residential, commercial or industrial unit or building or any space in a mobile home park in the City unless the tax and any penalty and interest imposed upon the construction and occupancy thereof by this chapter have been paid. (2297-6/78, 3827-4/09, 3879-6/10)

 

3.40.090 Refunds
Any tax, penalty or interest paid to the City under this chapter for any building or unit of a building or mobile home park which is not constructed shall be refunded upon application of the taxpayer and a showing to the satisfaction of the Director of Finance that the building or unit has not been constructed or construction commenced and that the building permit issued for the building or unit has been cancelled or surrendered or otherwise does not authorize the construction of the building or unit. (2297-6/78, 3827-4/09, 3879-6/10)

 

3.40.100 Disposition of Proceeds—Fund Created
All proceeds from the tax, penalty and interest collected under this chapter shall be paid into a special capital outlays fund of the City entitled “Library Service Fund” for acquiring, constructing, equipping, maintaining and staffing of libraries, and other City Council-approved cultural endeavors, which fund is hereby created. (2297-7/78, 3827-4/09, 3879-6/10)

 

Chapter 3.44 PIPELINE FRANCHISES
Note
*       Note: §§ 3.44.090, 3.44.140 and 3.44.150 repealed by Ord. 3889-9/10.

 

Article I. General Provisions and Definitions
3.44.010 Short Title
This chapter shall be known and cited as “Pipeline Franchise Ordinance.” (2319-10/78)

 

3.44.020 General Provisions
Every franchise hereafter granted by the City to lay, construct, maintain, operate, renew, repair, change the size of, remove or abandon in place pipes and pipelines for the collection, transportation or distribution of oil, gas, gasoline, petroleum, wet gas, hydrocarbon substances, or other substances, together with all manholes, valves, appurtenances and service connections necessary or convenient for the operation of said pipes or pipelines including conduits, cathodic protection devices, wires, cables and other appurtenances necessary or convenient for the exercise of the franchisee’s business, in, under, along or across any and all streets within the City of Huntington Beach except as otherwise provided in the particular franchise agreement, shall be granted upon and be subject to the rules, regulations, restrictions and terms and conditions of this chapter, in addition to those rules, regulations, restrictions, terms and provisions set forth in the particular franchise agreement. (2319-10/78, 3889-9/10)

 

3.44.025 Franchise Required When
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to exercise any privilege or franchise to lay or maintain any pipes or conduits in or under any public street, or alley in the City, for the transmission of gas, water, heat, steam, or other substance or to exercise any franchise or privilege for the erection or maintenance, in or upon any public street or alley in the City, of any telephone, telegraph, electric light or power poles, wires, or system, or for the erection of any pole or wire for the purpose of transmitting electrical energy or current, without first having procured a franchise to do so unless such person, firm or corporation is entitled to do so by direct and unlimited authority of the Constitution of the state or the Constitution of the laws of the United States. (3850-1/10)

 

3.44.030 Pole Lines
Nothing in this chapter or in any franchise agreement granting such a franchise shall be construed to permit the grantee to construct new poles or other facilities aboveground. (2319-10/78)

 

3.44.040 Definitions
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein:

“Council” shall mean City Council of the City of Huntington Beach.

“Code” shall mean the Huntington Beach Municipal Code.

“Department” shall mean the Public Works Department of the City of Huntington Beach.

“Director” shall mean the Public Works Director of the City of Huntington Beach.

“Franchisee” or “grantee” shall mean the person to whom the franchise is granted, and any person to whom it is lawfully assigned.

“Facilities” or “appurtenances” shall mean all property owned or used by the franchisee, in connection with the franchise, including but not limited to, pipelines, pump stations, and service connection with the franchisee’s facilities, whether installed by the franchisee as named or originally granted under this franchise or its predecessors or assignors, erected, constructed, laid, operated or maintained in, upon, over, under, along or across any street pursuant to any right or privilege granted by the franchise.

“Franchise payment period” shall mean the time period between the effective date of the franchise agreement granting the franchise and December 31st of the same calendar year, and each calendar year thereafter, during the life of the franchise.

“Franchise report period” in all cases shall mean the time period between the effective date of the franchise agreement granting the franchise through and including December 31st of that calendar year, and each calendar year thereafter, during the life of the franchise.

“Highway” or “street” shall mean any public highway, freeway (except a state freeway), street, road, alley, lane or court or other public easement, and above and below the same, which now exists or which may hereafter exist in the City of Huntington Beach.

“Main” shall mean any pipeline or conduit laid in, along or approximately parallel with any street for the collection, transmission or distribution of any hydrocarbon substances.

“Major street” shall mean any street or portion thereof designated as a major secondary highway in the circulation element of the Huntington Beach General Plan.

“Minor street” shall mean all streets in the City other than those designated as “major” or “secondary highways” in the circulation element of the Huntington Beach General Plan.

“Person” shall mean any individual, person, firm, partnership or corporation.

“Section” shall mean a section of the Huntington Beach Municipal Code, unless some other code or statute is mentioned.

“Service connection” shall mean the wire, pipes, or conduits connecting the building or place where the service or hydrocarbons supplied by the franchisee is used or delivered, or is made available for use or delivery, with the supply line or supply main in the highway or with such supply line or supply main on private property.

“Shall” is mandatory; “may” is permissive. (2319-10/78, 3889-9/10)

 

3.44.050 Term
Unless the franchise agreement granting the franchise provides otherwise, the term of the franchise shall be 15 years. (2319-10/78, 3889-9/10)

 

3.44.060 Acceptance of Franchise Agreement
The franchisee shall enter into a written agreement with the City of Huntington Beach which grants the franchise and sets forth the terms and provisions therein. The franchisee shall, within 30 days after the passage of the ordinance granting the franchise, file with the City Clerk of the City of Huntington Beach a written acceptance of the terms and conditions of said ordinance. The franchise shall be null and void if the written acceptance is not filed within the prescribed time. (2319-10/78, 3889-9/10)

 

3.44.070 Nonexclusive Franchise
The granting of the franchise shall not be construed to prevent the City from granting identical or similar franchise to any person other than the franchisee. Nothing herein contained shall ever be construed so as to exempt the franchisee from compliance with all ordinances, rules or regulations of the City now in effect or which may be hereafter adopted which are not inconsistent with the terms of the franchise. (2319-10/78, 3889-9/10)

 

3.44.080 Maps
Within 90 days following the date on which any facilities or appurtenances have been laid, removed or abandoned under the franchise, the franchisee shall file a map or maps with the department showing the accurate “as built” location, depth, and size of the facilities or appurtenances so laid, removed or abandoned. (2319-10/78, 3889-9/10)

 

3.44.100 Liability Insurance
The policy of liability insurance required by this chapter shall be issued to franchisee and name the City and its officers, agents, and employees as additional insureds. It shall further indemnify for all liability for personal and bodily injury, death and damage to property arising from activities conducted pursuant to the franchise by providing coverage thereof, including, but not limited to:

A.    Negligent acts or omissions of franchisee and the agents, servants and employees thereof, committed in the conduct of franchise operations.

B.     Provide a combined single limit liability insurance in the amount of $5,000,000.00.

C.     Be noncancellable without 30 days’ written notice thereof directed to the City of Huntington Beach. (2319-10/78, 3889-9/10)

 

3.44.105 Environmental Impairment Liability Insurance
The policy of environmental impairment liability insurance or other environmental insurance policy as approved at the sole discretion of the City as required by this chapter shall ensure liability for environmental impairment including cleanup cost endorsed for “sudden and accidental” contamination or pollution. Such coverage shall be in an amount and form to meet all applicable state and federal requirements but in no event less than $5,000,000.00 per occurrence.

A.    If written with an annual aggregate limit, the policy limit should be three times the above-required occurrence limit.

B.     If written on a claims made form, such insurance shall be endorsed to provide an extended reporting period of not less than two years following termination or cancellation of this franchise. (3889-9/10)

 

3.44.110 Workers’ Compensation Insurance
The policy of workers’ compensation insurance, required by this chapter, shall:

A.    Have been previously approved as to substance and form by the California Insurance Commissioner.

B.     Cover all employees of franchisee who in the course and scope of their employment to conduct or do work pursuant to the franchise operations.

C.     Provide for every benefit and payment presently or hereinafter conferred by Division 4 of the Labor Code of the State of California upon an injured employee, including vocational rehabilitation and death benefits.

D.    Be noncancellable without 30 days’ written notice thereof directed to the City of Huntington Beach. (2319-10/78, 3889-9/10)

 

3.44.120 Insurance—Filing
Franchisee shall file with the City Clerk prior to commencement of any franchise operations either certified copies of said policies, or a certificate of self-insurance coverage subject to the approval of the City Attorney and Risk Manager, or a certificate of insurance for each of the required policies executed by the company issuing the policy, certifying that the policy is in force and providing the following information:

A.    The policy number.

B.     The date upon which the policy will become effective and the date upon which it will expire.

C.     The names of the insured and any additional insureds.

D.    Subject of the insurance.

E.     The type of coverage provided by the insurance.

F.     Amount of limit of coverage provided by the insurance.

G.    A description of all endorsements that form a part of the policy.

H.    In addition to the insurance requirements in this section the insured shall also agree to defend, indemnify and hold harmless the City of Huntington Beach against loss, damage or expense by reason of any suits, claims, demands, and/or judgments caused by insured in the performance of the franchise as provided in Section 3.44.220.

Any franchise operation shall not commence until franchisee has complied with the aforementioned provisions of this section, and any such operation shall be suspended during any period that franchisee fails to maintain said policies in full force and effect. (2319-10/78, 3889-9/10, 4034-1/15)

 

3.44.130 Faithful Performance Bond
On or before the effective date of the franchise agreement granting the franchise, franchisee shall file and thereafter at all times during the life of the franchise keep on file with the City Treasurer a corporate surety bond approved by the City Attorney running to the City in the penal sum of $100,000.00. In the event that said bond, after it has been so filed, shall at any time during the life of the franchise become insufficient, in the sole opinion of the City Council, the franchisee agrees to renew said bond within 10 days after written notice to do so from the City Treasurer. At such time, the bond shall be increased by a rate set forth by City Council, with a surety to be approved by the City Attorney, conditioned that franchisee shall well and truly observe, fulfill and perform each condition of the franchise and that in case of any breach of condition of the bond the whole amount of the penal sum shall be deemed to be liquidated damages and shall be recoverable from the principal and sureties of the bond. If said bond is not filed prior to the effective date of the ordinance granting the franchise, the award of the franchise may be set aside and the ordinance granting the franchise repealed at any time prior to the filing of said bond and any money paid in consideration for said award of franchise shall be deemed forfeited. In the event that said bond, after it has been so filed, shall at any time during the life of the franchise become insufficient, franchisee agrees to renew said bond, subject to the approval of the City Attorney, within 10 days after written notice to do so from the director. (2319-10/78, 3889-9/10)

 

3.44.160 Forfeiture
The franchise is granted and shall be held and enjoined upon each and every condition contained in the franchise agreement, including such conditions contained herein as are incorporated by reference in said franchise agreement, and shall be strictly construed against the grantee. Any neglect, failure or refusal to comply with any of the terms and provisions of the franchise agreement shall constitute grounds for the suspension or forfeiture of the franchise, shall give to the grantee not less than 30 days’ notice in writing of any default thereunder. If the grantee does not, within the noticed period, begin the work of compliance or after such beginning does not prosecute the work with due diligence to completion, the Council may hold a hearing, at which the grantee shall have the right to appear and be heard, and thereupon the Council may determine whether such conditions are material and essential to the franchise and whether the grantee is in default with respect thereto and may declare the franchise suspended or forfeited. Notice of said hearing shall be given to the grantee by certified mail not less than five days before said hearing. (2319-10/78)

 

3.44.170 Value of Franchise
The grantee of any franchise awarded to a public utility, by accepting the terms and conditions thereof, stipulates and agrees that in any proceeding for the purpose of adjusting the rates of the grantee, no greater value shall be placed upon the franchise than the actual cash paid therefor by the grantee. (2319-10/78)

 

3.44.180 State Highways
If any street or portion thereof becomes a state highway, except for the right to continue to collect franchise payments in such other rights as by law remain with the City, the state shall succeed to all rights reserved to the City by the franchise. (2319-10/78, 3889-9/10)

 

3.44.190 Eminent Domain
No franchise granted by the City shall in any way impair or affect the right of the City or any successor in authority to acquire the property of the grantee by purchase or condemnation, and nothing contained in such a franchise shall be construed to contract away, modify or abridge either for a term or in perpetuity the City’s right of eminent domain in respect to any public utility. (2319-10/78, 3889-9/10)

 

3.44.200 Publication Costs
The grantee shall pay to the City within 30 days after receiving a statement therefor, all advertising and publishing costs, including the cost of publishing the granting of the franchise, if necessary. (2319-10/78, 3889-9/10)

 

3.44.210 Assignment
The grantee shall not directly or indirectly sell, transfer, assign or lease the franchise or any part thereof, or allow any other person or entity to operate any pipeline or related facility subject to the franchise, except with the written approval of the Council which may be withheld at its sole and absolute discretion. Such sale, transfer, assignment, or lease shall be made only by filing with the Council a copy of the duly executed instrument of such sale, transfer, assignment or lease and a written request for the consent of the Council to such sale, transfer, assignment or lease. If such duly executed instrument and such written request is not filed with the Council before the expiration of 30 days after the effective date of such sale, transfer, assignment or lease, then, upon the expiration of said 30 days, the franchise shall be subject to forfeiture and the Council may, without notice, revoke the franchise. As a condition to the granting of consent to such sale, transfer, assignment or lease, the Council may impose such additional terms and conditions upon the franchisee and upon the grantee or assignee, which the Council may deem to be in the public interest. Such additional terms and conditions shall be expressed by Council resolution. Nothing herein contained shall be construed to grant to the grantee the right to sell, transfer, assign or lease the franchise, or any part thereof, except in the manner aforesaid. This section applies to any assignment, whether by operation of law, by a voluntary act of the grantee or otherwise and includes a transfer of more than 50% of the voting stock of any corporate grantee or the change in identity of any general partner of a franchisee which is a partnership, whether to a third party or to any subsidiary, parent, or affiliated agency of franchisee. (2319-10/78, 3889-9/10)

 

3.44.220 Hold Harmless
A.    The grantee shall be responsible to the City and shall defend, indemnify and hold harmless the City and its officers and employees from all damages or liability arising from the use, operation or maintenance of the facilities erected, constructed, laid, operated or maintained thereunder.

B.     Franchisee hereby agrees to protect, defend, indemnify and hold harmless City, its officers, elected or appointed officials, employees, agents, and volunteers from and against any and all claims, damages, losses, expenses, judgments, demands defense costs, and consequential damage or liability of any kind or nature, however caused, including those resulting from death or injury to franchisee’s employees and damage to franchisee’s property, arising directly or indirectly out of the obligations or operations herein undertaken by franchisee, caused in whole or in part by any negligent act or omission of the franchisee, any subfranchisees, anyone directly or indirectly employed by any of them or anyone for whose acts any of them may be liable, including but not limited to concurrent active or passive negligence, except where caused by the active negligence, sole negligence, or willful misconduct of the City. Franchisee shall conduct all defense at its sole cost and expense and the City shall approve selection of franchisee’s counsel. The City shall be reimbursed for all costs and attorney’s fees incurred by the City in enforcing this obligation. This indemnity shall apply to all claims and liability regardless of whether any insurance policies are applicable. The policy limits do not act as a limitation upon the amount of indemnification to be provided by franchisee. (2319-10/78, 3889-9/10)

 

3.44.230 Standards
All facilities erected, constructed, laid, operated or maintained under the provisions of the franchise shall be erected, constructed, laid, operated or maintained in accordance with and conforming to all the ordinances, codes, rules and regulations now or hereafter adopted by or prescribed by the Council. (2319-10/78)

 

3.44.231 Conflicting Improvements
If the City or any other public entity constructs or maintains any storm drain, sewer structure, or other facility or improvement under or across any facility of the grantee maintained pursuant to the ordinance, the grantee shall provide at no expense to the City or other public entity such support as shall be reasonably required to support, maintain and protect grantee’s facility. (3889-9/10)

 

3.44.240 Defective Facilities
If any portion of any street shall be damaged by reason of defective facilities laid or constructed under the franchise, the grantee shall, at its own expense, repair any such defect and put such street in as good condition as it was before such damage was incurred, to the satisfaction of the City. If the grantee, within 10 days after receipt of written notice from the City, instructing it to repair such damage, shall fail to commence to comply with such instructions, or, thereafter, shall fail diligently to prosecute such work to completion, then the City immediately may do whatever work is necessary to carry out said instructions at the cost and expense of the grantee, which cost and expense, by the acceptance of the franchise, the grantee agrees to pay upon demand. If such damage constitutes an immediate danger to the public health or safety requiring the immediate repair thereof, the City without notice may repair such damage and the grantee agrees to pay the reasonable cost thereof upon demand. (2319-10/78, 3889-9/10)

 

3.44.250 Hazardous Substances
Prior to the issuance of any excavation permit for the construction or installation of any pipeline for the transmission of flammable liquids or gases, written approval shall be obtained from the director. Said approval may be withheld at the sole and absolute discretion of the director. Said approval may be based on the determination that no undue fire hazard will be created to life or property in the areas through which the proposed pipeline will be located. To make such determination, consideration shall be given to:

A.    Type of hydrocarbon to be transmitted.

B.     Density of population or structural development in the area through which the pipeline will be located.

C.     Adequacy of water supplies for fire control purposes.

D.    Extent of available public fire protection facilities.

E.     Number and location of shutoff valves in line. (2319-10/78, 3889-9/10)

 

3.44.251 Damage to Public Property Generally
Any damage done directly or indirectly to any public property by grantee, in exercising directly or indirectly any right, power, or privilege under this franchise, or in performing any duty under or pursuant to the provisions of this section, shall be promptly repaired by grantee at its sole cost and expense to as good a condition as it was before such damage was incurred, and to the satisfaction of the director. If the franchisee, within 10 days after receipt of written notice from the City, instructing it to repair such damage, shall fail to commence to comply with such instructions, or thereafter, shall fail to diligently prosecute such work to completion, the City immediately may do work necessary to carry out said instructions and the cost and expense of the franchisee, which cost and expense, by the acceptance of the franchise, the franchisee agrees to pay upon demand. If such damage constitutes an immediate danger to the public health or safety requiring the immediate repair thereof, the City without notice may repair such damage and the franchisee shall pay all costs incurred. (3889-9/10)

 

Article II. Compensation
3.44.252 Public Utility Not Transmitting Oil or Products Thereof
The franchisee of any franchise awarded to a public utility or non-public utility not transmitting oil or products thereof, as consideration for such franchise, shall annually pay to the City in lawful money of the United States, within 30 days after the end of each calendar year and during the life of the franchise for each and every year, including the year of granting the franchise a franchise fee negotiated as part of the franchise agreement (unless preempted by state law) arising from the use, operation or possession of the franchise. (3889-9/10)

 

3.44.253 Length
Whenever the length of any wire, pipe or conduit is a factor in calculating any payment due under any franchise granted by the City, all service connections shall be excluded in determining such lengths. (3889-9/10)

 

3.44.255 Public Utility Transmitting Oil or Products Thereof
The franchisee of any franchise awarded for a pipeline transmitting oil or products thereof which has been determined by the Public Utilities Commission to be a public utility, as consideration for such franchise, shall, within 30 days after the end of each calendar year and during the life of the franchise for each and every year, including the year of granting the franchise, annually pay to the City in lawful money of the United States, a fee in the following amounts as required by state law. In the event these referenced fees increase pursuant to state law, the fees referenced herein shall increase by the same:

 

Pipelines with an Internal Diameter of:

Base Rate Per Lineal Foot

0-4 inches

.088

6 inches

.132

8 inches

.176

10 inches

.220

12 inches

.264

14 inches

.308

16 inches

.352

18 inches

.396

20 inches

.440

22 inches

.484

24 inches

.528

26 inches

.572

28 inches

.616

30 inches

.660

 

For pipelines with an internal diameter not listed above, the fees shall be in the same proportion to the fees of a 12-inch-diameter pipe as the diameter of the unlisted pipe is to 12 inches.

The amount of the fee or charge provided for in this section shall be multiplied by the Consumer Price Index, All Urban Consumers (CPI-U) for the Los Angeles-Riverside-Orange County Area for the month of September immediately preceding the month in which payment is due and payable, and divided by the Consumer Price Index, All Urban Consumers (CPI-U for the Los Angeles-Riverside-Orange County Area for June 30, 1989 (1982-84=100.0)). (3889-9/10)

 

3.44.256 Non-Public Utility Franchises
The franchisee of any franchises awarded to other than a public utility transmitting oil or oil products thereof, as further consideration for such franchise including the extension, renewal, or continuation of a previously granted franchise, shall pay to the City in lawful money of the United States the following fees. (3889-9/10)

 

3.44.260 Basic Granting Fee
In the event of an initial grant of franchise or franchises which extend, renew, or continue previously granted franchises, a base granting fee shall be required as established, and amended from time to time, by resolution of the City Council. (2319-10/78, 2676-2/84)

 

3.44.270 Base Annual Fee
A base annual fee shall be paid by franchisee within 30 days after the end of each calendar year including the year of granting the franchises, according to the franchise payment period as defined in this chapter, in the following amounts:

 

Pipelines with an Internal Diameter of:

Amount Per Lineal Foot

0-4 inches

.590

6 inches

.895

8 inches

1.197

10 inches

1.485

12 inches

1.787

14 inches

2.092

16 inches

2.377

18 inches

2.682

20 inches

2.984

22 inches

3.272

24 inches

3.574

26 inches

3.879

28 inches

4.164

30 inches

4.469

 

The base annual rate applicable to pipelines with an internal diameter falling between incremental size categories shall pay a rate determined by adding the price corresponding to the lower size to a figure computed by multiplying the difference between the higher and lower price times the multiplier. The multiplier will be determined by dividing the difference between the size of the pipe and the lower size category by the difference between the two size categories. In determining the number of feet of pipeline upon which the annual fee will be computed, the greatest number of feet of pipeline covered by the franchise during the calendar year for which payment is due will be utilized. The base annual fee shall be paid no later than 30 days and a penalty at the rate of 10% per month or fraction thereof beyond the payment date shall be charged, but in no event shall said penalty exceed 50%.

The City reserves the right to adjust the base fees established hereunder at any time after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. (2319-10/78, 2676-2/84, 3889-9/10)

 

3.44.271 Payments to City
Payment is due 30 days after the City’s invoice date and a 10% per month late penalty and 18% annual interest cost will be charged for any delinquent payment. The City will also withhold any permits/not renew licenses if any payment is delinquent. Payments should be mailed to the City Treasurer, City of Huntington Beach, P.O. Box 711, Huntington Beach, CA 92648-0711. (3889-9/10)

 

3.44.280 Base Construction Charges
The holder of the franchise shall pay at the time of installation, relocation or replacement of any segment of pipe or pipeline, or any other facility covered by the franchise agreement, a base construction charge established, and amended from time to time, by resolution of the City Council. (2319-10/78, 2676-2/84)

 

3.44.290 Adjustments—Base Annual Fee
The amount of each base annual fee as specified in the above section shall be revised every year, in accordance with the following formula:

A.    The Consumer Price Index, All Urban Consumers (CPI-U) for the Los Angeles-Riverside-Orange County area (1982-84=100) as published by the United States Bureau of Labor Statistics (“Bureau”), shall be defined as the “index,” and such index as it stands on August 1, 2010 shall be defined as the “base index” and the index for the month of September immediately preceding the fee payment date shall be defined as the “current index.”

B.     If the current index differs from the base index, then the base annual fee shall increase or decrease by the percentage increase or decrease between the current index and the base index, provided that, if the current index drops below the base index, no adjustment shall be made. The base annual fee shall be multiplied by an adjustment factor determined by dividing the current index by the base index.

For example, if the base index is 185.0 and the current index is 190.5, the annual franchise fee shall be (i.e. 190.5/185.0 = 1.0297), times the base annual fee; provided, however, under no circumstances shall the multiplying factor be less than one, nor shall the annual franchise fee calculated using said factor, be less than the base annual fee. If the Bureau shall revise the index, the parties hereto shall accept the method of revision for conversion recommended by the Bureau; and

C.     If the Bureau discontinues the preparation or publication of the CPI-U, All Urban Consumers for the Los Angeles-Riverside-Orange County area (1982-84=100), and if no transposition table prepared by the Bureau is available, then the amount of each annual franchise fee shall be computed by reference to such other price index as may be chosen by the City, and the City shall be the sole judge of comparability of successive indices and its determination on this point shall be final and conclusive. In no event shall the annual franchise fee adjustment by reference to such other price index be less than the base annual fee as set forth herein.

D.    Publication and Administrative Issuance Costs. The franchisee shall pay to the City within 30 days after receiving a statement therefor, all administrative and other costs incurred by the City processing the application for a franchise, including but not limited to the preparation of any reports, statements or studies pursuant to the California Environmental Quality Act (Public Resources Code Section 21000, et seq.) and any similar federal statute, or any successor statute, and for any and all advertising and publishing costs, including the cost of publishing the ordinance, if necessary, incurred in connection with the granting of the franchise.

E.     The base annual fee may also be amended from time to time by resolution of the City Council. (3889-9/10)

 

3.44.300 Proration of Payments
In the event of abandonment of facilities with the approval of the City as elsewhere in this chapter provided, or in the event of removal of such facilities by the franchisee, or in the event of the grant of a franchise with an initial franchise payment period of less than one year, the annual franchise fee required under the aforementioned sections shall be prorated for the calendar year in which such removal or abandonment or grant occurs as of the end of the calendar month in which removed, abandoned or granted. (2319-10/78, 3889-9/10)

 

3.44.310 Records
A.    Franchisee shall keep and preserve for a period of five years subsequent to the date of the most recent franchise fee determination all the records necessary to determine the amount of such franchise fee.

B.     At all reasonable times, the franchisee shall permit the City or its duly authorized representative to examine all property of the franchisee erected, constructed, laid, operated or maintained pursuant to the franchise, together with any appurtenant property of the franchisee, and to examine and transcribe any and all books, accounts, papers, maps, and other records kept or maintained by the franchisee or under its control which concern the operations, affairs, transactions, property or financial condition of the franchisee with respect thereto. Said records shall be made available to the City at a location in the County of Orange. (2319-10/78, 3889-9/10)

 

Article III. Construction
3.44.320 Construction Requirements
Pipelines and appurtenances shall be constructed and maintained in a good workmanlike manner in conformity with applicable law and the terms and conditions of any City ordinance, rule or regulation now, or as hereafter amended, adopted or prescribed by the City. All pipelines and appurtenances will be installed in accordance with the latest revision of the “American Standard Code of Pressure Piping ASA B31.4.” (2319-10/78, 3889-9/10)

 

3.44.330 New Installation or Replacement
New installations or replacements of pipelines and appurtenances and all other facilities necessary for the installation, operation, maintenance, and safety of pipelines and conduits shall be laid and maintained only pursuant to applicable law and permit issued by the department. All such installations or replacements shall be reviewed by the director as to the most desirable location in the streets of the City and his or her decision shall be final and binding on the franchisee. (2319-10/78, 3889-9/10)

 

3.44.340 Permits
A.    Where the provisions of any City ordinance, resolution or regulation, which shall be in force at that time, require the issuance of an excavation, encroachment or other type of permit, the franchisee shall not commence any excavation or encroachment work under the franchise until it shall have obtained such permit from the department except in cases of emergency affecting public health, safety or welfare or the preservation of life or property, in which case the franchisee shall apply for such permit not later than the next business day.

B.     The application of the franchisee for such permit shall show the following facts: the length and proposed location of the pipeline and/or appurtenance intended to be installed, and such other facts as the department may require. The franchisee shall pay any and all permit inspection fees required by the department. (2319-10/78, 3889-9/10)

 

3.44.350 Work On and Restoration of Streets
The work of constructing, laying, replacing, maintaining, repairing or removing all pipelines and appurtenances authorized under the provisions of this chapter in, over, under, along or across any street shall be conducted with the least possible hindrance to the use of the street for purposes of travel. As soon as such work is completed, all portions of the street which have been excavated or otherwise damaged thereby shall promptly and in a workmanlike manner be repaired, replaced or restored and placed in as good condition as before the commencement of such work and shall be done to the satisfaction of the director at the expense of the franchisee, and in accordance with the terms and conditions of any City ordinance, resolution or regulation. For streets that have been rehabilitated within three years prior to the proposed work, the City shall require the resurfacing, or other treatment, of the entire lane widths of the street as directed by the director. For those streets that have not been rehabilitated by the City within three years prior to the proposed work, the restoration shall be in full compliance with City requirements. All restoration, repair or replacement work shall be done to the satisfaction of the director at the expense of the franchisee in accordance with all applicable law. In the event that the franchisee shall fail or neglect to make such highway repair, replacement or restoration work, 10 days after notice therefor has been given franchisee by the director, the City may repair, replace or restore said highway at the expense of franchisee. Franchisee agrees to pay to the City the cost of performing such work. The amount so chargeable shall be the direct cost of such work plus the current rate of overhead being charged by the City for reimbursable work. (2319-10/78, 3889-9/10)

 

3.44.360 Failure to Comply Timely
A.    In the event that the franchisee fails to complete the work within the time specified in the permit, the City may require the franchisee to pay to the City not more than $500.00 per day as liquidated damages for each day construction extends beyond the time specified in the permit.

B.     Whenever the franchisee fails to complete any work required by the terms and provisions of the franchise, and the permits issued thereunder, within the time limits required thereby, the City may complete or cause to be completed any and all such work at the expense of the franchisee. The franchisee agrees to pay to the City the cost of performing such work. The amount so chargeable to franchisee shall be the direct cost of such work plus the current rate of overhead being charged by the City for reimbursable work. (2319-10/78, 3889-9/10)

 

3.44.370 Completion Statement
Upon the completion of the construction of any pipelines or other facilities constructed pursuant to said franchise, the franchisee shall submit a statement to the director, identifying the permit or permits issued by the department, the total length of pipeline, pipeline material, diameter of pipeline, the construction of which was authorized under such permit or permits, and the total length of pipeline or facilities actually laid and as-built drawings. (2319-10/78, 3889-9/10)

 

3.44.371 Responsibility
In addition to any indemnification set forth herein, franchisee shall be specifically responsible to the City and shall save the City, its officers, agents, and employees, free and harmless from all damages or liability arising from any damage or injury suffered by any person by reason of any excavation or obstruction being improperly guarded during any work authorized pursuant to the franchise or the failure or neglect of the franchisee to properly perform, maintain, or protect any phase of such work. (3889-9/10)

 

3.44.380 Facilities
The franchisee shall have the right to construct, maintain and repair such traps, manholes, conduits, valves, appliances, attachments and other facilities as may be necessary or convenient for the proper maintenance and operation of the pipelines under said franchise, and said facilities shall be kept flush with the surface of the street and so located as to conform to applicable law including any ordinance, resolution or regulation of the City, or of any permit issued by the department in regard thereto and shall not interfere with the use of the street for travel. The franchisee shall have the right subject to such ordinances, resolutions and regulations as are now or may hereafter be in force, to make all necessary excavations in said street for the construction, maintenance and repair of said facilities; provided, however, that the franchisee shall first obtain an excavation permit from the department for doing any such work. (2319-10/78, 3889-9/10)

 

3.44.386 Shoring
The franchisee shall provide at its sole cost such shoring or other support as shall be reasonably required to support, maintain, and protect franchisee’s facilities in connection with any storm drain or sewer construction by the City or in connection with any facility constructed by the City, or by any successor agency. (3889-9/10)

 

3.44.390 Ordinary Repair
The franchisee shall be privileged to excavate in the road or street for line repair for the number of days agreed upon by the franchisee and the department; provided, however, that the franchisee shall first obtain an excavation permit from the department for the doing of any such work. (2319-10/78, 3889-9/10)

 

3.44.391 Relocation of Pipelines and Facilities
A.    The City reserves the right to change the grade, to change the width or to alter or change the location of any street over which the franchise is granted. If any of the pipelines, facilities or appurtenances heretofore or hereafter constructed, installed or maintained by the franchisee pursuant to the franchise on, along, under, over, in, upon or across any street are located in a manner which conflict in any way with the change of grade, traffic needs, operation, maintenance, improvements, repair, construction, reconstruction, widening, alteration or relocation of the street, the franchisee shall relocate permanently or temporarily any such facility at no expense to the City upon receipt of a written request from the director to do so, and shall commence such work on or before the day specified in such written request which date shall be not less than 30 days from receipt of such written request. Franchisee shall thereafter diligently prosecute such work to completion.

B.     The City reserves the right for itself, and all other public entities which are now or may later be established, to alter, relocate, and maintain subsurface or other facilities or improvements of any type or description in a governmental but not proprietary capacity within the streets over which the franchise is granted. If the City or any other public entity finds that the location or relocation of such facilities or improvements conflicts with the facilities laid, constructed or maintained under the franchise, whether such facilities were laid before or after the facilities of the City or such other public entity were laid, the franchisee of such franchise shall at no expense to the City or public entity, on or before the date specified in a written request from the director, which date shall be not less than 30 days after the receipt of such notice and request to do so, commence work to change the location either permanently or temporarily of all facilities so conflicting with such improvements to a permanent or temporary location in said streets to be approved by the director and thereafter diligently prosecute such work to completion. (3889-9/10)

 

3.44.400 Breaks or Leaks
If any portion of the street shall be damaged by reason of breaks or leaks in any pipe, conduit, or appurtenance constructed or maintained under the franchise, the franchisee thereof shall, at its own expense, immediately following written or oral notification thereof, promptly repair any such damage and put such street in as good condition as it was in before such damage or leak, all to the satisfaction of the department. The franchisee shall obtain an excavation permit from the department for the doing of any such work. (2319-10/78, 3889-9/10)

 

3.44.410 Emergency Equipment
At all times during the term of this franchise, the franchisee shall maintain or arrange for, on a 24-hour a day basis adequate emergency equipment and a properly trained emergency crew within a radius of 25 miles from any facilities installed or maintained pursuant hereto for the purpose of shutting off the pressure and the flow of contents of such facilities in the event of an emergency resulting from an earthquake, act of war, civil disturbance, fire, flood, or any other cause or nature whatsoever. (2319-10/78)

 

3.44.420 Removal or Abandonment of Facilities
A.    At the expiration, revocation or termination of this franchise or the permanent discontinuance of the use of all or a portion of its facilities, the franchisee shall, within 30 days thereafter make written application to the director for authority either: (1) to abandon all or a portion of such facilities in place; or (2) to remove all or a portion of such facilities. Such application shall describe the facilities desired to be abandoned or removed by reference to the map or maps required by Section 3.44.080 and shall also describe with reasonable accuracy the physical condition of such facilities. The director shall determine whether any abandonment or removal which is thereby proposed may be effected without detriment to the public interest and under what conditions such proposed abandonment or removal may be safely effected and shall then notify the franchisee of his or her determination. The franchisee shall pay to the City the cost of all tests required to determine the disposition of the application for abandonment removal.

B.     Within 30 days after receipt of such notice, the franchisee shall apply for a permit from the department to abandon or remove the facility and shall pay all fees and costs related thereto. Such permit is to contain the conditions of abandonment or removal as may be prescribed by the director. Any abandonment shall be conditioned, in part, upon the franchisee’s compliance with the provisions set forth in this chapter.

The franchisee shall, within 90 days after obtaining such permit, commence and diligently prosecute to completion the work authorized by the permit. If the franchisee applies for authority to abandon all or a portion of its facilities in place, and the director determines that abandonment in place of all or part of the facilities may be affected without detriment to the public interest, the franchisee shall pay to the City a fee which shall be computed as follows:

 

 

Pipelines with an Internal Diameter of

Amount per Lineal Foot

0-12 inches

$15.00

14-18 inches

$22.00

20-30 inches

$28.00

(2319-10/78, 3889-9/10)

 

3.44.430 Failure to Comply
A.    If any facilities to be abandoned “in place” subject to prescribed conditions shall not be abandoned in accordance with all such conditions the director may make additional appropriate orders, including an order that the franchisee shall remove any or all such facilities. The franchisee shall comply with such additional orders.

B.     In the event that the franchisee shall fail to comply with the terms and conditions of abandonment or removal as may be required by this chapter and within such time as may be prescribed by the director, the City may remove or cause to be removed such facilities at the franchisee’s expense. The franchisee shall pay to the City the cost of such work plus the current rate of overhead being charged by the City for reimbursable work.

C.     If, at the expiration, revocation or termination of this franchise, or of the permanent discontinuance of the use of all or a portion of its facilities, the franchisee shall, within 30 days thereafter, fail or refuse to make written application for the abovementioned authority, the director shall make the determination as to whether the facilities shall be abandoned in place or removed. The director shall then notify the franchisee of his or her determination. The franchisee shall thereafter comply with the provisions of subsection B of Section 3.44.420. (2319-10/78, 3889-9/10)

 

3.44.440 Abandonment “In Place” Conditions
Facilities abandoned “in place” shall be subject to the condition that if, at any time after the effective date of the abandonment, the director determines that the facility may interfere with any public project, franchisee or its successor in interest must remove the facility at its expense when requested to do so by the City or to pay the City for the cost of such removal. (2319-10/78, 3889-9/10)

 

3.44.447 Operation After Franchise Expiration—Revocable License
If a franchise is to expire within 60 days according to the franchise terms, and a new franchise has been requested, but has not yet been granted, the franchisee may request the Mayor and City Council to issue the franchisee a written revocable license, for a renewable term not to exceed 120 days from the expiration of the franchise, permitting the franchisee to continue to locate its existing facilities in or upon public property in the City during the term of the license. The Mayor and City Council may issue such a revocable license, subject to any restrictions, terms, and conditions (including compensation), without limitation, that they deem to be in the best interests of the City. Nothing herein requires the Mayor and City Council to grant such a revocable license, nor does the issuance of such a revocable license require that the Mayor and City Council grant the franchisee a new franchise. Upon request of the franchisee, the City Clerk shall provide a revocable license application form. (3850-1/10)

 

Article IV. Special Provisions for Petroleum Pipelines
3.44.450 Rights Granted
The franchisee granted a petroleum pipeline franchise shall have the right during the life thereof to transport oil, gas, gasoline, petroleum, wet gas and other hydrocarbon substances through the pipelines maintained under the franchise. If the franchisee or assignee later qualifies before the Public Utilities Commission of the State of California as a common carrier, the franchisee or assignee shall then have no right to continue to operate hereunder after the date of such qualification except with the consent of the Council, granted upon such additional terms and conditions as the Council may deem proper or as superseded by statute. Such additional terms and conditions shall be expressed by resolution. (2319-10/78, 3889-9/10)

 

3.44.460 Materials Used
All pipelines used or to be used for the transportation of oil, gas, gasoline, petroleum, wet gas and other hydrocarbon substances shall be first class and standard material as set forth by current American Petroleum Institute pipeline specifications. (2319-10/78)

 

3.44.470 Approvals
On all pipelines laid pursuant to the franchise, the director shall approve where flush-valve connections shall be placed in the line. The availability of adequate water supplies, the hydrocarbons transmitted in the line, and the location of control valves shall be considered when making such determination. Such flush-valve connections shall be installed in the manner prescribed by the director. (2319-10/78)

 

3.44.480 Reports
The franchisee during the life of the franchise, within 60 days after the expiration of each franchise payment period, shall:

A.    File with the director two copies of a verified report of the franchisee showing for the immediately preceding franchise period, the length of lines in streets, the internal diameter of such lines, the rate per foot per year and the total amount due the City.

B.     File with the director a report in triplicate, showing the permit number of each permit obtained for the installation of new mains during the immediately preceding franchise payment period, together with the length and size of said mains. On this report the franchisee shall show any change in franchise footage since the last franchise payment period segregating such footage as to new mains laid, old mains removed, old mains abandoned in place, and the footage of mains in territory annexed or incorporated since the last franchise payment period.

C.     All payments should be mailed to the City Treasurer, City of Huntington Beach, P.O. Box 711, Huntington Beach, CA 92648-0711. (2319-10/78, 3889-9/10)

 

3.44.490 Payments Due
Except for pipelines lawfully maintained other than by the authority granted by the franchise, the semi-annual payments shall accrue from the respective dates of installation, whether before or after the effective date of the franchise agreement, and such payments, together with the initial construction charges, if any, shall be due and payable semi-annually. (2319-10/78, 3889-9/10)

 

3.44.500 Cost of Relocation
Franchisee shall bear the costs of removing and relocating its facilities used and maintained under this franchise if made necessary by any lawful change of grade, alignment or width of any public street, way, alley or place, or for any public project, even if franchisee’s facilities are located on a private easement. If the grantee after reasonable notice, fails or refuses to relocate permanently or temporarily its facilities located in, on, upon, along, under, over, across or above any highway or to pave, surface, grade, repave, resurface or regrade as required, pursuant to any provision of the franchise, the City or other public entity may cause the work to be done and shall keep an itemized account of the entire cost thereof, and the grant shall hold harmless the City, its officers and employees from any liability which may arise or be claimed to arise from the moving, cutting, or alteration of any of the grantee’s facilities, or the turning on or off of water, oil, or other liquid, gas, or electricity. (2319-10/78, 3889-9/10)

 

Chapter 3.48 LATE CHARGES
3.48.010 Definitions
Except where the context otherwise requires, the definitions given in this section govern the construction of this chapter:

“City” means the City of Huntington Beach.

“Miscellaneous receivables” means all billings except those for taxes, business licenses, and water as otherwise governed by Titles 3, 5 and 14 of this Code, respectively.

“Person” means any domestic or foreign corporation, firm, association, syndicate, joint stock company, partnership of any kind, joint venture, club, trust, business, society, individual or municipal corporation. (2939-6/88)

 

3.48.020 Established
Late charges are established on all persons in the City on all miscellaneous receivables. A late charge will be applied to the miscellaneous receivable if payment is not received by the due date. (2939-6/88)

 

3.48.030 Due Date
The due date is 30 days after the billing date, unless otherwise agreed to by the City and the person billed. (2939-6/88)

 

3.48.040 Late Charge
An additional penalty of one and one-half percent per month shall be assessed for non-payment of any amount billed. (2939-6/88, 3139-6/92)

 

3.48.050 Application of Amounts Received
Amounts received shall apply first to any late charge, and then to the original amount billed. (2939-6/88)

 

Chapter 3.50 STATE VIDEO FRANCHISES
3.50.010 Purpose and Application
The State of California, through the Public Utilities Commission, is the sole authority with power to grant State video franchises pursuant to the Digital Infrastructure and Video Competition Act of 2006 (“DIVCA”), effective January 1, 2007, and codified at Public Utilities Code Section 5800 et seq., at the time of enactment of this chapter. The purposes of this chapter are to implement DIVCA in the City of Huntington Beach and to regulate video service providers, consistent with DIVCA and General Order 169, as amended, which the California Public Utilities Commission adopted to implement DIVCA. This chapter shall be applied to and interpreted consistently with any amendments to DIVCA. (4180-7/19)

 

3.50.020 Definitions
A.    Whenever a term or phrase is not defined in this section, or elsewhere in this Code, the most common dictionary definition is presumed to be correct.

B.     “Access” means that the State Video Franchise Franchisee is capable of providing video service at the household address using any technology, other than direct-to-home satellite service, providing two-way broadband Internet capability and video programming, content, and functionality, regardless of whether any customer has ordered service or whether the owner or landlord or other responsible person has granted access to the household. If more than one technology is utilized, the technologies shall provide similar two-way broadband Internet accessibility and similar video programming.

C.     “CPUC” means the California Public Utilities Commission.

D.    “DIVCA” means the Digital Infrastructure and Video Competition Act of 2006 (Ch. 700, Stats. 2006), as amended.

E.     “PEG channels” means public, educational, and governmental access channels.

F.     “State Video Franchisee” or “Franchisee” means any entity providing video service pursuant to a franchise issued by the CPUC pursuant to DIVCA.

G.    “Video service” means video programming services, cable service, or open video system service provided through facilities located at least in part in public rights-of-way without regard to delivery technology, including Internet protocol or other technology. This definition does not include: (1) any video programming provided by a commercial mobile service provider defined in Section 322(d) of Title 47 of the United States Code; or (2) video programming provided as part of, and via, a service that enables users to access content, information, electronic mail, or other services offered over the public Internet. (4180-7/19)

 

3.50.030 State Video Franchise Fees
Pursuant to Public Utilities Code Section 5840(a), any State Video Franchisee operating within the boundaries of the City shall pay a fee to the City equal to five percent of the State Video Franchisee’s gross revenues as defined in Public Utilities Code Section 5860(d). The franchise fee shall be remitted to the City quarterly, within 45 days after the end of the calendar quarter. Each payment shall be accompanied by a summary explaining the basis for the calculation of the State franchise fee. If the Franchisee does not pay the franchise fee when due, the Franchisee shall pay a late payment charge at a rate per year equal to the highest prime lending rate during the period of delinquency, plus one percent. If the Franchisee has overpaid the franchise fee, it may deduct the overpayment from its next quarterly payment. (4180-7/19)

 

3.50.040 PEG Support Fee
A.    Any State Video Franchisee operating within the boundaries of the City shall pay a PEG support fee to the City for capital support of public, educational, and/or governmental (“PEG”) purposes equal to one percent of gross revenues, as defined by Section 5870(n) of the California Public Utilities Code.

B.     Effective as of April 19, 2017, the City reauthorized the PEG support fee on State Video Franchisees to support PEG channel facilities pursuant to Ordinance No. 4130 and all other provisions therein. The adoption of this Section 3.50.040 is intended to extend the PEG support fee for the remainder of the 10-year term of Ordinance No. 4130.

C.     Commencing from, and after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, the City’s PEG support fee shall continue to apply to any new or existing State Video Franchisee operating in the City, and shall automatically be reauthorized within the meaning of Public Utilities Code Section 5870(n) upon expiration and renewal of any existing or future State Video Franchisee operating in the City. Such automatic renews of the PEG support fee shall continue until such time that the City Council takes formal affirmative action to cease the renewals. (4180-7/19)

 

3.50.050 PEG Channels
A.    The City’s current franchises with Frontier Communications and Spectrum provide for three public, educational and governmental channels for PEG programming.

B.     All State Video Franchisees shall comply with the provisions of DIVCA related to PEG channels. Without limiting the foregoing, the PEG channels shall be carried on the basic service tier. To the extent feasible, the PEG channels shall not be separated numerically from other channels carried on the basic service tier and the channel numbers for the PEG channels shall be the same channel numbers used by the incumbent cable operator as defined in Public Utilities Code Section 5830(i) unless prohibited by Federal law and shall provide video and sound quality, recording capability, channel accessibility and location equal to, or substantially equal to, that provided by the incumbent cable providers. After the initial designation of PEG channel numbers, the channel numbers shall not be changed without agreement of the City unless Federal law requires the change.

C.     A State Video Franchisee shall have three months from the date the City requests the PEG channels to designate the capacity. However, the three-month period shall be tolled by any period during which the designation or provision of PEG channel capacity is technically infeasible, including any failure or delay of the incumbent cable operator to make adequate interconnection available, as required by DIVCA. Any State Video Franchisee which believes that the designation or provision of PEG channel capacity is technically infeasible shall provide to City, in writing, its reasons therefor and its plan for correcting or solving the infeasibility. The City may hold a hearing on the claim of infeasibility and, thereafter, take such action as the City deems proper to require the designation and provision of the PEG channels on the State Video Franchisee’s system. (4180-7/19)

 

3.50.060 Audit Authority
Not more than once annually, the City Manager or designee may examine and perform an audit of the business records of each State Video Franchisee operating within the boundaries of the City to ensure compliance with California Public Utilities Code Section 5860. (4180-7/19)

 

3.50.070 Customer Service Penalties
A.    Each State Video Franchisee shall comply with all applicable California and Federal customer service and protection standards pertaining to the provision of video service, including those specified at Sections 53055, 53055.1, 53055.2, and 53088.2 of the California Government Code.

B.     The City Manager or designee shall monitor the compliance of each State Video Franchisee operating within the boundaries of the City with respect to California and Federal customer service and protection standards. The City Manager or designee will provide the State Video Franchisee written notice of any material breaches of applicable customer service standards, and will allow the State Video Franchisee 30 days from the receipt of the notice to remedy the specified material breach. The City may impose the following penalties for any material breaches not remedied within the 30-day time period:

1.     For the first occurrence of a violation, a fine of up to $500.00 may be imposed for each day the violation remains in effect, not to exceed $1,500.00 for each violation.

2.     For a second violation of the same nature within 12 months, a fine of up to $1,000.00 may be imposed for each day the violation remains in effect, not to exceed $3,000.00 for each violation.

3.     For a third or further violation of the same nature within 12 months, a fine of up to $2,500.00 may be imposed for each day the violation remains in effect, not to exceed $7,500.00 for each violation.

C.     A State Video Franchisee may appeal a penalty assessed by the City Manager to the City Council within 60 days of the initial assessment. The City Council shall hear all evidence and relevant testimony and may uphold, modify or vacate the penalty. The City Council’s decision on the imposition of a penalty shall be final.

As used herein, “material breach” is defined as set forth in Public Utilities Code Section 5900. (4180-7/19)

 

3.50.080 Public Rights-of-Way
For the purpose of operating and maintaining a video system in the City, a State Video Franchisee may erect, install, construct, repair, replace, reconstruct, and retain in, on, over, under, upon, across and along the public rights-of-way and public cables, conductors, ducts, conduits, vaults, manholes, amplifiers, property and equipment as are necessary and appurtenant to the operations of the cable system. The State Video Franchisee shall comply with all applicable provisions of the Huntington Beach Municipal Code.

The City maintains the right to perform any public work or public improvement of any description, including, without limitation, all work authorized by applicable law. In the event that the State Video Franchisee’s system interferes with the construction, operation, maintenance or repair of any such public work or improvement, the State Video Franchisee, after reasonable notice from the City, shall, at its own cost and expense, promptly protect, alter or relocate the system, or any part thereof, as directed by the City.

In the event that the State Video Franchisee refuses or neglects to so protect, alter or relocate all or any part of its system, the City shall have the right in connection with the performance of such public work or public improvement to break through, remove, alter or relocate all or any part of the system without any liability to the State Video Franchisee except for the City’s willful misconduct and the State Video Franchisee shall promptly pay to the City its costs incurred by such breaking through, removal, alteration or relocation. (4180-7/19)

 

3.50.090 Police Powers
The rights of a State Video Franchisee operating within the boundaries of the City are subject to the police power of the City to adopt and enforce general ordinances necessary to the health, safety and welfare of the public, and each State Video Franchise Franchisee shall comply with all applicable general laws and ordinances enacted by the City pursuant to such power. (4180-7/19)

 

3.50.100 Preemption—Reservation of Rights
If any area of regulatory authority is or was preempted from local regulation by Federal or State law, and such preemption later ceases, the City reserves the right to resume local regulation to the extent permitted, including the right to enact an ordinance or to enforce this chapter of the Municipal Code to regulate video services within the City, should it be determined by State or Federal law, regulation or rule that the City may enter into a local franchise with providers of video services within the City. (4180-7/19)

 

Chapter 3.56 CITY OF HUNTINGTON BEACH SPECIAL TAX FINANCING IMPROVEMENT CODE
Article I. General Provisions
3.56.010 Short Title
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the “City of Huntington Beach Special Tax Financing Improvement Code,” and shall be referred to in this chapter as the “Code.” (3417-6/99, 3546-4/02, 3751-11/06)

 

3.56.020 Municipal and State Affairs—Authority Conferred by Code—Applicability of Laws
A.    This Code is adopted pursuant to Section 500 of Article V of the Charter of the City of Huntington Beach. In proceedings had pursuant to this Code which are a municipal affair, any general laws referred to in this Code are deemed a part of this Code.

B.     In the event that any proceeding had pursuant to this Code shall be adjudged a state affair, it is declared to be the intention that the proceedings were had pursuant to any applicable general law or laws.

C.     This Code provides an alternative method of financing certain public and private capital facilities and municipal services. The provisions of this Code shall not affect or limit any other provisions of law authorizing or providing for the furnishing of facilities or services, or the raising of revenue for these purposes. The City may use the provisions of this Code in conjunction with the Mello-Roos Community Facilities Act of 1982, as amended (commencing with Section 53311 of the California Government Code) (the “Act”), or any other method of financing part or all of the cost of providing the authorized kinds of public and private capital facilities and municipal services. Actions not otherwise addressed in this Code shall be otherwise governed by the provisions of the Act.

D.    This Code shall be deemed to provide a complete, additional and alternative method for actions authorized hereby and shall be regarded as a supplemental and additional to the powers conferred by other laws, including the Act. (3417-6/99, 3546-4/02, 3751-11/06)

 

3.56.030 Conflicting Provisions—Severability
A.    Any provision in this Code which conflicts with any general law or act shall prevail over the other such provision in connection with any proceedings taken pursuant to this Code.

B.     In the event any portion of this Code shall be declared illegal, unenforceable or unconstitutional, such provision shall be deemed severable from the rest of the provisions of this Code. (3417-6/99, 3546-4/02, 3751-11/06)

 

3.56.040 Actions or Determinations by Local Agency
The local agency may take any actions or make any determinations which it determines are necessary or convenient to carry out the purposes of this Code and which are not otherwise prohibited by law. (3417-6/99, 3546-4/02, 3751-11/06)

 

3.56.050 Liberal Construction of Chapter—Error, Irregularity, Neglect or Omission
This Code shall be liberally construed in order to effectuate its purposes. No error, irregularity, informality, and no neglect or omission of any officer, in any procedure taken under this Code, which does not directly affect the jurisdiction of the legislative body to order the installation of the facility or the provision of service, shall void or invalidate such proceeding or any levy for the costs of such facility or service. (3417-6/99, 3546-4/02, 3751-11/06)

 

3.56.060 Failure to Receive Notice, Resolution, Order or Other Matter Not Affecting Proceedings
The failure of any person to receive a notice, resolution, order, or other matter shall not affect in any way whatsoever the validity of any proceedings taken under the Code, or prevent the legislative body from proceeding with any hearing so noticed. (3417-6/99, 3546-4/02, 3751-11/06)

 

3.56.070 Definitions
Unless the context otherwise requires, the definitions contained in this article shall govern the construction of this Code.

“Act” means the Mello-Roos Community Facilities Act of 1982, as amended (commencing with Section 53311 of the California Government Code).

“City” means the City of Huntington Beach.

“City Clerk” or “Clerk” means the City Clerk of the City of Huntington Beach.

“City Council” means the City Council of the City of Huntington Beach.

“Community facilities district” or “district” means a legally constituted governmental entity established pursuant to this Code and the Act for the sole purpose of financing facilities and services.

“Cost” means the expense of constructing, installing or purchasing the public facility and of related land, right-of-way, easements, including incidental expenses, and the cost of providing authorized services, including incidental expenses.

“Debt” means any binding obligation to pay or repay a sum of money, including obligations in the form of bonds, certificates of participation, long-term leases, loans from government agencies, or loans from banks, other financial institutions, private businesses, or individuals, or long-term contracts.

“Incidental expense” includes all of the following:

1.     The cost of planning and designing public facilities to be financed pursuant to this Code, including the cost of environmental evaluations of those facilities.

2.     The costs associated with the creation of the district, issuance of bonds, determination of the amount of taxes, collection of taxes, payment of taxes, or costs otherwise incurred in order to carry out the authorized purposes of the district.

3.     Any other expenses incidental to the construction, completion, and inspection of the authorized work.

“Landowner,” “owner” or “owner of land” means any person shown as the owner of land on the last equalized assessment roll or otherwise known to be the owner of the land by the City Clerk. Notwithstanding the foregoing, “landowner,” “owner” or “owner of land” means, with respect to any land which is the subject of a condemnation action, the person entitled to possession of the land pursuant to such condemnation action, or with respect to land to which the City or Redevelopment Agency has fee title, the person having a leasehold interest in the land for a term exceeding 40 years. The legislative body has no obligation to obtain other information as to the ownership of the land, and its determination of ownership shall be final and conclusive for the purposes of this Code. A public agency is not a landowner, owner, or owner of land for purposes of this Code, unless the land owned by a public agency would be subject to a special tax pursuant to Section 3.56.040 or unless the public agency has acquired possession to the land through a condemnation and has made the certification required in Section 3.56.300.

“Legislative body” means the legislative body or governing board of any local agency, and with respect to the City means the City Council.

“Local agency” means any city or county, whether general law or chartered, special district, school district, joint powers entity created pursuant to Chapter 5 (commencing with Section 6500) of Division 7 of Title 1, or any other municipal corporation, district, or political subdivision of the state.

“Rate” means a single rate of tax or a schedule of rates.

“Redevelopment Agency” means the Redevelopment Agency of the City of Huntington Beach.

“Services” means the provision of categories of services identified in Section 3.56.110. “Services” includes the performance by employees of functions, operations, maintenance, and repair activities. “Services” does not include activities or facilities identified in Section 3.56.120. (3417-6/99, 3546-4/02, 3751-11/06)

 

Article II. Purpose of District
3.56.100 Initiation of Proceedings to Establish District Upon Adoption of Certain Local Goals and Policies
The City may initiate proceedings to establish a district pursuant to this Code only if it has first considered and adopted local goals and policies concerning the use of this Code, except in the case of districts being formed pursuant to a development agreement between the City and a qualified developer and/or the Redevelopment Agency and a qualified developer. The policies shall include at least the following:

A.    A statement of the priority that various kinds of public facilities shall have for financing through the use of this Code, including public facilities to be owned and operated by other public agencies, including school districts.

B.     A statement concerning the credit quality to be required of bond issues, including criteria to be used in evaluating the credit quality.

C.     A statement concerning steps to be taken to ensure that prospective property purchasers are fully informed about their taxpaying obligations imposed under this Code.

D.    A statement concerning criteria for evaluating the equity of tax allocation formulas, and concerning desirable and maximum amounts of special tax to be levied against any parcel pursuant to this Code. (3417-6/99, 3546-4/02, 3751-11/06)

 

3.56.110 Establishment of Community Facilities District to Finance Certain Services
A community facilities district may be established under this Code to finance any one or more of the following types of services within an area:

A.    Police protection services, including, but not limited to, criminal justice services. However, criminal justice services shall be limited to providing services for jails, detention facilities, and juvenile halls.

B.     Fire protection and suppression services, and ambulance and paramedic services.

C.     Recreation program services, library services, maintenance services for elementary and secondary school sites and structures, and the operation and maintenance of museums and cultural facilities. Bonds may not be issued pursuant to this Code to fund any of the services specified in this subdivision. A special tax may be levied for any of the services specified in this subdivision only upon approval of the voters as specified in subdivision (b) of Section 53328 of the Act. However, the requirement contained in subdivision (b) of Section 53328 of the Act that a certain number of persons have been registered to vote for each of the 90 days preceding the close of the protest hearing does not apply to an election to enact a special tax for recreation program services, library services, and the operation and maintenance of museums and cultural facilities subject to subdivision (c) of Section 53326 of the Act.

D.    Maintenance of streets, landscaping, street lighting, parks, parkways, and open space.

E.     Flood and storm protection services, including, but not limited to, the operation and maintenance of storm drainage systems, and sandstorm protection systems.

F.     Services with respect to removal or remedial action for the cleanup of any hazardous substance released or threatened to be released into the environment. As used in this subdivision, the terms “remedial action” and “removal” shall have the meanings set forth in Sections 25322 and 25323, respectively, of the Health and Safety Code, and the term “hazardous substance” shall have the meaning set forth in Section 25281 of the Health and Safety Code. Community facilities districts shall provide the State Department of Health Services and local health and building departments with notification of any cleanup activity pursuant to this subdivision at least 30 days prior to commencement of the activity.

G.    Maintenance of, and the provision of repair and replacement reserves for, any other public improvement not specifically listed in the preceding subsections A through F of this section, the construction, installation, expansion, improvement or rehabilitation of which may be financed under Section 3.56.120 or 3.56.130 of this Code. (3546-4/02)

 

3.56.120 Additional Financing Powers of District—Purchase, Construction, Expansion, Improvement, Rehabilitation, or Planning and Design Work of Real or Tangible Property
A community facilities district may also finance the purchase, construction, installation expansion, improvement, or rehabilitation of any real or other tangible property with an estimated useful life of five years or longer or may finance planning and design work that is directly related to the purchase, construction, expansion, or rehabilitation of any real or tangible property. The facilities need not be physically located within the district. A district may only finance the purchase of facilities whose construction has been completed, as determined by the legislative body, before the resolution of formation to establish the district is adopted pursuant to Section 53325.1 of the Act, except that a district may finance the purchase of facilities completed after the adoption of the resolution of formation if the facility was constructed as if it had been constructed under the direction and supervision, or under the authority of, the local agency. For example, a community facilities district may finance facilities, including, but not limited to, the following:

A.    Local park, recreation, parkway, open-space facilities, beach maintenance facilities, beach access facilities and parking facilities adjacent or accessible to such facilities.

B.     Elementary and secondary school sites and structures provided that the facilities meet the building area and cost standards established by the State Allocation Board.

C.     Libraries.

D.    Child care facilities, including costs of insuring the facilities against loss, liability insurance in connection with the operation of the facility, and other insurance costs relating to the operation of the facilities, but excluding all other operational costs. However, the proceeds of bonds issued pursuant to this Code shall not be used to pay these insurance costs.

E.     The district may also finance the construction or undergrounding of water transmission and distribution facilities, natural gas pipeline facilities, telephone lines, facilities for the transmission or distribution of electrical energy, and cable television lines to provide access to those services to customers who do not have access to those services or to mitigate existing visual blight. The district may enter into an agreement with a public utility to utilize those facilities to provide a particular service and for the conveyance of those facilities to the public utility. “Public utility” shall include all utilities, whether public and regulated by the Public Utilities Commission, or municipal. If the facilities are conveyed to the public utility, the agreement shall provide that the cost or a portion of the cost of the facilities that are the responsibility of the utility shall be refunded by the public utility to the district or improvement area thereof, to the extent that refunds are applicable pursuant to (1) the Public Utilities Code or rules of the Public Utilities Commission, as to utilities regulated by the commission, or (2) other laws regulating public utilities. Any reimbursement made to the district shall be utilized to reduce or minimize the special tax levied within the district or improvement area, or to construct or acquire additional facilities within the district or improvement area, as specified in the resolution of formation.

F.     The district may also finance the acquisition, improvement, rehabilitation, or maintenance of any real or other tangible property, whether privately or publicly owned, for the purposes described in subsection E of Section 3.56.110.

G.    The district may also pay in full all amounts necessary to eliminate any fixed special assessment liens or to pay, repay, or defease any obligation to pay or any indebtedness secured by any tax, fee, charge, or assessment levied within the area of a community facilities district or may pay debt service on that indebtedness. In addition, tax revenues of a district may be used to make lease or debt service payments on any lease, lease purchase contract, or certificate of participation used to finance authorized district facilities.

H.    Any other governmental facilities which the legislative body creating the community facilities district is authorized by law to contribute revenue to, or construct, own, or operate. However, the district shall not operate or maintain or, except as otherwise provided in subsections E and F of this section, have any ownership interest in any facilities for the transmission or distribution of natural gas, telephone service, or electrical energy.

I.      1.     A district may also pay for the following:

a.     Work deemed necessary to bring buildings or real property, including privately owned buildings or real property, into compliance with seismic safety standards or regulations. Only work certified as necessary to comply with seismic safety standards or regulations by local building officials may be financed. No project involving the dismantling of an existing building and its replacement by a new building, nor the construction of a new or substantially new building may be financed pursuant to this subparagraph. Work on qualified historical buildings or structures shall be done in accordance with the State Historical Building Code (Part 2.7 (commencing with Section 18950) of Division 13 of the Health and Safety Code).

b.     In addition, within any county or area designated by the President of the United States or by the Governor as a disaster area or for which the Governor has proclaimed the existence of a state of emergency because of earthquake damage, a district may also pay for any work deemed necessary to repair any damage to real property directly or indirectly caused by the occurrence of an earthquake cited in the President’s or the Governor’s designation or proclamation, or by aftershocks associated with that earthquake, including work to reconstruct, repair, shore up, or replace any building damaged or destroyed by the earthquake. Work may be financed pursuant to this subparagraph only on property or buildings identified in a resolution of intention to establish a community facilities district adopted within seven years of the date on which the county or area is designated as a disaster area by the President or by the Governor or on which the Governor proclaims for the area the existence of a state of emergency.

2.     Work on privately owned property, including reconstruction or replacement of privately owned buildings pursuant to paragraph b of subsection (I)(1), may only be financed by a tax levy if all of the votes cast on the question of levying the tax, vote in favor of levying the tax, or with the prior written consent to the tax of the owners of all property which may be subject to the tax, in which case the prior written consent shall be deemed to constitute a vote in favor of the tax and any associated bond issue. Any district created to finance seismic safety work on privately owned buildings, including repair, reconstruction, or replacement of privately owned buildings pursuant to this subdivision, shall consist only of lots or parcels on which the legislative body finds that the buildings to be worked on, repaired, reconstructed, or replaced, pursuant to this subdivision, are located or were located before being damaged or destroyed by the earthquake cited pursuant to paragraph b of subsection (I)(1) or by the aftershocks of that earthquake.

J.      1.     A district may also pay for the following:

a.     Work deemed necessary to repair and abate damage caused to privately owned buildings and structures by soil deterioration. “Soil deterioration” means a chemical reaction by soils that causes structural damage or defects in construction materials including concrete, steel, and ductile or cast iron. Only work certified as necessary by local building officials may be financed. No project involving the dismantling of an existing building or structure and its replacement by a new building or structure, nor the construction of a new or substantially new building or structure may be financed pursuant to this subdivision.

b.     Work on privately owned buildings and structures pursuant to this subdivision, including reconstruction, repair, and abatement of damage caused by soil deterioration, may only be financed by a tax levy if all of the votes cast on the question of levying the tax vote in favor of levying the tax. Any district created to finance the work on privately owned buildings or structures, including reconstruction, repair, and abatement of damage caused by soil deterioration, shall consist only of lots or parcels on which the legislative body finds that the buildings or structures to be worked on pursuant to this subdivision suffer from soil deterioration. (3417-6/99, 3546-4/02, 3751-11/06)

 

3.56.130 Additional District Financing Powers
Pursuant to Section 3.56.120, a community facilities district may also finance the acquisition improvement, rehabilitation, or maintenance of any real or other tangible property, whether privately or publicly owned, for the purposes described in subsection F of Section 3.56.110. (3417-6/99, 3546-4/02, 3751-11/06)

 

3.56.140 Revolving Fund for Cleanup of Hazardous Substances—Withdrawal of Funds
A.    In connection with the financing of services and facilities pursuant to subsection F of Section 3.56.110 and Section 3.56.130, the legislative body may establish a revolving fund to be kept in the treasury of the district. Except as provided in subsection B of this section, moneys in the revolving fund shall be expended solely for the payment of costs with respect to those services and facilities. The revolving fund may be funded from time to time with moneys derived from any of the following:

1.     Proceeds of the sale of bonds issued pursuant to Article 5 (commencing with Section 3.56.400), notwithstanding any limitation contained in Section 3.56.410.

2.     Any taxes or charges authorized under this Code.

3.     Any other lawful source.

B.     Subject to the provisions of any resolution, trust agreement or indenture providing for the issuance of district bonds for the purposes set forth in Section 3.56.130, the legislative body may withdraw money from the revolving fund whenever and to the extent that it finds that the amount of money therein exceeds the amount necessary to accomplish the purposes for which the revolving fund was established. Any moneys withdrawn from the revolving fund shall be used to redeem bonds of the district issued for the purposes set forth in Section 3.56.300 or shall be paid to taxpayers in the district in amounts which the legislative body determines. (3417-6/99, 3546-4/02, 3751-11/06)

 

3.56.150 Liability—Removal or Remedial Action—Hazardous Substances Released or Threatened to Be Released
A.    Any responsible party as defined by subdivision (a) of Section 25323.5 of the Health and Safety Code shall be liable to the district for the costs incurred in the removal or remedial action for the cleanup of any hazardous substance released or threatened to be released into the environment. The amount of the costs shall include interest on the costs accrued from the date of expenditure. The interest shall be calculated based on the average annual rate of return on the district’s investment of surplus funds for the fiscal year in which the district incurred the costs. Recovery of costs by a community facilities district under this section shall be commenced before or immediately upon completion of the removal or remedial action, and payments received hereunder by the district shall be deposited in the revolving fund in accordance with Section 3.56.140.

B.     To expedite cleanup, this section is intended to provide local jurisdictions an alternative method of financing the cost of removal or remedial action for the cleanup of any hazardous substance through the issuance of voter-approved limited obligation bonds. The provisions of this section shall not affect or limit the provisions of any other law establishing the liability of any person for, or otherwise regulating, the generation, transportation, storage, treatment, or disposal of hazardous substances. The scope and standard of liability for any costs recoverable pursuant to Section 3.56.150 shall be the scope and standard of liability set forth in the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980, as amended (42 U.S.C. Sec. 6901 et seq.), or any other provision of state or federal law establishing responsibility for cleanup of hazardous waste sites. (3417-6/99, 3546-4/02, 3751-11/06)

 

3.56.160 Ordinance—Local Agency Contribution—Purposes
At any time either before or after the formation of the district, the legislative body may provide, by ordinance, that for a period specified in the ordinance, the local agency may contribute, from any source of revenue not otherwise prohibited by law, any specified amount, portion, or percentage of the revenues for the purposes set forth in the ordinance, limited to the following: the acquisition or construction of a facility, the acquisition of interest in real property, or the payment of debt service with respect to the financing of either, the provision of authorized services, and the payment of expenses incidental thereto. The contribution shall not constitute an indebtedness or liability of the local agency. (3417-6/99, 3546-4/02, 3751-11/06)

 

3.56.170 Joint Community Facilities Agreement or Joint Exercise of Powers Agreement
A.    A community facilities district may finance facilities to be owned or operated by an entity other than the agency that created the district, or services to be provided by an entity other than the agency that created the district, or any combination, only pursuant to a joint community facilities agreement or a joint exercise of powers agreement adopted pursuant to this section.

B.     At any time prior to the issuance of bonds by the district, the legislative bodies of two or more local agencies may enter into a joint community facilities agreement pursuant to this section and Sections 53316.4 of the Act and 53316.6 of the Act or into a joint exercise of powers agreement pursuant to Chapter 5 (commencing with Section 6500) of Division 7 of Title 1 of the California Government Code to exercise any power authorized by this Code with respect to the community facilities district being created or changed if the legislative body of each entity adopts a resolution declaring that such a joint agreement would be beneficial to the residents of that entity.

C.     Notwithstanding Chapter 5 (commencing with Section 6500) of Division 7 of Title 1 of the California Government Code, a contracting party may use the proceeds of any special tax or charge levied pursuant to this Code or of any bonds or other indebtedness issued pursuant to this Code to provide facilities or services which that contracting party is otherwise authorized by law to provide, even though another contracting party does not have the power to provide those facilities or services.

D.    Notwithstanding subsection B of this section, nothing in this section shall prevent entry into or amendment of a joint community facilities agreement or a joint exercise of powers agreement, after the issuance of bonds by the district, if the new agreement or amendment is necessary, as determined by the legislative body, for either of the following reasons:

1.     To allow an orderly transition of governmental facilities and finances in the case of any change in governmental organization approved pursuant to the Cortese-Knox Local Government Reorganization Act of 1985 (Division 1 (commencing with Section 56000) of Title 6).

2.     To allow participation in the agreement by a state or federal agency that could or would not otherwise participate, including, but not limited to, the California Department of Transportation.

E.     Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code, no local agency which is party to a joint exercise of powers agreement or joint community facilities agreement shall have primary responsibility for formation of a district or an improvement area within a district, or for an extension of authorized facilities and services or a change in special taxes pursuant to Article III, unless that local agency is one or more of the following:

1.     A city, a county, or a city and county.

2.     An agency created pursuant to a joint powers agreement that is separate from the parties to the agreement, is responsible for the administration of the agreement, and is subject to the notification requirement of Section 6503.5.

3.     An agency that is reasonably expected to have responsibility for providing facilities or services to be financed by a larger share of the proceeds of special taxes and bonds of the district or districts created or changed pursuant to the joint exercise of powers agreement or the joint community facilities agreement than any other local agency. (3417-6/99, 3546-4/02, 3751-11/06)

 

3.56.180 Special Tax—Property Acquired by Public Entity Through Negotiated Transaction or by Gift or Devise
A.    If property not otherwise exempt from a special tax levied pursuant to this Code is acquired by a public entity through a negotiated transaction, or by gift or devise, the special tax shall, notwithstanding Section 53340 of the Act, continue to be levied on the property acquired and shall be enforceable against the public entity that acquired the property. However, even if the resolution of formation that authorized creation of the district did not specify conditions under which the obligation to pay a special tax may be prepaid and permanently satisfied, the legislative body of the local agency that created the district may specify conditions under which the public agency that acquires the property may prepay and satisfy the obligation to pay the tax. The conditions may be specified only if the local agency that created the district finds and determines that the prepayment arrangement will fully protect the interests of the owners of the district’s bonds.

B.     Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code, any public agency other than a city, county or school district may subject property owned by it to the levy of special taxes, if it shall certify to the City Council: (1) its agreement to do so, (2) that it intends to dispose of such property by transfer to a non-governmental agency at some time in the future, and (3) that it agrees to cooperate in the sale of property if necessary to obtain funds to pay any special taxes levied upon such property. (3417-6/99, 3546-4/02, 3751-11/06)

 

3.56.190 Special Tax—Special Assessment on Property Acquired by Public Entity Through Eminent Domain
If property subject to a special tax levied pursuant to this Code is acquired by a public entity through eminent domain proceedings, the obligation to pay the special tax shall be treated, pursuant to Section 1265.250 of the Code of Civil Procedure, as if it were a special annual assessment. For this purpose, the present value of the obligation to pay a special tax to pay the principal and interest on any indebtedness incurred by the district prior to the date of apportionment determined pursuant to Section 5082 of the Revenue and Taxation Code shall be treated the same as a fixed lien special assessment. (3417-6/99, 3546-4/02, 3751-11/06)

 

Article III. Proceedings to Create a Community Facilities District
3.56.200 Institution of Proceeding—Request—Petition—Fee
Proceedings for the establishment of a community facilities district may be instituted by the legislative body on its own initiative and shall be instituted by the legislative body when any of the following occurs:

A.    A written request for the establishment of a district, signed by two members of the legislative body, describing the boundaries of the territory which is proposed for inclusion in the area and specifying the type or types of facilities and services to be financed by the district, is filed with the legislative body.

B.     A petition requesting the institution of the proceedings signed by the requisite number of registered voters, as specified in subsection D of Section 3.56.210, is filed with the clerk of the legislative body. The petition may consist of any number of separate instruments, each of which shall comply with all of the requirements of the petition, except as to the number of signatures.

C.     A petition requesting the institution of the proceedings signed by landowners owning the requisite portion of the area of the proposed district, as specified in subsection D of Section 3.56.210, is filed with the clerk of the legislative body.

D.    The written request filed pursuant to subsection A of this section and the petitions filed pursuant to subsections B and C of this section shall be accompanied by the payment of a fee in an amount which the legislative body determines is sufficient to compensate the legislative body for all costs incurred in conducting proceedings to create a district pursuant to this Code. (3417-6/99, 3546-4/02, 3751-11/06)

 

3.56.210 Petition—Contents—Findings as to Requisite Number of Signers
A petition requesting the institution of proceedings for the establishment of a community facilities district shall do all of the following:

A.    Request the legislative body to institute proceedings to establish a community facilities district pursuant to this Code.

B.     Describe the boundaries of the territory which is proposed for inclusion in the district.

C.     State the type or types of facilities and services to be financed by the district.

D.    Be signed by not less than 10% of the registered voters residing within the territory proposed to be included within the district or by owners of not less than 10% of the area of land proposed to be included within the district. If the legislative body finds that the petition is signed by the requisite number of registered voters residing within the territory proposed to be included within the district or by the requisite number of owners of land proposed to be included within the district, that finding shall be final and conclusive. (3417-6/99, 3546-4/02, 3751-11/06)

 

3.56.220 Resolution of Intention to Establish District—Time for Adoption
Within 90 days after either a written request by two members of the legislative body or a petition requesting the institution of proceedings for the establishment of a community facilities district is filed with the legislative body, it shall adopt a resolution of intention to establish a community facilities district in the form specified in Section 53321 of the Act. (3417-6/99, 3546-4/02, 3751-11/06)

 

3.56.230 Reports and Estimate of Costs by Responsible Officers—Remedial Action Plan for Cleanup of Hazardous Substance—Inclusion in Record of Hearing
A.    At the time of the adoption of the resolution of intention to establish a community facilities district, the legislative body shall direct each of its officers who is or will be responsible for providing one or more of the proposed types of public facilities or services to be financed by the district, if it is established, to study the proposed district and, at or before the time of the hearing, file a report with the legislative body containing a brief description of the public facilities and services by type which will in his or her opinion be required to adequately meet the needs of the district and his or her estimate of the cost of providing those public facilities and services. If the purchase of completed public facilities or the payment of incidental expenses is proposed, the legislative body shall direct its appropriate officer to estimate the fair and reasonable cost of those facilities or incidental expenses.

B.     If removal or remedial action for the cleanup of any hazardous substance is proposed, the legislative body shall (1) direct its responsible officer to prepare or cause to be prepared, a remedial action plan based upon factors comparable to those described in subdivision (c) of Section 25356.1 of the Health and Safety Code or (2) determine, on the basis of the particular facts and circumstances, which shall be comparable to those described in subdivision (g) of Section 25356.1 of the Health and Safety Code, that the remedial action plan is not required or (3) condition financing of the removal or remedial action upon approval of a remedial action plan pursuant to Section 25356.1 of the Health and Safety Code. All of those reports shall be made a part of the record of the hearing on the resolution of intention to establish the district. (3417-6/99, 3546-4/02, 3751-11/06)

 

3.56.240 Expedited Hearing Procedure
If the owners of all of the land to be subject to the levy of special taxes within a proposed district, or within the territory proposed to be annexed to an existing district, file petitions with the City Clerk requesting the formation of the district or the annexation of territory to an existing district, respectively, the public hearing referred to in Section 53321(e) or 53339.3(f), as applicable, of the California Government Code may occur not less than 14 days after adoption of the resolution of intention to form or to annex territory to the district, as applicable, rather than the minimum of 30 days otherwise specified in said sections of the California Government Code. (3546-4/02)

 

Article IV. Procedures for Levying
3.56.300 Lease or Possessory Interest by Exempt Person or Entity to Nonexempt Person or Entity—Lease Provisions—Collection
A.    If a public agency owning property, including property held in trust for any beneficiary, which is exempt from a special tax pursuant to Section 53340 of the Act grants a leasehold or other possessory interest in the property to a nonexempt person or entity, the special tax shall, notwithstanding Section 53340 of the Act, be levied on the leasehold or possessory interest and shall be payable by the owner of the leasehold or possessory interest.

B.     When entering into a lease or other written contract creating a possessory interest that may be subject to taxation, pursuant to subsection A of this section, the public agency shall include, or cause to be included, in the contract a statement that the property interest may be subject to special taxation pursuant to this Code, and that the party in whom the possessory interest is vested may be subject to the payment of special taxes levied on the interest. Failure to comply with the requirements of this section shall not, however, invalidate the contract.

C.     If the special tax on any possessory interest levied pursuant to subsection A of this section is unpaid when due, the tax collector may use those collection procedures which are available for the collection of assessments on the unsecured roll. (3417-6/99, 3546-4/02, 3751-11/06)

 

3.56.310 Actions or Proceedings Against Levy of Special Tax or Increase in Special Tax—Time for Commencement—Time for Perfection of Appeal From Final Judgment
Any action or proceeding to attack, review, set aside, void, or annul the levy of a special tax or an increase in a special tax pursuant to this Code shall be commenced within 30 days after the special tax is approved by the voters. Any appeal from a final judgment in that action or proceeding shall be perfected within 30 days after the entry of judgment. (3417-6/99, 3546-4/02, 3751-11/06)

 

3.56.320 Reservation of Rights—Tender of Full or Partial Payment—Special Tax Installments or Interest or Penalties Due or Delinquent
A.    The legislative body may provide in the resolution issuing bonds and in documents setting forth the rights of the debtholders that it shall reserve to itself, the right and authority to allow any interested owner of property within the county, subject to the provisions of this section and to those conditions as it may impose, and any applicable prepayment penalties as prescribed in the bond indenture or comparable instrument or document, to tender to the County Treasurer in full payment or part payment of any installment of the special taxes or the interest or penalties thereon which may be due or delinquent, but for which a bill has been received, any bond or other obligation secured thereby, the bond or other obligation to be taken at par and credit to be given for the accrued interest shown thereby computed to the date of tender. The County Treasurer shall thereupon cancel the bond debt and shall cause proper credit therefor to be entered on the records of the district and in the office of the auditor and tax collector. If the legislative body agrees to allow bond tenders pursuant to this section (or to Section 3.56.490) the legislative body may, at its discretion, agree to distribute or direct its trustee or other agent to distribute by any means an offer to purchase bonds or other related inquiry to the holders of the bonds of the district, at the expense of the person requesting the mailing. Neither the legislative body, nor any of its officers, agents, or trustees shall be liable in any way for that distribution.

B.     The provisions of this subdivision apply to any tender of bonds pursuant to this section by an owner of property within the county who is delinquent in paying special taxes levied by this county when due. Bonds may be tendered pursuant to this subsection only after all of the following conditions have been satisfied:

1.     The delinquent lot or parcel, or possessory interest in such delinquent lot or parcel, has been offered for sale as a result of a foreclosure judgment and the minimum price required to be paid for the lot or parcel, or possessory interest in such delinquent lot or parcel, was not received.

2.     The bonds to be tendered to the county were obtained by the property owner, or holder of the possessory interest, only after their prior owner was presented with a tender offer or solicitation as defined in this subsection.

a.     For purposes of this subsection, a “tender offer” or “solicitation” is a solicitation by any person or that person’s agent by offering circular, memoranda, tender, or solicitation, or any other document or written, oral, or electronic communication for the purchase of the bonds from their then current owner. A person includes a natural person, corporation, company, partnership, limited liability company, limited liability partnership, association, or any other entity and a “tendering party” includes any person making a tender offer for bonds.

b.     Any tender offer or solicitation shall include all material information as required under federal and state securities laws and shall also include the following information, to the extent applicable:

i.      The name of the tendering party.

ii.     An individual who can be contacted to provide further information with respect to the tender.

iii.    The current holdings of bonds of the district by the tendering party and its affiliates.

iv.    The total face amount of the bonds being solicited.

v.     The price or method of determining the price per $1,000.00 in bonds being offered by the tendering party.

vi.    Whether the tendering party or any person affiliated with or related to the tendering party, or any employee, agent, or representative of the tendering party, is a property owner within the district that issued the bonds.

vii.   Whether the present intentions of the tendering party are to use the bonds for payment of special taxes or the purchase of property (or purchase of possessory interest) at a foreclosure sale pursuant to this section or Section 3.56.490. This statement of present intentions shall not be construed to be binding on the tendering party.

viii.  The status of the bond redemption fund, construction fund, reserve fund, and any other funds of the district and the special tax delinquency rate of the district, all of which data shall be the most recent available from the district and, in any event, shall apply to the state of the funds after the most recent payment of principal and interest on the bonds. The district shall provide the necessary data to the property owner within 10 days of receiving a written request and may charge a reasonable fee not to exceed its actual costs of providing the data. The district shall simultaneously release the same information to the general public. The property shall also provide the percentage of the delinquency attributable to the tendering party or any person affiliated with or related to the tendering party, or any employee, agent, or representative of the tendering party, for each of the three most recent fiscal years.

ix.    If the tendering party owns or leases property in the district that issued the bonds, the development plans for that property and an update on the current status of development of that property and of any zoning, planning, or other permits or approvals needed for development of the property to proceed.

x.     Any other material information available to the tendering party and not generally available to the public that would significantly affect the market value of the bonds of the district.

c.     The tendering party shall notify the legislative body of his or her intent to make a tender offer or solicitation at least simultaneously with making any offer or solicitation.

d.     The tendering party shall provide a copy of the solicitation to the Department of Corporations prior to five working days after notifying the legislative body pursuant to subsection (B)(2)(c) of this section.

3.     The tendering property owner or tendering possessory interest holder provides the legislative body with a negative assurance from counsel representing the property owner or tendering possessory interest holder that no misleading or other information has come to the opining party’s attention after reasonable investigation, that would lead the party providing the negative assurance to believe that the tender was in violation of federal or state securities laws.

4.     The tendering property owner delivers to the legislative body of the district that issued the bonds subject to the tender, a certificate to the effect that the tender information is accurate in all material respects and does not omit to state a material fact necessary in order to make the statements included in the tender information not misleading, except that the certificate need not provide any assurances as to the accuracy of the information as to the bond fund balances and tax payment information provided by the district.

C.     The provisions of this subdivision apply to any tender of bonds pursuant to this section by any owner of property within the district who is not delinquent in paying special taxes on any property within the district. A person subject to this subdivision shall be deemed to be a person whose relationship to the issuer may give him or her access, directly or indirectly, to material information about the issuer not generally available to the public, and the provisions of Section 25402 of the Corporations Code apply to any purchase or sale of securities by that person in connection with the tender transaction. For purposes of this subdivision, the “issuer” includes the district, the local agency that created the district, and any owner of property within the district. At any time prior to tendering bonds to the district pursuant to this section, any person subject to this subdivision shall deliver to the legislative body of the district a certificate that he or she has complied with this subdivision and applicable federal and state securities laws. (3417-6/99, 3546-4/02, 3751-11/06)

 

Article V. Bond Indebtedness
3.56.400 Resolution to Incur Bonded Indebtedness
Whenever the legislative body deems it necessary for the community facilities district to incur a bonded indebtedness, it shall, by resolution, set forth all of the following:

A.    A declaration of the necessity for the indebtedness.

B.     The purpose for which the proposed debt is to be incurred.

C.     The amount of the proposed debt. The legislative body may provide for a reduction in the amount of proposed debt in compliance with the provisions of Section 53313.9 of the Act.

D.    The time and place for a hearing by the legislative body on the proposed debt issue. (3417-6/99, 3546-4/02, 3751-11/06)

 

3.56.410 Inclusion of Certain Costs and Estimated Costs in Proposed Bonded Indebtedness
The amount of the proposed bonded indebtedness may include all costs and estimated costs incidental to, or connected with, the accomplishment of the purpose for which the proposed debt is to be incurred, including, but not limited to, the estimated costs of construction, improvement or acquisition of buildings, or both; acquisition of land, rights-of-way, water, sewer, wetlands mitigation or other capacity or connection fees; lease payments for school facilities, satisfaction of contractual obligations relating to expenses or the advancement of funds for expenses existing at the time the bonds are issued pursuant to this Code; architectural, engineering, inspection, legal, fiscal, and financial consultant fees; bond and other reserve funds; discount fees; interest on any bonds of the district estimated to be due and payable within two years of issuance of the bonds; election costs; and all costs of issuance of the bonds, including, but not limited to, fees for bond counsel, costs of obtaining credit ratings, bond insurance premiums, fees for letters of credit, and other credit enhancement costs, and printing costs. (3417-6/99, 3546-4/02, 3751-11/06)

 

3.56.420 Sale of Bonds—Appraisal of Real Property Subject to Special Tax for Paying Debt Service on Bond—Determination of No Unusual Credit Risk—Vote to Proceed for Specified Public Policy Reasons
A.    The legislative body may sell bonds pursuant to this Code only if it determines prior to the award of sale of bonds that the value of the real property that would be subject to the special tax to pay debt service on the bonds will be at least three times the principal amount of the bonds to be sold and the principal amount of all other bonds outstanding that are secured by a special tax levied pursuant to this Code on property within the community facilities district or a special assessment levied on property within the community facilities district. Any determination made pursuant to this subsection shall be based upon the full cash value as shown on the ad valorem assessment roll or upon an appraisal of the subject property made in a manner consistent with the policies adopted pursuant to Section 3.56.100(A)(5) by a state certified real estate appraiser as defined in subdivision (c) of Section 11340 of the California Business and Professions Code. The City Treasurer and the Finance Director may recommend definitions, standards, and assumptions to be used for these appraisals. These definitions, standards, and assumptions are advisory only, and the definitions, standards, and assumptions to be applied to appraisals will be those adopted by the local agency pursuant to Section 3.56.100(A)(5).

B.     Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection A of this section, if the legislative body selling the bonds finds and determines that the proposed bonds do not present any unusual credit risk due to the availability of credit enhancements or for other reasons specified by the legislative body, the provisions of subsection A may be disregarded.

C.     Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection A of this section, if the legislative body selling the bonds finds and determines by a vote of not less than four-fifths of all of its members that the proposed bond issue should proceed for specified public policy reasons, the provisions of subsection A may be disregarded.

D.    A finding and determination by the legislative body pursuant to this section shall be final and conclusive upon all persons in the absence of actual fraud, and neither the legislative body nor the district shall have any liability of any kind whatsoever out of, or in connection with, any finding and determination. (3417-6/99, 3546-4/02, 3751-11/06)

 

3.56.430 Agreement to Notify One or More Parties in the Event Specified Events Occur Affecting the Market Value of Outstanding Bonds—Events Triggering Notice
The bond indenture or other bond documents may provide that the legislative body agrees to notify one or more parties, including the underwriter or other first purchaser of the bonds, an appropriate national repository for bond information approved by the Securities and Exchange Commission, or the California Debt Advisory Commission, in the event that specified events occur which may affect the market value of outstanding bonds. These events may include, but are not limited to, the following, for example:

A.    Withdrawal of funds from any reserve fund for the bonds, such that the balance in the fund falls below a specified percentage of the amount required by bond documents.

B.     Draw upon a letter of credit or other credit enhancement for the bonds.

C.     Filing for bankruptcy by a developer or other owner of more than a specified percentage of the area or property value within the district.

D.    Unforeseen discovery of toxic materials or rare and endangered plant or animal species within areas of the district proposed for development. (3417-6/99, 3546-4/02, 3751-11/06)

 

3.56.440 Action to Foreclose Liens—Cumulative Remedy—Resolution to Diligently Pursue Foreclosure Action—Collection of Delinquent Charges
A.    As a cumulative remedy, if debt is outstanding, the legislative body may, not later than four years after the due date of the last installment of principal thereof, order that any delinquent special taxes levied in whole or in part for payment of the debt, together with any penalties, interest, and costs, be collected by an action brought in the superior court to foreclose the lien of special tax.

B.     The legislative body may, by resolution, adopted prior to the issuance of debt under this Code covenant for the benefit of debt holders to commence and diligently pursue any foreclosure action regarding delinquent installments of any amount levied as a special tax for the payment of interest or principal of any bonds that are issued, and, at any time may assign the causes of action arising from the foreclosure to a trustee or joint powers authority to do so on behalf of the debtholders. The resolution may specify a deadline for commencement of the foreclosure action and any other terms and conditions the legislative body determines reasonable regarding the foreclosure action.

C.     Except as provided in Section 3.56.470, all special taxes, interest, penalties, costs, fees, and other charges that are delinquent at the time of the ordering of a foreclosure action shall be collected in the action. In the event that a lot or parcel of property or a possessory interest has not been sold pursuant to judgment in the foreclosure action at the time that subsequent special taxes become delinquent, the court may include the subsequent special taxes, interest, penalties, costs, fees, and other charges in the judgment or modified judgment.

D.    For purposes of financing delinquent special taxes pursuant to Section 26220 of the California Government Code, the legislative body may act as if it were a board of supervisors.

E.     Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code, no trustee or joint powers authority shall be obligated to accept the tender of bonds in satisfaction of any obligation arising from a delinquent special tax, although either may do so if authorized to do so by the legislative body.

F.     An action to determine the validity of any bonds issued, any joint powers agreement entered into, and any related agreements entered into, by a joint powers agency acting pursuant to this section may be brought by the joint powers agency pursuant to Chapter 9 (commencing with Section 860) of Title 10 of Part 2 of the Code of Civil Procedure. Any appeal from a judgment in the action shall be commenced within 30 days after entry of judgment. (3417-6/99, 3546-4/02, 3751-11/06)

 

3.56.450 Complainants—Time Limitations—Contents of Complaint
The foreclosure action shall be brought in the name of the local agency or trustee on behalf of the bondholders pursuant to Section 3.56.440, and may be brought within the time specified in Section 3.56.440. The complaint may be brief and need only include the following allegations:

A.    That on a stated date, a certain sum of special taxes, levied against the subject property or possessory interest (describing it) pursuant to this Code, became delinquent.

B.     On that date, bonds issued pursuant to this Code, payable in whole or in part by the subject special taxes, were outstanding.

C.     That the legislative body or trustee has ordered the foreclosure. (3417-6/99, 3546-4/02, 3751-11/06)

 

3.56.460 Judgment Decree—Contents—Amount—Attorneys’ Fees—Application of General Foreclosure Provisions
A.    Any judgment shall decree the amount of the continuing lien against each parcel or possessory interest to be foreclosed, and shall order the parcel to be sold on execution as in other cases of the sale of real property or possessory interests by process of the court except:

1.     Notwithstanding Section 701.545 of the Code of Civil Procedure, notice of sale of any lot or parcel or possessory interest included in the judgment may be given pursuant to Section 701.540 of the Code of Civil Procedure any time after the expiration of 20 days after the date notice of levy on the interest in real property was served on the judgment debtor or debtors, provided that the lot or parcel to be sold is not a dwelling for not more than four families and provided that all parties whose liens are extinguished by the foreclosure judgment were either defendants in the foreclosure action or, for those parties who acquired an interest in a lien on the parcel after the recording of notice of the pending foreclosure action, received constructive notice of the action.

2.     Whenever notice of sale may be given after the expiration of 20 days after the date notice of levy was served as provided in subsection (A)(1) of this section, the 30-day time period contained in subdivision (h) of Section 701.540 of the Code of Civil Procedure shall be reduced to 10 days.

3.     Upon proof that the lot or parcel or possessory interest to be sold is not a dwelling for not more than four families, and upon determining that all parties whose liens are extinguished by the foreclosure judgment were either defendants in the foreclosure action or, for those parties who acquired an interest in a lien on the parcel after the recording of notice of the pending foreclosure action, received constructive notice of the action, pursuant to Section 716.020 of the Code of Civil Procedure, the court shall order that subsections (A)(1) and (2) of this section apply to any judgment previously entered.

4.     The minimum bid amount provided in Section 3.56.470 shall apply instead of subdivision (a) of Section 701.620 of the Code of Civil Procedure.

5.     The local agency may bid at the price provided in Section 3.56.470 by giving the levying officer a written receipt crediting all or part of the amount required to satisfy the judgment. If the local agency becomes the purchaser pursuant to bid, the local agency shall pay the amount of its credit bid into the redemption fund within 24 months of the date of the foreclosure sale.

6.     Notwithstanding subdivision (c) of Section 701.620 of the Code of Civil Procedure, if the minimum price required to be paid for a lot of parcel pursuant to Section 3.56.470 is not obtained at a foreclosure sale, upon written request of the local agency, the levying officer shall retain the writ of sale and, provided that the writ of sale has not been returned to the court pursuant to paragraph (1) of subdivision (a) of Section 699.560 of the Code of Civil Procedure, give notice of sale pursuant to Section 701.540 of the Code of Civil Procedure without relevying on the property.

7.     As provided elsewhere in this Code.

B.     The judgment amount shall include reasonable attorneys’ fees to be fixed by the court, together with interest, penalties, and other authorized charges and costs (all calculated up to date of judgment).

C.     The foreclosure action shall be governed and regulated by the provisions of this Code, and also where not in conflict with this Code, by other provisions of law generally applicable to foreclosure actions. (3417-6/99, 3546-4/02, 3751-11/06)

 

3.56.470 Price of Property or Possessory Interests Sold
Property or possessory interests sold hereunder may not be sold for less than the amount of the judgment plus post-judgment interest and authorized costs without the consent of the owners of 75% by value of the outstanding bonds. (3417-6/99, 3546-4/02, 3751-11/06)

 

3.56.480 Computation Errors—Validity of Special Tax Installment, Interest or Penalty
No special tax installment, interest or penalties thereon, or deed shall be held invalid for any error in computation if the error is found to be comparatively negligible, or is found to be in favor of the owner of the real property affected thereby. (3417-6/99, 3546-4/02, 3751-11/06)

 

3.56.490 Tender of Bonds or Debt—Special Taxes—Penalties and Interest—Satisfaction of Bid Amount
Provided the legislative body permits bonds or debt to be tendered for special taxes and the penalties and interest thereon pursuant to Section 3.56.320, if the highest bid for a lot or parcel sold pursuant to a judgment of foreclosure and order of sale exceeds $5,000.00 and the highest bidder elects to treat the sale as a credit transaction pursuant to subdivision (c) of Section 701.590 of the Code of Civil Procedure, the balance due as provided in that section may be paid in full or in part by tender of bonds or debt, provided, however, that bonds or debt may not be tendered for costs of foreclosure, including attorney’s fees, and administrative charges incurred by the local agency with respect to removing the special taxes from the rolls of the treasurer or tax collector, or other administrative charges.

A.    Tender of bonds or debt shall be made to the local agency within seven days of the date of the sale. The local agency shall be charged with authenticating the tender and shall, within 10 days of the date of the sale, submit a written receipt to the levying officer who conducted the sale for the amount of the bond or debt tender accepted by it.

B.     Tender of cash or certified check or cashier’s check shall be made to the levying officer within 10 days of the date of the sale.

C.     The levying officer shall total the cash, certified checks and cashier’s checks, and any agency written receipts for bonds or debt to determine if the amount of the bid, plus accruing costs and interests, has been paid. In no event shall the tendering party be entitled to receive cash or other compensation in return for all or any part of the value of a tendered bond or bonds, except for recognition of their value in satisfying the amount bid.

D.    The tendering party shall comply with the provisions of Section 3.56.320, as applicable as if they were fully set out in this section. (3417-6/99, 3546-4/02, 3751-11/06)

 

3.56.500 Notice of Proposed Sale of Bonds—Contents
A.    The legislative body shall, no later than 30 days prior to the sale of any bonds pursuant to this article, give written notice of the proposed sale to the California Debt and Investment Advisory Commission by mail, postage prepaid, as required by Chapter 12 (commencing with Section 8855) of Division 1 of Title 2 of the California Government Code

B.     Each year after the sale of any bonds, including refunding bonds, pursuant to this article, and until the final maturity of the bonds, the legislative body shall, not later than October 30th of each year, supply the following information to the California Debt and Investment Advisory Commission by mail, postage prepaid:

1.     The principal amount of bonds outstanding.

2.     The balance in the bond reserve fund.

3.     The balance in the capitalized interest fund, if any.

4.     The number of parcels which are delinquent with respect to their special tax payments, the amount that each parcel is delinquent, the length of time that each has been delinquent, and when foreclosure was commenced for each delinquent parcel.

5.     The balance in any construction funds.

6.     The assessed value of all parcels subject to special tax to repay the bonds as shown on the most recent equalized roll.

C.     In addition, with respect to any bonds sold pursuant to this article, regardless when sold, and until the final maturity of the bonds, the legislative body shall notify the California Debt and Investment Advisory Commission by mail, postage prepaid, within 10 days if any of the following events occur:

1.     The local agency or its trustee fails to pay principal and interest due on any scheduled payment date.

2.     Funds are withdrawn from a reserve fund to pay principal and interest on the bonds beyond levels set by the California Debt and Investment Advisory Commission.

D.    Neither the legislative body nor the California Debt and Investment Advisory Commission shall be liable for any inadvertent error in reporting the information required by this section. (3417-6/99, 3546-4/02, 3751-11/06)

Title 4 RESERVED

Title 5 BUSINESS LICENSES AND REGULATIONS
Note
*       Note: Chs. 5.10 and 5.12 repealed by Ord. 3603-6/03, Ch. 5.36 repealed by Ord. 3619-11/03, Chs. 5.40 and 5.41 repealed by Ord. 3560-7/02, Ch. 5.52 repealed by Ord. 3733-5/06, Ch. 5.68 repealed by Ord. 3608-6/03.

 

Chapter 5.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Note
*       Note: § 5.04.070 repealed by Ord. 3603-6/03.

 

5.04.010 Definitions
Unless the particular chapter, provision or the context otherwise requires, the definitions and provisions contained in this section shall govern the construction, meaning, and application of words and phrases used in Title 5.

“Amusement machine” means any mechanical or electronic game, equipment, machine or device which is played or operated for amusement or entertainment, wherein a sum of money is charged or collected for the operation of such machine or device by means of a coin slot or otherwise.

“Apartment house” means any building, or portion thereof, which is designed, built, rented, leased, let or hired out to be occupied, or which is occupied as the home or residence of two or more families living independently of each other, in which building or portion thereof, kitchen or cooking facilities are incorporated, whether or not the occupants do their cooking in said building, and shall include flats and apartments. This section shall not apply where the building or portion thereof mentioned above consists of two units on a single lot as long as one of such units is owner occupied.

“Auto wrecker” means any person who buys any motor vehicle for the purpose of dismantling or disassembling, or who dismantles or disassembles any such motor vehicle whether for the purpose of dealing in the parts thereof or using the same for the purpose of reconditioning any other vehicle, or for the purpose of selling or otherwise dealing in the materials of such vehicle or vehicles.

“Average number of employees” means the full-time equivalent of employees in the managing, operating, transacting and carrying on of any business in the City. The average number of employees for any business means the average number of persons employed daily for the 12-month period ending on December 31st preceding the date of license application and shall be determined by ascertaining the total number of hours of service performed by all employees during such year, and dividing the total number of hours of service thus obtained by the number of hours of service constituting a day’s work, according to the custom or laws governing such employments, and by again dividing the sum thus obtained by the number of business days in such year.

“Bulk-vending machine” means a nonelectrically-operated vending machine, containing unsorted confections, nuts or merchandise which, upon insertion of a coin or coins, dispenses same in equal portions, at random and without selection by the customer, excluding “vending machines.”

“Business” means professions, trades, and occupations and all and every kind of calling whether or not carried on for profit.

“City Treasurer” means the City Treasurer and designee.

“Dinner dancing place” means a place where music is provided and the public is permitted to dance without payment of a fee.

“Event” means certain short-term events which may be held on public or private property by persons, charitable organizations or businesses, at which some measure of business is conducted which may include the sale of tickets, entry fees or registration, the promoting or advertising of a business or organization, fund-raising events, or the sale of merchandise. These events include but are not limited to art shows, sidewalk sales, seminars, trade shows, amusement attractions, fashion shows, marathon runs, car shows, festivals, sporting events or any combination thereof.

“Exhibitors” means any person or organization exhibiting, displaying, selling, exchanging, or offering for sale or exchange any property or service at a meet or event.

“Finance Director” shall mean the Finance Director or his or her designee.

“General building contractor” means a contractor whose principal contracting business is in connection with any structure built, being built or to be built, for the support, shelter and enclosure of persons, animals, chattels or movable property of any kind, requiring in its construction the use of more than two unrelated building trades or crafts or to do or superintend the whole or any part thereof.

“General engineering contractor” means a contractor whose principal contracting business is in connection with fixed works requiring specialized engineering knowledge and skill, including the following divisions or subjects: irrigation, drainage, water power, water supply, flood control, inland waterways, harbors, docks and wharves, shipyards and ports, levees, river control and reclamation works, railroads, highways, streets and roads, tunnels, sewers and sewage disposal plants and systems, pipelines and other systems for the transmission of petroleum and other liquid or gaseous substances, parks, playgrounds and other recreational works, refineries, chemical plants and similar industrial plants requiring specialized engineering knowledge and skill, powerhouses, power plants and other utility plants and installations, land leveling and earthmoving projects, excavating, grading, trenching, paving and surfacing work and cement and concrete works in connection with the abovementioned fixed works.

“Hotel, motel or rooming house” means any lodging house, motel, hotel, rooming house, bungalow court, auto court or public or private club containing more than three guest rooms or units, and which is occupied or is intended or designed for occupancy by more than three guests, whether rent is paid in money, goods, labor, services or otherwise and which is maintained, advertised or held out to the public as a place where sleeping or rooming accommodations are furnished to the whole or any part of the public whether with or without meals.

“Junk collectors” means any person, other than a junk dealer engaged in the business of buying or selling, either at wholesale or retail, rags, bottles, papers, cans, metal or other articles of junk.

“License” means a license required for any person conducting, transacting, carrying on or engaged in any business, trade, profession, calling or occupation in the City.

“Licensee” means any person conducting, transacting, carrying on or engaged in any business in the City who has acquired, or is required to obtain, a business license.

“Merchandise” means tangible items, wares, goods, objects and articles which may be offered for sale.

“Operator” means any person conducting or operating a swap meet, or event within the City. This shall include such events commonly referred to as a farmer’s market and arts and craft shows.

“Peddler” means any person not having a fixed place of business in this City, who for him or herself, or as agent or representative for or of another, goes from house to house, and place to place, or at or along the streets of this City offering to sell tangible objects or articles, goods, wares, merchandise or services, who delivers such object, article, goods, wares, merchandise or service, in person, to the person placing the order for the same, at the time such order is placed and paid for.

“Person” means all domestic and foreign corporations, associations, syndicates, joint stock corporations, partnerships of every kind, clubs, or common law trusts, societies and individuals transacting and carrying on any business in the City other than as an employee.

“Public dance” means a dance open to the public for an admittance fee or charge, which is held on one day only.

“Public dance hall” means a place open to the public upon payment of admittance fee, wherein music is provided and people are allowed to dance which is so open at regular intervals or on regular days of the week.

“Service machine” means any mechanical or electronic machine, device or equipment that is operated, rented or used for a fee and provides a service to the customer, such as computers, scanners, photocopiers, weighing machines, vacuum cleaners or car washes.

“Solicitors and canvassers” means any person not having a fixed place of business within the City who for him or herself or as agent or representative for or of another, in person or by telephone or by any other means of communication is engaged in the business of going from house to house and place to place or at or along the streets of this City, offering to sell intangibles, such as bonds or stock or oil or mining shares or units, or soliciting or taking orders for future delivery of articles, goods, wares or merchandise, services or subscriptions inclusive of newspapers, magazines, periodicals, books and all other publications, and whether collecting advance payments or not, and inclusive of all persons who thus go from place to place, and from house to house within the City, in any like or analogous activities, and inclusive of any and all such persons who may or may not engage in any actual or purported interstate commerce. The terms “solicitor” and “canvasser” shall not apply to commercial salespeople, agents and the like who sell or take orders for the sale of wholesale goods to persons maintaining a fixed place of business in this City who are licensed as prescribed by this title.

“Specialty contractor” means a subcontractor and is a contractor whose operations as such are the performance of construction or other work requiring special skill and whose principal contracting business involves the use of specialized building trades or crafts or other specialized techniques and who is not classified as a general engineering or general building contractor by the Department of Professional and Vocational Standards of the State of California, and those various categories of contractors who are not required to be and who are not licensed as “contractors” by the aforementioned department. The classification assigned to contractors by the State of California will be used in determining the fee for issue of license by this City. A license as a specialty or subcontractor will not be issued to a person classified by the state as a general or engineering contractor unless such contractor holds a valid sub or specialty contractor classification license in addition to his or her general or engineering license.

“Stall, space or booth” shall be defined as a physical area measuring 144 square feet or less.

“Swap meet” means an operation of occasional, periodic or regularly scheduled markets held within a building of at least 100,000 square feet, or outside, that has received a conditional use permit to conduct an indoor swap meet.

“Vending machine” means any weighing, service, merchandise, food or drink-dispensing machine, or device wherein a sum of money is charged or collected for the operation of such machine or device by means of a coin slot or otherwise, excluding “bulk-vending machines.” (766-7/60, 838-6/61, 904-6/62, 1461-2/69, 1604-10/70, 1924-7/74, 1935-11/74, 2594-2/83, 2679-3/84, 3100-5/91, 3161-7/92, 3603-6/03, 3751-11/06)

 

5.04.020 Purpose
The ordinance codified herein is enacted solely to raise revenue for municipal purposes, and is not intended for regulation. (766-7/60)

 

5.04.030 Effect on Other Ordinances
Persons required to pay a license tax for transacting and carrying on any business under this title shall not be relieved from the payment of any license tax for the privilege of doing such business required under any other ordinance of the City of Huntington Beach, and shall remain subject to the regulatory provisions of other ordinances. (766-7/60)

 

5.04.040 Effect on Past Actions and Obligations
Neither the adoption of the ordinance codified herein nor its superseding of any portion of any other ordinance of the City shall in any manner be construed to affect prosecution for violation of any other ordinance committed prior to the effective date hereof, nor be construed as a waiver of any license or any penal provision applicable to any such violation, nor be construed to affect the validity of any bond or cash deposit required by any ordinance to be posted, filed or deposited, and all rights and obligations thereunto appertaining shall continue in full force and effect. (766-7/60)

 

5.04.050 Prohibited Occupations
Nothing in this title shall be construed to permit the conduct of any trade, business or occupation which is prohibited by an applicable federal, state or municipal ordinance or regulation, or which has been declared illegal or to constitute a nuisance by any governmental or municipal authority. (852-8/61)

 

5.04.060 Permit From Council Required for Certain Businesses
No license shall be issued for the conduct of any business which, in the opinion of the Finance Director would be detrimental to the public health, safety, welfare or moral standards of the City until a permit shall have first been obtained from the City Council or appropriate City department. (838-6/61, 3603-6/03, 3751-11/06)

 

5.04.080 Investigation Fees
Investigation fees may be levied against business applicants, firms, persons or subsequent employees, when so designated by the City Manager and City Council. Said fees shall be reasonable and based on standards set by the City Manager and shall be payable to the City Treasurer prior to the police investigation. Fees are not refundable. (1171-1/66, 3603-6/03)

 

5.04.090 License Not a Permit
The business licenses issued pursuant to the provisions of this title constitute a receipt for the license fee paid and shall have no other legal effect. A business license is a requirement, not a permit to conduct, manage or carry on any business activity within this City. (838-6/61)

 

Chapter 5.08 LICENSING PROCEDURES
Note
*       Note: §§ 5.08.190, 5.08.210 and 5.08.240 repealed by Ord. 3603-6/03.

 

5.08.010 License—Required
There are imposed upon the businesses, trades, professions, callings and occupations specified in this title license taxes in the amounts hereinafter prescribed. It shall be unlawful for any person to transact and carry on any business, trade, profession, calling or occupation in the City without first having procured a license from the City so to do or without complying with any and all applicable provisions of this title. (327-4/29, 766-7/60)

 

5.08.015 Evidence of Doing Business
When any person shall by use of signs, circulars, cards, telephone book or newspapers, advertise, hold out, or represent that the person is in business in the City, or when any person holds an active license or permit issued by a governmental agency indicating that the person is in business in the City, and such person fails to deny by a sworn statement to the Finance Director that they are conducting business in the City, after being requested to do so by the Finance Director or authorized employees of the City, then these facts shall be considered prima facie evidence that the person is conducting a business in the City. (3603-6/03, 3751-11/06)

 

5.08.020 Exemptions—Generally
Nothing in this title shall be deemed or construed to apply to any person transacting and carrying on any business exempt by virtue of the Constitution or applicable statutes of the United States or the State of California from payment of such taxes as are herein prescribed.

A.    Interstate Commerce. None of the license taxes provided for by this title shall be so applied as to occasion an undue burden upon interstate commerce. In any case where a license tax is believed by a licensee or applicant for license to place an undue burden upon such commerce, he or she may apply to the Finance Director for an adjustment of the tax so that it shall not be discriminatory or unreasonable as to such commerce. Such application may be made before, at or within six months after payment of the prescribed license tax. The applicant shall, by affidavit and supporting testimony, show his or her method of business and the average number of employees or estimated average number of employees and such other information as the Finance Director may deem necessary in order to determine the extent, if any, of such undue burden on such commerce. The Finance Director shall then conduct an investigation, and after having first obtained the written approval of the City Attorney, subject to the approval of the City Council, shall fix as the license tax for the applicant, an amount that is reasonable and nondiscriminatory, or if the license tax has already been paid, shall order a refund of the amount over and above the license tax so fixed. In fixing the license tax to be charged, the Finance Director shall have the power to base the license tax upon the average number of employees or any other measure which will ensure that the license tax assessed shall be uniform with that assessed on businesses of like nature, so long as the amount assessed does not exceed the license tax as prescribed by this title. Should the Finance Director determine the average number of employees measure of license tax to be the proper basis, he or she may require the applicant to submit, either at the time of termination of applicant’s business in the City or at the end of each three-month period, a sworn statement of the average number of employees and pay the amount of license tax therefor, provided that no additional license tax during any one calendar year shall be required after the licensee shall have paid an amount equal to the annual license tax as prescribed in this title.

1.     Any person claiming an exemption pursuant to this chapter shall file a verified statement with the Finance Director stating the facts upon which exemption is claimed.

2.     The Finance Director shall, upon a proper showing contained in the verified statement, subject to approval of the City Council, issue a license to such person claiming exemption under this section without payment to the City of the license tax required by this title.

3.     The Finance Director, after giving notice and a reasonable opportunity for hearing to a licensee, as provided in Sections 5.08.240 and 5.08.250, may revoke any license granted pursuant to the provisions of this section upon information that the licensee is not entitled to the exemption as provided herein.

B.     Charitable and Nonprofit Organizations. As used in this title, “charitable” and “nonprofit organizations” shall include only religious, charitable, fraternal, educational, military, state, county or municipal organizations or associations as defined by Internal Revenue Code Section 501(c). The provisions of this chapter shall not be deemed or construed to require the payment of a license tax to conduct, manage or carry on any business, occupation or activity from any institution or organization which is conducted, managed or carried on wholly for the benefit of charitable purposes or from which profit is not derived, either directly or indirectly, by any person, nor shall any license tax be required for the conducting of any entertainment, concert, exhibition or lecture on scientific, historical, literary, religious or moral subjects within the City whenever the receipts of any such entertainment, concert, exhibition or lecture are to be appropriated at any church or school or to any religious or benevolent purpose; nor shall any license tax be required for the conducting of any entertainment, dance, concert, exhibition or lecture by a religious, charitable, fraternal, educational, military, state, county, or municipal organizations or associations, or lecture are to be appropriated for the purpose and object for which such organization or association was formed and from which profit is not derived, either directly or indirectly, by any person, provided, however, that nothing in this section shall be deemed to exempt any such organization or association from complying with any of the provisions of this Code requiring a permit from the City Council or other City department, or any commission or officer to conduct, manage or carry on any profession, trade calling or occupation.

C.     Disabled Veterans—Exempted When. Every honorably discharged soldier, sailor or Marine of the United States, who is physically unable to obtain his or her livelihood by means of manual labor and who is a qualified voter of the State of California, shall have the right to hawk, peddle and vend any goods, wares, or merchandise owned by him or her, except spiritous, malt, vinous or other intoxicating beverages, without the payment of a license fee, subject, however, to the restrictions, limitations, regulations and conditions hereinafter set forth. Every applicant must comply with the following requirements before a license may be issued under the provisions of this chapter:

1.     Every applicant must furnish a certificate of physical disability executed by a qualified surgeon of the United States Navy, Army, Marines, Air Force or U. S. Public Health Service, a certificate of honorable discharge from the United States Navy, Army, Marines, Air Force or U. S. Coast Guard, and a written recommendation from the representatives of the local posts of the American Legion and/or the Veterans of Foreign Wars.

2.     Every applicant must furnish two identification photographs, one to be attached to the license issued to said applicant, and the other to be attached to the copy retained by the Finance Director. The applicant must also sign both copies of the license at the time of the issuance thereof.

3.     License Issuance Conditions. A license when issued is subject to the following conditions:

a.     It is nontransferable and for the exclusive use of the licensee named.

b.     Applicant’s identification photograph must be attached to the license at all times, and failure to comply herewith is grounds for revocation of the license and for refusing its renewal or the issuance of a new license thereafter.

c.     The licensee named must identify him or herself by his or her signature and present a valid license whenever required to do so by a police officer or the Finance Director.

d.     Every license issued under the provisions of this section shall expire 30 days from and after the date of issuance and a new license may thereafter be issued pursuant to the provisions of this section subject to review by the Finance Director.

e.     It is unlawful for any person, other than the licensee named, to use or have in his or her possession any license issued pursuant to the provisions of this section.

f.      It is unlawful for any person to purchase or transfer any license issued pursuant to the provisions of this section, or for any person to transfer or convey the certificates mentioned in subsection (C)(1) of this section to any other person for the purpose of securing a license as herein provided.

D.    Real Estate Agents. Persons licensed by the California Department of Real Estate and having their license placed with a broker licensed by the California Department of Real Estate for purposes of supervision and control, as required by state law, shall not be subject to taxation under this title if their broker pays the tax in accordance with the provisions of this title and includes the real estate agent as one of its employees for purposes of any computation of the tax. (327-4/29, 766-7/60, 3603-6/03, 3751-11/06, 3817-4/09)

 

5.08.030 Conflict With Other Provisions—Tax Payment
Persons not required to obtain a license prior to doing business within the City because of conflict with applicable statutes of the United States or of the State of California shall not be liable for payment of the tax imposed by this title. (327-4/29, 766-7/60, 3603-6/03)

 

5.08.040 Fee Payment—Average Number of Employees
In the case of an application for license under the average number of employees classification, the applicant shall pay the entire minimum fee plus the amount based on the average number of employees at the time the application for license is made. (766-7/60, 904-6/62, 1605-10/70, 3603-6/03)

 

5.08.050 License—Term
The fees for all licenses, whether under flat rate (annual) status or Classifications A, B, C, and D, shall be payable in advance, and such license shall cover the period of one year from the first day of the month in which said license is issued. (766-7/60, 904-6/62, 1605-10/70)

 

5.08.060 Additional Sums Due Before Renewal
No renewal license shall be issued until the full amount due and payable, including any penalties or other unpaid fees or taxes levied by any City department have been paid in full. (766-7/60, 904-6/62, 1605-10/70, 3603-6/03, 3751-11/06)

 

5.08.065 Application, License Process and Renewal Fees
A non-refundable processing fee shall be paid at the time of application and a non-refundable renewal fee shall be paid annually to renew the business license. These fees shall be established by resolution of the City Council. These fees shall be in addition to any other taxes or fees required by this title or required under any other chapter of this Code. (3603-6/03)

 

5.08.070 Fee Payment—When Ceasing Business
In no event shall any portion of the fee be refundable in the event a business shall cease operation. (766-7/60, 904-6/62, 1605-10/70, 3603-6/03)

 

5.08.080 Fee Payment—When Due
The license fee payable under the average number of employees classification shall be due and payable in the case of an original license before the license is issued, and in the case of a renewal license, shall accompany the application for renewal. (766-7/60, 904-6/62, 1605-10/70, 3603-6/03)

 

5.08.090 Nontransferable—Amended for Changed Location
No license issued pursuant to this title shall be transferable; provided, that where a license issued authorizing a particular person to transact and carry on a business at a particular place or under a particular business name, such licensee may upon application therefor and paying a fee as adopted by resolution of the City Council have the license amended to authorize the transacting and carrying on of such business under said license at some other location to which the business is or is to be moved or business name. (766-7/60, 838-6/61, 1605-10/70, 3603-6/03)

 

5.08.100 Delinquent Payment—Penalty
For failure to pay a license tax when due, the City Treasurer shall direct the Finance Director to add a penalty of 10% of the license tax on the first day of each month after the due date thereof. (766-7/60, 3603-6/03, 3751-11/06)

 

5.08.110 Delinquent Payment—Bars Further License
No license shall knowingly be issued to any person who, at the time of making application for any license, is indebted to the City for any prior unpaid license fee or other fee, permit or invoice. (372-3/34, 838-6/61, 3603-6/03)

 

5.08.120 Bonds—Required When
Where, by the terms of this title, a bond is required to be furnished by any person accruing or applying for a license, such person shall, before the issuance to him or her of such license, deliver to the City Treasurer a bond, executed by any reliable surety company or by two personal sureties, each of whom is the owner of property within the City, of the value of twice the amount of the penal sum of the bond. (327-4/29, 766-7/60, 3603-6/03)

 

5.08.130 Bond—Form
The conditions of the bond shall be in a form approved by the City Attorney. (327-4/29, 766-7/60, 3603-6/03)

 

5.08.140 Separate License—Branch Establishments
A separate license must be obtained for each branch establishment or location of the business transacted and carried on and for each separate type of business at the same location, and each license shall authorize the licensee to transact and carry on only the business licensed thereby at the location or in the manner designated in such license; provided that warehouses and distributing plants used in connection with and incidental to a business licensed under the provisions of this title shall not be deemed to be separate places of business or branch establishments. (766-7/60)

 

5.08.150 Unexpired Prior to Ordinance
Where a license for revenue purposes has been issued to any business by the City and the tax paid therefor under the provisions of any ordinance heretofore enacted and the term of such license has not expired, then the license tax prescribed for the business by this title shall not be payable until the expiration of the term of such unexpired license. (766-7/60)

 

5.08.160 Replacement—Fees
A duplicate license, license decal or license plate may be issued by the Finance Director to replace any license, license decal or license plate previously issued hereunder which has been lost or destroyed upon the licensee filing a statement of such fact, and at the time of filing such statement, paying to the City Treasurer a fee as adopted by resolution of the City Council. (766-7/60, 838-6/61, 1605-10/70, 3603-6/03, 3751-11/06)

 

5.08.170 Posting and Keeping
All licenses must be kept and posted in the following manner:

A.    Any licensee transacting or carrying on business at a fixed place of business in the City shall keep the license posted in public view upon the premises where such business is carried on and have in or upon the licensee’s business vehicles the business license or other form of license as designated by the Finance Director issued for such vehicle.

B.     Any licensee transacting and carrying on business but not operating at a fixed place of business in the City shall keep the license upon his or her person at all times while transacting and carrying on such business and have in or upon each of the licensee’s business vehicles, at the time of operation in this City, the business license or other form of license as designated by the Finance Director issued for such vehicles. (766-7/60, 838-6/61, 3603-6/03, 3751-11/06)

 

5.08.180 Application—Contents
Before any license is issued to any person, unless otherwise provided in this title, a written application by the applicant shall be made to the Finance Director, upon a form to be secured from the Finance Director and which application shall contain the following information:

A.    The exact nature or kind of business, profession, show, exhibition, game, occupation or enterprise for which the license is requested;

B.     The place where such business, profession, show, exhibition, game, occupation or enterprise is to be carried on, and if the same is not to be carried on at any permanent place of business, the places of residence of the owners of the same;

C.     Any further information which the Finance Director may require to enable him or her to issue the type of license applied for;

D.    In the event that application is made for the issuance of a license to a person doing business under a fictitious name, the application shall set forth the names and place of residence of those owning the business, profession, show, exhibition, game, occupation or enterprise. (766-7/60, 3603-6/03, 3751-11/06)

 

5.08.200 Error by Finance Director—Correct Amount Due
In no case shall any mistake of the Finance Director in stating the amount of a license prevent or prejudice the collection by the City of what should be actually due from any person carrying on any business, profession, show, exhibition, game, occupation or enterprise subject to a license under the provisions of this title. (766-7/60, 3603-6/03, 3751-11/06)

 

5.08.220 Statements Not Conclusive Determination
A.    No statements shall be conclusive as to the matters set forth therein, nor shall the filing of the same preclude the City from collecting by appropriate action such sum as is actually due and payable hereunder. Such statement and each of the several items therein contained shall be subject to audit and verification by the Finance Director.

B.     All licensees, applicants for license, and persons engaged in business in the City are required to permit an examination of such books and records for the purposes aforesaid.

C.     The information furnished or secured pursuant to this section or Section 5.08.210 shall be confidential except that information which is deemed to be public records pursuant to state law. Any unauthorized disclosure or use of such information by any officer or employee of the City shall constitute a misdemeanor and such officer or employee shall be subject to the penalty provisions of this title in addition to any other penalties provided by law. (766-7/60, 3603-6/03, 3751-11/06)

 

5.08.230 Failure to File Statement
If any person fails to file any required statement within the time prescribed, or if after demand therefor made by the Finance Director, such person fails to file a corrected statement, the Finance Director may determine the amount of license tax due from such person by means of such information as he or she may be able to obtain. (3603-6/03, 3751-11/06)

 

5.08.250 Additional Power of Finance Director
In addition to all other powers conferred upon the Finance Director, he or she shall have the power, for good cause shown, to extend the time for filing any required sworn statement for a period not exceeding 30 days, and in such case to waive any penalty that would otherwise have accrued in accordance with the City Charter and Municipal Code; and shall have the further power, with the consent of the City Council, to compromise and claim as to amount of license tax due. (766-7/60, 3603-6/03, 3751-11/06)

 

5.08.260 Deposit of Fees, Penalties and Other Moneys Into General Fund
All fees, penalties and other moneys received by the City Treasurer pursuant to the provisions of this title shall be deposited to the general fund of this City upon the same day or the business day next following the receipt of the same. (3603-6/03)

 

5.08.270 Renewal
The licensee shall renew the license annually by payment of the tax and renewal fee as set forth by resolution of the City Council, regardless of whether or not a renewal notice is received by the licensee. (3603-6/03)

 

5.08.280 Examination of Business Place
The Finance Director, in the exercise of the duties imposed upon him or her hereunder, shall examine or cause to be examined all places of business in the City to ascertain whether the provisions of Chapters 5.04 through 5.16 of this title have been complied with. (3603-6/03, 3751-11/06)

 

5.08.290 Officers’ Right of Entry
The Finance Director, code enforcement officers, and any police officer shall have the power and authority to enter, free of charge at any reasonable time, any place of business required to be licensed herein, and demand exhibition of the licensee’s business license. Any person having such business license theretofore issued, in his, her or its possession or under his, her or its control, who willfully fails to exhibit same on demand, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to the penalties provided by this title. (3603-6/03, 3751-11/06)

 

5.08.300 License—Revocation—Suspension
A.    Any licensee who is conducting the business licensed in such a manner as to be detrimental to the public health, morals or safety of the general public or shall permit the violation of City ordinances, state laws or the laws of the United States of America within its licensed establishment shall be subject to having its license suspended or permanently revoked by the Finance Director.

B.     The licensee shall be provided with written notice by first class mail, postage prepaid, of such revocation and/or suspension. (3603-6/03, 3751-11/06)

 

5.08.310 Appeal
Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Finance Director under Huntington Beach Municipal Code Chapters 5.04 through 5.16 may file an appeal with the City Clerk within 15 days of the date of mailing of the notice of revocation or suspension, and, at the time of such filing, pay a fee as adopted by resolution of the City Council. (3603-6/03, 3751-11/06)

 

5.08.320 Appeal Procedure
A.    The City Clerk shall schedule a hearing to be held within 15 days after the filing of the notice of appeal.

B.     Notice of the date, time and place of the hearing shall be mailed, postage prepaid, at least 10 days prior thereto to the licensee at the address given in the notice of appeal, or if none is provided, to the address set forth in the permit application.

C.     The City Council, or their designee, shall have authority to determine all questions raised on such appeal. The decision of the City Council or their designee shall be final. (3603-6/03)

 

5.08.330 Hearing—Licensee Right
At such hearing, the licensee shall be entitled to be represented by counsel, and shall be given full opportunity to show cause why its license shall not be revoked or suspended. (3603-6/03)

 

5.08.340 License—Tax—A Debt
The amount of any license tax and penalty imposed by the provisions of this title shall be deemed a debt to the City. An action may be commenced in the name of the City in any court of competent jurisdiction for the amount of any delinquent license tax and penalties. (3603-6/03)

 

5.08.350 Remedies Cumulative
All remedies prescribed hereunder shall be cumulative and the use of one or more remedies by the City shall not bar the use of any other remedy for the purpose of enforcing the provisions hereof. (3603-6/03)

 

5.08.360 Zoning and Other Regulations
No license shall be issued to any person failing to present all appropriate zoning permits, or who has failed to comply with any other provision of this Code. (3603-6/03)

 

5.08.370 Violation—Penalty
Any person violating this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of $1,000.00 or by imprisonment in the county jail for a period not to exceed six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (3603-6/03)

 

Chapter 5.16 RATES
5.16.010 Rates per Employees
The following rates shall apply to business licenses:

 

First 3 employees

$75.00

4 through 12 employees, per employee

$4.00

13 through 52 employees, per employee

$3.00

All other employees in excess of 52 employees, per employee

$2.00

(766-7/60, 904-6/62, 1605-10/70, 2022-1/76, 2965-10/88, 3100-5/91, 3161-8/92, 3603-6/03)

 

5.16.020 Rates per Employees—Minimum License
The minimum license in each classification shall be $75.00 per year. In any case where a licensee or an applicant for a license believes that this individual business is not assigned to a proper classification under this chapter because of circumstances peculiar to it, he or she may apply to the Finance Director for reclassification. Such application shall contain such information as the Finance Director may deem necessary and require in order to determine whether applicant’s individual business is properly classified. The Finance Director shall then conduct an investigation, following which he or she shall assign the applicant’s individual business to the classification shown to be proper on the basis of such investigation. (766-7/60, 904-6/62, 1605-10/70, 2965-10/88, 3100-5/91, 3161-8/92, 3603-6/03, 3751-11/06)

 

5.16.030 Application for Reclassification—Action
The Finance Director shall notify the applicant of the action taken on the application for classification. Such notice shall be given by serving it personally or by depositing it in the United States Post Office at Huntington Beach, California, postage prepaid, addressed to the applicant at his or her last known address. (766-7/60, 904-6/62, 1605-10/70, 3603-6/03, 3751-11/06)

 

5.16.040 License Classifications Designated
Every person described in the following classifications who engages in business within the City shall pay a license tax based upon the average number of employees at the rates hereinafter set forth:

A.    Classification A.

Abstractor of titles

Accountant

Accounting service

Advertising agent

Agricultural advisor or counselor

Appraiser

Aquarian chirothessian

Architect

Assayer

Attorney at law

Auctioneer

Auditor

Bacteriologist

Bail bond broker

Barber shop

Beauty shop

Business management consultant

Certified public accountant

Chemical engineer

Chemist

Child nurseries (9 children or more)

Chiropodist

Chiropractor

Civil engineer

Claim adjuster

Construction engineer

Consulting engineer

Dancing academy

Dealers in stocks, bonds and other securities

Dental laboratory

Dentist

Designer

Detective

Detective agency

Draftsman

Drugless practitioner

Electrical engineer

Electrologist

Employment agency or bureau

Fine arts or music school

Geologist

Herbalist

Industrial relations consultant

Insurance adjuster

Interior decorator

Investment counselor

Labor relations consultant

Landscape architect

Lapidary

Mechanical engineer

Mortician

Naturopath

Oculist

Optician

Optometrist

Oral surgeon

Orchard care

Osteopath physician

Physician

Physician and surgeon

Private home for the aged (7 persons or more)

Real estate broker

Real estate office

Stocks and bonds broker

Surgeon

Surveyor

Taxidermist

Trade or business school

Tree remover

Tree surgery

Tree trimming

Veterinarian

and any other business of a professional nature where the principal business activity is the furnishing of services and where such business is not specifically listed in some other classification or section of this chapter will be classified in the above category.

B.     Classification B. Any person who is licensed as a general building, general engineering or specialty contractor.

C.     Classification C. Any person conducting, managing or carrying on a business consisting mainly of manufacturing, packing, processing, carrying or selling at wholesale any goods, wares, merchandise, or produce, comes under this classification.

D.    Classification D. Any person conducting, managing or carrying on a business consisting mainly of selling at retail any goods, or conducting and maintaining a recreation park or amusement center under one general management, or business not otherwise specifically licensed by other sections of this chapter comes under this classification. (327-4/29, 766-7/60, 838-6/61, 904-6/62, 1605-10/70, 3603-6/03)

 

5.16.050 Flat Rate Payment Code Letters
Every person transacting and carrying on the businesses herein enumerated shall pay a license tax as hereinafter set forth. The tax and the duration of the license shall be annual, quarterly, monthly, weekly or daily as indicated in this section. The letter “A” following the fee shall indicate an annual fee; the letter “D” shall indicate daily fee; the letter “M” shall indicate monthly fee; the letter “Q” shall indicate quarterly fee; and the letter “W” shall indicate weekly fee. All amounts shown are in dollars. (766-7/60, 904-6/62)

 

5.16.060 Advertising
The fees for advertisers shall be as follows:

 

A.    By distributing samples or handbills, provided that this section shall not apply to any person, employee, agent or representative of any person who already has a City license as provided elsewhere in this chapter:

$75.00 A

B.     By sign or bill posting, sign erection or installation, or any form of outdoor advertising as defined by the Huntington Beach Municipal Code:

$112.50 A

 

 

C.     By vehicle containing amplifier, phonograph, loudspeakers, etc., for each vehicle:

$112.50 A

Or at the option of the licensee, for each vehicle:

$49.50 D

If any such vehicle is used by a City licensee to advertise solely his or her own business and such vehicle is regularly registered and licensed by the state to such licensee, then the fee for each such vehicle:

$58.00 A

Or at the option of the licensee, for each such vehicle:

$40.00 D

D.    By means of stereopticon, biograph, moving pictures similar device (not moving picture theaters) used outdoors:

$225.00 A

Or, used indoors:

$112.50 A

(766-7/60, 838-6/61, 904-6/62, 1604-10/70, 3100-5/91, 3161-8/92, 3603-6/03)

 

5.16.070 Amusement Activities
License fees are imposed for amusement activities as follows:

 

A.    For any bowling alley, the first six lanes, a minimum fee of $327.50 per year, for each lane over six:

$58.00 A

B.     For boxing or wrestling exhibitions per exhibition:

$58.00 D

C.     Carnival, tent show or open-air show in hall or building constructed for theatrical purposes:

$187.50 D

In addition, for five concessions or less:

$66.00 D

In addition, for each concession in excess of five:

$39.00 D

D.    For each juke box, phonograph or motion picture or other type device operated by insertion of coin, per machine:

$26.00 A

E.     The owner of the business shall be held responsible for the full amount of the license fee if the operator, exhibitor, machine owner, lessee or other person has not paid the fee when due and payable.

(766-7/60, 904-6/62, 1604-10/70, 2594-2/83, 3100-5/91, 3161-8/92, 3603-6/03)

 

5.16.080 Auctioneer
For the business of licensed auctioneer or auction company whose permanent place of business, as filed with the California Auctioneer Commission, is located in the City of Huntington Beach, the fee shall be subject to rates per employees as detailed in Section 5.16.010. (766-7/60, 904-6/62, 1604-10/70, 2784-9/85)

 

5.16.090 Bankrupt Sale
For the conducting, managing or carrying on the business of selling, offering for sale or otherwise handling by special retail sale the stock in trade of any bankrupt or insolvent person, the fee shall be $58.00 D. (3100-5/91, 3161-8/92)

 

5.16.100 Bath
For every person conducting, managing, or carrying on the business of giving steam baths, electric light baths, shower baths, electric tub baths, sponge baths or operating any public bath which maintains in connection therewith a steam room, plunge, bath or sleeping accommodations, the fee shall be $112.50 A. (766-7/60, 904-6/62, 1604-10/70, 3100-5/91, 3161-8/92)

 

5.16.110 Circus
With seating capacity under 4,000, the fee shall be:

 

 

First day:

$262.50 D

 

Each additional day:

$187.50 D

With seating capacity over 4,000, the fee shall be:

 

 

First day:

$337.50 D

 

Each additional day:

$187.50 D

 

For every sideshow in conjunction with a circus, the fee shall be:

$49.50 D

 

For every concession or carnival ride in conjunction with a circus,
the fee shall be:

$40.00 D

(766-7/60, 904-6/62, 1604-10/70, 3100-5/91, 3161-8/92, 3603-6/03)

 

5.16.120 Contractors Without a Fixed Place of Business Within the City
Every person engaging in business in this City as a general building, general engineering or specialty contractor may alternatively pay a license fee as indicated herein:

 

General engineering and/or general building contractor:

$142.50 A

Specialty, subcontractor, or other:

$90.00 A

(766-7/60, 904-6/62, 1604-10/70, 3100-5/91, 3161-8/92, 3603-6/03)

 

5.16.140 House Moving
 

Every person engaged in house moving or wrecking of buildings and/or structures, shall pay a fee of:

$112.50 A

(766-7/60, 904-6/62, 1604-10/70, 3100-5/91, 3161-8/92)

 

5.16.160 Junk Collector
 

For every person conducting, managing or carrying on the business of junk collector, the fee shall be:

$187.50 A

Or at the option of the licensee:

$40.00 D

(766-7/60, 904-6/62, 1604-10/70, 3100-5/91, 3161-8/92, 3603-6/03)

 

5.16.170 Junk Dealer and Auto Wrecking
 

For every person conducting, managing or carrying on the business of junk dealer or auto wrecker, the fee shall be:

$187.50 A

(3603-6/03)

 

5.16.180 Music or Fine Arts Teacher
Every person engaged in the profession of teaching music, dance, dramatics, art, designing, dressmaking, mechanics or any other trade or fine art who has no regularly established place of business where such teaching is carried on, shall pay a fee of $75.00 A. (766-7/60, 904-6/62, 1604-10/70, 3100-5/91, 3161-8/92, 3603-6/03)

 

5.16.190 Office Building
For every person conducting, managing or carrying on the business of operating an office building:

 

For each office building therein the fee shall be:

$32.50 A

And for each unit/office:

$7.00

(1604-10/70, 3100-5/91, 3161-8/92, 3603-6/03)

 

5.16.200 Oil Business—Nonproduction
Every person conducting, managing, carrying on or engaging in, from a fixed place of business in the City, the business or activity of oil well, injection well, or water-source-well drilling or servicing operation, or refining oil or petroleum products and producing the byproducts, or marketing, selling or distributing at wholesale, oil or any petroleum products, or byproducts, or maintaining tankage or warehouse storage facilities where oil is kept for the purpose of wholesale distribution thereof, shall pay a license tax in accordance with Section 5.16.010. Nothing in this section shall be deemed to apply or relate to actual oil or gas production operations. (1652-9/71)

 

5.16.210 Outdoor Theaters
For every person conducting, managing or carrying on an outdoor theater where moving or motion pictures are exhibited the license fee shall be:

 

Number of Stalls

Fee Per Year

First 500

$337.50

All over 500 (per stall)

$0.50

A separate license shall be obtained for snack bars, foodstands and other concessions. (766-7/60, 904-6/62, 1604-10/70, 3100-5/91, 3161-8/92)

 

5.16.220 Pawnbroker
Every person conducting, managing, or operating a pawnbroker business shall pay a fee of $487.50 A. (766-7/60, 904-6/62, 1604-10/70, 3100-5/91, 3161-8/92, 3603-6/03)

 

5.16.230 Peddler
Peddlers of flags, banners, balloons, cones, horns, kites, noise-making instruments, toys, notions, souvenirs or similar goods or novelties of any description other than from a stand, tent, wagon or other vehicle shall pay a fee of $17.00 D or by vehicle $97.50 A. Peddlers of any article or commodity not mentioned in this section, including every person, firm or corporation conducting the business of selling and delivering any goods for human consumption directly to the consumer thereof, by means of a regular system of delivery vehicles for the purpose of making sales and deliveries upon a fixed route, or in the case of food catering vehicles, from place to place, within this City shall pay a fee of $17.00 D or $97.50 A. The license tax prescribed by this section shall cover one person and in the case of route peddlers, one vehicle only and an additional like fee shall be paid for each additional such person or vehicle so engaged. (766-7/60, 838-6/61, 904-6/62, 1604-10/70, 3100-5/91, 3161-8/92, 3603-6/03)

 

5.16.240 Public Dance Hall, Dinner Dancing Place, and Public Dance Place
Every person conducting, managing or operating a public dance hall or dinner place shall pay a tax of $337.50 A. Every person conducting, managing or operating a public dance shall pay a tax of $58.00 D. (3603-6/03)

 

5.16.250 Public Utilities
Any public utility as defined by the PUC operating in the City under a franchise or franchises from the City, or applicable therein; and which makes franchise payments thereunder is subject to the provisions of this chapter if it engages in retail merchandising, pursuant to Section 5.16.040(D) not covered by the franchise in the City. (766-7/60, 904-6/62, 1604-10/70, 3603-6/03)

 

5.16.260 Rooming House, Apartment House, Motel, Bungalow or Auto Court
For every person conducting, managing, or carrying on the business of operating an apartment house, rooming house, motel, bungalow court or auto court consisting of three or more rental units, the fee shall be $32.00 A and $7.00 per unit. (766-7/60, 904-6/62, 1604-10/70, 3100-5/91, 3161-8/92)

 

5.16.270 Skating Rink
For every person conducting, managing or carrying on any ice or roller skating rink, enclosure or park, the license fee shall be $187.50 A. (766-7/60, 904-6/62, 1604-10/70, 3100-5/91, 3161-8/92)

 

5.16.280 Small Stands and Businesses—Temporary and Permanent
Every person, not having a regularly established place of business in this City, who sells or offers for sale goods or articles of any description in his or her possession, or services, at, on or from a stand upon any public street, alley or public place, or in or from a doorway of any room or building, or unenclosed or vacant lot or parcel of land, which business is not otherwise licensed by the terms of this chapter shall pay a fee of $75.00; or, at the option of the licensee, $17.00 D. (766-7/60, 1604-10/70, 3100-5/91, 3161-8/92, 3603-6/03)

 

5.16.290 Telephone Solicitor or Canvasser
For every person conducting, managing, carrying on or engaging in the business of telephone solicitation or canvassing for each such person employed or so engaged, the fee shall be $49.00 D. (766-7/60, 838-6/61, 904-6/62, 1604-10/70, 3100-5/91, 3161-8/92, 3603-6/03)

 

5.16.300 Soliciting on Streets for Hotels or Dining Rooms
For every person conducting, managing or carrying on the business of soliciting customers, or patronage upon any public street, alley or other public place, for any hotel, inn, rooming house, lodging house, apartment house, restaurant, dining room or house or place where meals or board or lodging are furnished for compensation, the fee shall be $112.50 A. (766-7/60, 904-6/62, 1604-10/70, 3100-5/91, 3161-8/92)

 

5.16.310 Stockyard Auction
For every person conducting, managing or carrying on any stockyard, sales, stable or corral where horses, cattle, goats, sheep, mules and other livestock are bought, sold or exchanged at public auction, the license fee shall be $187.50 A. (1604-10/70, 3100-5/91, 3161-8/92)

 

5.16.315 Swap Meets
The operators and exhibitors shall pay a business license tax according to the provisions of this section:

A.    Indoor Swap Meets. Indoor swap meets, because of their unique character and location, will have rates established individually by City Council action.

B.     Outdoor Swap Meets.

1.     Every operator shall pay a business license tax, based upon the following table:

 

 

Stalls/Booths

(Annual)

0 - 50

$300.00

51 - 100

$400.00

101 - 200

$500.00

over 200

$600.00

 

2.     Each exhibitor will be required to have a regular business license after participating eight times at the swap meet. (3241-10/94, 3603-6/03)

 

5.16.317 Events
Any person conducting, organizing, promoting or operating an event is required to obtain a business license. A list of tentative exhibitors and service providers must accompany the application for business license.

A.    Every operator shall pay a business license tax based on the number of exhibitors/booths according to the following table:

 

Exhibitors/Booths

30 Days or Less

Annual

0-3 booths:

$75.00

$100.00

4-10 booths:

$100.00

$150.00

11-25 booths:

$150.00

$200.00

26-50 booths:

$200.00

$300.00

51-100 booths:

$300.00

$400.00

101-200 booths:

$400.00

$500.00

Over 200 booths:

$500.00

$600.00

 

B.     Blanket License. The operator may elect to obtain a blanket business license to cover all service providers at the event, provided that such persons do not have a fixed place of business within this City and do not have an annual license with the City as provided elsewhere by the title. The tax for a blanket license is based on the number of service providers employed for a fee to provide services at the event, according to the following table:

 

 

1 - 3 service providers:

$75.00

4 - 10 service providers:

$100.00

11 - 15 service providers:

$150.00

16 - 20 service providers:

$200.00

21 - 25 service providers:

$250.00

26 - 30 service providers:

$300.00

31 - 40 service providers:

$400.00

41 - 50 service providers:

$500.00

Over 50 service providers:

$600.00

 

The tax for the blanket license shall be in addition to the tax for the operator’s business license for the event.

C.     Payments and Application. All applications must be submitted at least 14 days prior to the day of the event to allow time for processing. Payments received under 21 days must be made by money order, cash, check (drawn on local bank only) or cashier’s check made payable to the City of Huntington Beach.

D.    Records. Each operator shall keep full and accurate records of receipts and stall rentals to exhibitors in connection with the operation of the meet. The City, by and through its authorized officers shall have the right to examine and audit such records, including records of any bank accounts, at any reasonable time, and operators shall cooperate fully with the inspection of them. Such records shall include, but are not limited to, the total number of stall rentals from each day, as well as whatever records are necessary in order to provide the City any required information pursuant to this section. (3241-10/94, 3603-6/03)

 

5.16.320 Trailer Parks
For every person conducting, managing or carrying on the business of trailer park or mobile home park the license fee shall be $112.50 annually for the first 25 trailer spaces and $7.00 for each additional trailer space. (766-7/60, 838-6/61, 904-6/62, 1604-10/70, 3100-5/91, 3161-8/92)

 

5.16.330 Transportation, Trucking and Hauling—Established Place of Business
Every person engaged in the business, in whole or in part, of using or operating any motor vehicle in connection with the conduct of their business, for the transportation of any goods, wares, merchandise, products of any nature, raw materials, pipe or castings, tanks or machinery or tools of any description, when said person has an established place of business within the City, shall pay an annual license tax in accordance with the following schedule for each and every motor vehicle so used or operated in excess of one vehicle:

 

 

For vehicles with a manufacturer’s rated capacity of under one ton:

$12.00 A

 

For vehicles with a manufacturer’s rated capacity of under three tons, but one ton or over:

$35.00 A

 

For vehicles with a manufacturer’s capacity of three tons or over:

$46.00 A

(766-7/60, 838-6/61, 904-6/62, 1604-10/70, 3100-5/91, 3161-8/92, 3603-6/03)

 

5.16.340 Transportation, Trucking or Hauling—No Business Location
Every person engaged in the business, in whole or in part, of using or operating any motor vehicle in connection with the conduct of their business, and who uses the public streets or highways of this City for the purpose of such use or operation for the delivery or transportation of any goods, wares, merchandise, products of any nature, raw materials, waste materials, pipe or casting, tanks, machinery or tools of any description or in connection with rendering services for fees, when said person does not have an established place of business within this City, shall pay an annual license fee of $75.00 for each and every vehicle so used or operated other than those vehicles described in Sections 5.16.330 and 5.16.350. (766-7/60, 838-6/61, 904-6/62, 1604-10/70, 3161-8/92)

 

5.16.350 Transportation, Trucking or Hauling—Exceptions From Fee
No fee hereunder shall be required for the operation of any motor vehicle or equipment along the streets of this City if such operation is merely occasional or incidental to a business conducted elsewhere; provided, however, that no operation shall be deemed merely occasional if trips or hauls are made beginning or ending at points within this City upon an average of more than 13 in any quarter of the year. More than 13 such trips or hauls within any quarter shall be deemed doing business within this City. A business shall be deemed conducted within this City if an office or agency is maintained here or if transportation business is solicited here. (766-7/60, 838-6/61, 904-6/62, 1604-10/70)

 

5.16.360 Transportation, Trucking or Hauling—Dump and Tank Trucks
Every person engaged in the business, in whole or in part, of using or operating motor vehicles for the transportation, hauling or delivery or removal of crude oil, petroleum products or petroleum byproducts in any form, rotary mud, sand, dirt fill, asphalt, water, machinery of any description, or any other articles or commodity not classified in Sections 5.16.330 and 5.16.340, who uses the public streets or highways of this City for the purpose of such use or operation, who is not required to pay the license or fees as set forth in Sections 5.16.330 and 5.16.340, shall pay an annual license fee based upon each motor vehicle so used or operated as follows:

 

A.    For each dump truck:

$75.00 A

For each additional trailer or wagon with single rear axle:

$49.00 A

For each additional trailer or wagon with dual rear axle:

$49.00 A

B.     For each tank truck or tank wagon:

$97.50 A

(semi-tractor and front trailer as one tank truck or tank wagon)

 

For each additional wagon or trailer:

$23.00 A

(766-7/60, 838-6/61, 904-6/62, 1604-10/70, 3100-5/91, 3116-6/91, 3161-8/92, 3603-6/03)

 

5.16.370 Truck Rental or Leasing
A.    Every person conducting, managing or carrying on the business of renting or leasing the use of any truck or motor-propelled vehicle for the transportation of materials, commodities or products, or the transportation of any other object, to be driven by the person or employees or other representative of the person hiring the same at rates per mile, per trip, per hour, per day, per week, per month, per year or any greater period of time, and the truck or vehicle is under the directional control of the person hiring the same, shall pay an annual license fee of $75.00 plus $23.00 for each truck or vehicle over one used in the business.

B.     In the case of persons operating trucks or vehicles in this City, within the meaning of Sections 5.16.330 through 5.16.350, when such truck or vehicle has been rented from a truck rental business or agency, the person having rented or hired such truck or vehicle shall pay the license fee prescribed in Sections 5.16.330 through 5.16.350, whichever is applicable, and the person in the business of renting or leasing such truck or vehicle to the renter or lessee shall not be required to pay an additional fee for each such truck or vehicle so rented or leased over one used in the business. (766-7/60, 838-6/61, 904-6/62, 1604-10/70, 3100-5/91, 3161-8/92)

 

5.16.380 Passenger Vehicle Rental or Leasing
Every person conducting, managing or carrying on the business of renting or leasing the use of any motor-propelled vehicle for the transportation of persons to be driven by the person or employee or other representative of the person hiring, renting or leasing the same at rates per mile, per trip, per hour, per month, per year or any greater period of time, and where such vehicle is under the directional control of the person hiring the same, shall pay an annual license fee of $75.00 plus $11.50 for each vehicle over one used in the business. Provided that where a person conducts, manages or carries on the rental or leasing of both trucks and passenger vehicles as one and the same business, from the same place of business, the payment of only one annual license fee of $75.00 will be required in addition to the prescribed fees for each vehicle over one used in the business. (766-7/60, 904-6/62, 1604-10/70, 3100-5/91, 3161-8/92)

 

5.16.390 Trailer Rentals
Every person conducting, managing or carrying on the business of renting the use of trailers designed to be attached to motor-propelled vehicles shall pay an annual license fee of $75.00 plus $2.00 per wheel for all trailers used in the business. (766-7/60, 904-6/62, 1604-10/70, 3100-5/91, 3116-6/91, 3161-8/92)

 

5.16.400 Transportation—Water
Every person engaged in the business, in whole or in part, of using or operating any boat or barge in connection with the conduct of their business for the transportation or accommodation of passengers, whether fee for such transportation or accommodation is paid directly or indirectly, or for the transportation of any goods, wares, merchandise, products of any nature, raw materials, waste materials, pipe or castings, tanks or machinery or tools of any description, shall pay an annual license fee in accordance with the following schedule:

 

For the first vessel:

$75.00 A

For each and every vessel so used or operated in excess of one vessel:

 

Less than 16 feet in length

$40.00 A

16 feet or over but less than 26 feet in length

$49.00 A

26 feet or over but less than 40 feet in length

$58.00 A

40 feet or over in length

$66.00 A

(904-6/62, 1604-10/70, 3100-5/91, 3161-8/92)

 

5.16.410 Vending, Bulk-Vending and Amusement Machines
A.    Every person owning, conducting, transacting, managing, operating or carrying on the business of providing, furnishing, letting the use of, distributing or maintaining any vending machine, bulk-vending machine and/or amusement machine, as defined in this title, and not prohibited by law, shall pay an annual license fee in accordance with the following schedule:

 

 

        1.     Vending machines and service machines:

$11.50 A

Plus

 

For each machine charging 1¢ to and including 4¢:

$ 2.50 A

For each machine charging 5¢ to and including 9¢:

$ 7.00 A

For each machine charging 10¢ and over:

$ 14.00 A

For each cigarette vending machine:

$ 29.00 A

Stamp-vending machines dispensing United States postage stamps for mailing purposes are hereby exempt from these terms and provisions

 

        2.     Bulk-vending machines:

$ 11.50 A

Plus

 

For each machine charging 1¢ to and including 4¢:

$ 2.50 A

For each machine charging 5¢ to and including 9¢:

$ 4.50 A

For each machine charging 10¢ or over :

$ 7.00 A

 

 

        3.     Amusement machines:

 

For each pinball machine:

$ 50.00 A

For each pool/billiard machine:

$ 50.00 A

For all other amusement machines:

$ 50.00 A

 

B.     In the event any license fee provided by this section on any vending or bulk-vending machine is not paid when due and payable, the owner of the business on whose business premises such vending or bulk-vending machine is located, shall be jointly and severally liable to pay the full amount of such license fee.

C.     A person having a business license in connection with a fixed place of business in this City is not exempt from payment of license fees otherwise imposed by this chapter.

D.    A minimum annual license fee of $337.50 shall be paid by each game arcade, amusement center room, business or parlor containing an aggregate of four or more pool tables, billiard tables, pinball machines, electronic video screen game machines, and/or other amusement devices. The fees levied under this section shall be credited toward such minimum. (766-7/60, 838-6/61, 904-6/62, 1461-2/69, 2594-2/83, 3100-5/91, 3161-8/92, 3603-6/03)

 

5.16.420 Water Companies
An annual fee of $32.00 and 85 cents per customer for the maximum number of customers at one time during the preceding calendar year. (766-7/60, 904-6/62, 1604-10/70, 3100-5/91, 3161-8/92)

 

Chapter 5.20 AMBULANCE SERVICE
5.20.010 Intent and Purpose
It is the intent of this chapter to establish general operating procedures and standards for medical transportation services operating within the incorporated areas of this City in both emergency and other situations, to provide a fair and impartial means of allowing responsible private operators to provide such services in the public interest and to provide a means for the designation of emergency response areas. (2852-8/86)

 

5.20.020 Definitions
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms are defined:

“Advanced life support service and basic life support service” mean the same as defined in the California Health and Safety Code.

“Ambulance” means a motor vehicle, helicopter, or similar vehicle, specifically constructed, modified, equipped, or arranged and operated for the purpose of transporting patients requiring immediate or ongoing medical services excluding the transportation of such persons to or from locations not providing services as defined in this chapter.

“Ambulance service” means the activity, business or service, for hire, profit, or otherwise, of transporting one or more persons by ambulance; provided however, ambulance service shall not include the transportation by ambulance by an employer of his or her own employees in an ambulance owned and operated by the employer solely for this purpose.

“Ambulance service operator” means any person who operates or owns an ambulance service.

“Attendant” means a trained, qualified individual who, regardless of whether he or she also serves as driver, is responsible for the care of patients.

“County” means the County of Orange, State of California.

“Department” means the emergency medical services agency of the County of Orange or the Health Care Agency of the County of Orange, or as otherwise designated by the Board of Supervisors.

“Dispatcher” means an individual employed by an ambulance service operator responsible for sending an ambulance to provide ambulance service to a patient.

“Driver” means an attendant who drives or pilots an ambulance.

“Emergency” means a sudden, unforeseen event giving rise to a need for ambulance service with basic or advanced life support services.

“Emergency response area” means a geographical location specified by the Fire Chief within which emergency service may be provided under a license.

“Emergency service” means ambulance service performed in response to an emergency.

“Fire Chief” means the Fire Chief of the City of Huntington Beach.

“Health officer” means the Orange County Health Officer or other official designated by the Board of Supervisors of Orange County to perform the health officer’s functions under this chapter.

“Licensee” means an ambulance service operator which has been granted a license under this chapter to provide ambulance service.

“Medical services” means services provided by health care professionals licensed pursuant to the California Business and Professions Code or as specified by regulations adopted pursuant to this chapter.

“Paramedic” means the same as defined in the California Health and Safety Code.

“Patient” means a wounded, injured, sick, invalid, or otherwise incapacitated person.

“Person” means any individual, firm, corporation, partnership, association, or other group or combination acting as a unit.

“Physician” means a medical doctor or osteopath holding the appropriate license or certificate to practice as such with the State of California pursuant to the Business and Professions Code.

“Public safety agency” means any public law enforcement agency, fire protection agency, or forest ranger operating in the county. (841-6/61, 2852-8/86)

 

5.20.030 License Required
A.    It shall be unlawful for any person to be an ambulance service operator, or to act in such a capacity either directly or indirectly, without possession of a license issued pursuant to this chapter.

A license may specify the specific geographical area within the county in which it is valid; provided, however, with respect to emergency response areas, reference to the emergency response area by a specific number or similar identification shall be sufficient description of geographic limitation. A license shall be valid for not more than one calendar year or the expiration of the calendar year in which it was issued, whichever is shorter.

B.     The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to:

1.     Ambulances operated at the request of a public safety agency during any “state of war emergency,” “state of emergency” or “local emergency,” as defined in the Government Code.

2.     Ambulance service transporting a patient from a location outside of Orange County regardless of destination.

3.     Ambulance service transporting a patient by a fixed-wing airplane. (2852-8/86)

 

5.20.040 Transfer and Term of License
No license issued pursuant to this chapter can be transferred by operation of law or otherwise. The following shall be considered transfers for purposes of this section:

A.    Any change in the business structure of a licensee, including, but not limited to, changes from or to:

1.     A sole proprietorship;

2.     A partnership, including any change in the partners; and

3.     A corporation, including any change in the shareholders, whether by operation of law or otherwise.

B.     Bankruptcy, an assignment for the benefit of creditors, or the appointment of a receiver.

C.     A sale or transfer of over 10% of the assets of a licensee.

A licensee may apply to the health officer for an amendment to the terms of the license, which request shall be processed in the same manner as an original application. Notwithstanding anything in this section to the contrary, licenses may be suspended, revoked, or terminated prior to the expiration date, pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. (2852-8/86)

 

5.20.050 Applications
A.    Each application for a license shall be accompanied by an application fee, if any, set by the Board of Supervisors, and be made upon forms prescribed by the health officer.

B.     Each applicant shall submit the following:

1.     The names and addresses of the applicant(s) and the owner(s) of the ambulance(s) and the business and any interest therein;

2.     The applicant’s training and experience in the transportation and care of patients;

3.     The names under which the applicant has engaged, does, or proposes to engage in ambulance service;

4.     A description of each ambulance including the make, model, year of manufacture, vehicle identification number, current state license number, the length of time the vehicle has been in use, and the color scheme, insignia, name, monogram and other distinguishing characteristics of the vehicle, a description of the company’s program for maintenance of the vehicle, and a description of the vehicle’s radio(s);

5.     Proof that the applicant has obtained all licenses and permits required by state or local law or regulation for the type of ambulance service proposed, excluding only a license to provide the service for which application is made;

6.     The names and qualifications of each attendant, driver, or dispatcher employed, or to be employed, in providing ambulance service;

7.     Proof that the applicant possesses and maintains currently valid California Highway Patrol inspection reports for each vehicle listed in the application;

8.     A description of the company’s training and orientation programs for attendants, drivers and dispatchers;

9.     Evidence of such financial responsibility and insurance coverage as may be required by the health officer pursuant to regulations adopted in accordance with this chapter;

10.   Identification of the geographical area to be served by the applicant, if required by the department;

11.   As to new applications or transfers as specified in Section 5.20.040, a fingerprint receipt for each principal of the applicant, issued by the Orange County Sheriff-Coroner indicating each principal of the applicant has undergone a complete criminal history check, followed by a report from the Orange County Sheriff-Coroner showing no conviction of crimes which would be violations of the provisions of Section 5.20.070(D)(1-7);

12.   A list of all substations or offices where equipment and personnel are, or will be based, including hours of operation; and

13.   A description of whether the service proposed by the applicant will include basic life support services or advanced life support service, and, if so:

a.     The number of basic life support service or advanced life support serve units to be deployed on each shift,

b.     The emergency response area(s) to receive basic life support service or advance life support service, and

c.     The provisions, if any, for continuing education of attendants;

14.   Such other information as the health officer may require in regulations adopted pursuant to this chapter.

C.     Renewal applications shall be submitted in the same form and require the same materials, as original applications except the requirement of subsection (B)(11) of this section. (2852-8/86)

 

5.20.060 Investigations
Upon receipt of a completed application and the required fee, if any, the health officer shall make, or cause to be made such investigation, as the health officer deems necessary, to determine if:

A.    The applicant is a responsible and proper person to conduct, operate or engage in the provision of ambulance services;

B.     The applicant meets the requirements of this chapter and of other applicable laws, ordinances or regulations. (2852-8/86)

 

5.20.070 Issuance or Denial of License
A.    The health officer shall issue a license to an applicant if the health officer, after completing any investigation required pursuant to this chapter, determines all requirements of this chapter have been met and the license fee, if any, set by the Board of Supervisors, has been paid.

B.     In the event of denial, the applicant shall be informed in writing of the reasons therefor.

C.     The licensee shall obtain and keep in force during the term of a license, comprehensive automobile liability insurance and professional liability insurance issued by a company authorized to do business in the State of California, acceptable to the health officer, insuring the owner against loss by reason of injury or damage that may result to persons or property from negligent operation or defective construction of such ambulance, or from violation of this chapter or any other law of the State of California, or the United States. Said comprehensive automobile liability policy shall be in the sum of not less than $500,000.00 for combined single limit, bodily injury and property damage. Said professional liability insurance shall be in the sum of not less than $1,000,000.00 per person and $1,000,000.00 annual aggregate. Workers’ compensation insurance shall be carried covering all employees of the license holder. Before the health officer shall issue a license, copies of the policies, or certificates evidencing such policies, shall be filed with the health officer. All policies shall contain a provision requiring a 30-day notice to be given to the department prior to cancellation, modification, or reduction in limits. The amount of comprehensive automobile liability insurance shall be subject to review and adjustment by the health officer pursuant to regulations adopted under this chapter. In the use of helicopters the equivalent insurance requirements shall apply.

D.    Grounds for denial of a license application shall be:

1.     Failure to meet the requirements of any provisions of this chapter;

2.     Violation by any principal of an applicant of Penal Code Section 290;

3.     Habitual or excessive use of narcotics or dangerous drugs;

4.     Conviction during the preceding seven years of any crime relating to the use, sale, possession or transportation of narcotics, addictives or dangerous drugs;

5.     Habitual or excessive use of intoxicating beverages;

6.     Conviction during the preceding seven years of any crime punishable as a felony in the State of California;

7.     Conviction of any crime involving moral turpitude, including fraud or intentional dishonesty for personal gain.

E.     In determining the effect of any criminal acts on the issuance or denial of a license, the health officer shall consider whether the criminal acts are related to the activities of an ambulance service and shall evaluate the rehabilitations of the persons involved. The health officer shall not consider crimes of which the applicant is, or was, accused but not convicted. (2852-8/86)

 

5.20.080 License Suspension or Revocation
A.    The health officer may suspend or revoke license for failure by the licensee to comply, and maintain compliance with, or for violation of, any applicable provisions, standards or requirements of state law or regulation, of this chapter, or of any regulations promulgated hereunder. Suspension of a license is not a condition precedent to revocation of a license.

B.     Before suspension or revocation, the health officer shall give written notice to the licensee. Said notice shall:

1.     Specify the reasons for which the action is to be taken;

2.     Set a hearing for not more than 15 days or less than seven days after the date of the notice;

3.     Specify the date, time and place of the hearing; and

4.     Be served on the licensee either by delivery to its principal place of business or to its designated agent for service of such notices, if any.

C.     If the licensee, subsequent to service of a suspension or revocation notice under this section, remedies some or all of the conditions to which the notice refers, the health officer may rescind a suspension or revocation at any time.

D.    At the hearing, the health officer has the burden of proof and may present evidence as to why such action should be taken and to answer the evidence presented by the licensee.

E.     The health officer may reduce the period of time for hearing under a suspension or revocation notice to no less than 24 hours when the health officer makes written preliminary findings that such action is necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare. When, as a result of such an emergency proceeding, a license is suspended or revoked, the licensee may request an additional hearing at which the licensee will have the burden of establishing renewed compliance justifying reinstatement of the license. Such additional hearing will be commenced within five days of the licensee’s request. The request for, and the scheduling of, an additional hearing shall not stay operation of the suspension or revocation order.

F.     Hearings conducted pursuant to this section shall be conducted before a hearing officer designated by the department. At the conclusion of said hearing, the hearing officer shall expeditiously prepare a written summary of the evidence and proposed findings and conclusions for consideration by the health care agency director.

G.    The health care agency director shall issue a written decision within 30 days after conclusion of the hearing. (2852-8/86)

 

5.20.090 Appeal to Board of Supervisors
In the event of denial, suspension, or revocation of a license, the applicant or licensee shall have the right to request a hearing before the Board of Supervisors, which hearing shall be requested and conducted in the manner specified in Section 5-2-19 of the Codified Ordinances of Orange County. (2852-8/86)

 

5.20.100 Notification
The licensee shall notify the health officer within 24 hours after any change in ownership or management of the licensee, or any interruption of service of more than 24 hours duration, or any substantial change in staffing or equipment. For purposes of this section, the term “substantial change” shall be as defined by regulation adopted pursuant to this chapter. (2852-8/86)

 

5.20.110 Personnel Standards
A.    A licensee shall only employ personnel performing tasks described in this chapter who comply with the requirements of this section.

B.     Attendants shall be at least 18 years of age and trained and competent in the proper use of all equipment, and shall hold current “EMT 1A” certification in compliance with all state laws, rules and regulations. Additionally, each attendant shall hold a license from the health officer indicating compliance with this section. Applications for such licenses shall be in a form required by the health officer and shall be accompanied by the fee, if any, established therefor. All applicants for licenses as an attendant shall be subject to the same criminal history review as required for principals of ambulance companies, pursuant to this chapter, no less than once every four years. Certificates may be denied, suspended, or revoked in the same form and fashion as that specified for ambulance service licensees in this chapter. Licenses shall be valid for two years from the date of issuance or certification as an Emergency Medical Technician-1A, whichever is less. Renewal of a license shall be in the same fashion as issuance of a new license.

C.     Each licensee shall have at least one dispatcher. Emergency ambulance service licensees shall have a dispatcher on a 24-hour-per-day basis and shall adequately train the dispatcher for radio operation and protocols and for the emergency response area(s) served before said dispatcher begins dispatching emergency calls. For purposes of this section, “adequate” training of a dispatcher shall be that which meets state standards, if any, or county requirements.

D.    Ambulance drivers shall, in addition to the requirements of this chapter for attendants, maintain an appropriate license issued by the California Department of Motor Vehicles and, if applicable, the Federal Aviation Administration. (2852-8/86)

 

5.20.120 Rates
No licensee shall charge more than those rates approved by the Board of Supervisors for emergency ambulance services. (2852-8/86)

 

5.20.130 Usage of Ambulance Service Licensees
A.    The City shall contract with licensees on a competitive basis for provision of ambulance service in response to emergencies in each emergency response area. Said contracts shall provide for one primary contractor per emergency response area, with such other backup service by other emergency ambulance service providers as deemed necessary by the City. In awarding these contracts, the City shall consider the comparative value of competing proposals in the same fashion as would be the case were the City evaluating proposals from prospective service providers for other City activities, including consideration of:

1.     The quality of service to be provided;

2.     The level of service to be provided;

3.     The rates charged for services to be provided; and

4.     The cost, if any, to the City.

B.     The Fire Chief shall administer the contracts for ambulance service awarded by the City Council under this section. The Fire Chief shall also prepare and keep current emergency response area lists specifying contract providers for each area. The Fire Chief shall include on the list for each emergency response area the provider which has entered into an ambulance service agreement with the City as the primary contractor as well as the emergency ambulance service provider(s) who will provide backup emergency ambulance service for that area.

C.     In the event no proposals acceptable to the City under the provisions of this section are received for one or more emergency response areas, the City shall designate one or more licensees in that emergency response area to provide emergency ambulance services. From the date of such designation until a regular emergency ambulance service agreement is signed for the affected area(s), provision of emergency ambulance service shall be an express condition of the license and unreasonable or unjustified refusal of such calls shall be a violation of this chapter.

D.    No person shall provide ambulance service in response to, or as a result of, an emergency unless that person is a licensee specified in each instance by a physician or public safety agency. A licensee thus specified by a physician need not be a contractor selected pursuant to this section. Any ambulance service operator receiving a request for emergency ambulance service from a source other than a public safety agency shall immediately, by telephone, notify a public safety agency, designated by regulation, of the request.

No licensee responding to an emergency shall transport a patient unless:

1.     A paramedic is present at the location of the patient; or

2.     A physician is present at the location of the patient and directs transportation in the absence of a paramedic; or

3.     A safety-qualified employee of the Huntington Beach Fire Department, or an appropriate employee of a public safety agency, designated by regulation, directs transportation in the absence of a paramedic.

Unless otherwise directed by a physician present at the location of the patient, a licensee shall transport a patient pursuant to regulations adopted under Section 5.20.140. (2852-8/86)

 

5.20.140 Rules and Regulations
A.    As to all sections of this chapter except Section 5.20.130, the health officer shall make such rules and regulations as may be necessary to implement this chapter. Prior to adoption, proposed rules and regulations shall be submitted to the Orange County emergency medical care committee for comment.

B.     As to Section 5.20.130, the Fire Chief shall make such rules and regulations and as may be necessary to implement this chapter. Prior to adoption, the Fire Chief’s rules and regulations shall be submitted to the Orange County emergency medical care committee for comment.

C.     The health officer or the Fire Chief or their designee(s) may inspect the records, facilities, transportation units, equipment and method of operations of each licensee whenever necessary and, by the health officer, at least annually. (2852-8/86)

 

5.20.150 Complaints
The department, any user, subscriber, public safety agency or consumer who believes, or has reason to believe, that he or she or another party has been required to pay an excessive charge for services, received inadequate services, or services provided were not in compliance with the provision of this chapter, may file a written complaint with the department setting forth such allegations. The department shall notify the ambulance service operator of such complaint. The ambulance service operator shall file a written response within 15 calendar days after receipt of notification. (2852-8/86)

 

5.20.160 Variance
As to all but Section 5.20.130, the health officer may grant variances from the terms of this chapter if he or she finds such action is necessary to protect the public health, safety or welfare. As to Section 5.20.130, the Fire Chief may grant variances from the terms of this chapter if he or she finds such action is necessary to protect the public health, safety or welfare. As to the health officer, such variances may include the issuance of a temporary license. No variance shall exceed 180 days in duration. (2852-8/86)

 

5.20.170 Violation
Violation of any provision of this chapter by an ambulance service operator shall be a misdemeanor. (2852-8/86)

 

Chapter 5.24 MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS
Note
*       Prior history note: §§ 5.24.040—5.24.070, 5.24.090—5.24.110, 5.24.125, 5.24.130, 5.24.190—5.24.220, 5.24.250—5.24.275 and 5.24.285 were repealed by Ord. 3844-11/09; §§ 5.24.080 and 5.24.140 were repealed by Ord. 3267-9/95; § 5.24.120 was repealed by Ord. 2466-2/81; §§ 5.24.280 and 5.24.290—5.24.330 were repealed by Ord. 2726-10/84; subsequently, Ord. 3973-5/13 amended Ch. 5.24 in its entirety, said chapter being previously comprised of provisions derived from Ord. Nos. 2395-11/79, 2466-2/81, 2726-10/84, 3173-10/92, 3267-9/95, 3467-6/00, 3694-2/05, 3738-7/06, 3844-11/09 and 3876-5/10; Ord. 4049-5/15 amended Ch. 5.24 in its entirety, said chapter being previously derived from Ord. No. 3973-5/13.

 

5.24.010 Definitions
“Applicant” means an individual or business seeking to open a Massage Establishment in Huntington Beach, who maintains a current CAMTC Certification or will employ only CAMTC Certified Massage Therapists, and is applying for an Establishment Registration Certificate from the City.

“California Massage Therapy Council” or “CAMTC” means the organization created by the State of California, pursuant to Division 2, Chapter 10.5 of the Business and Professions Code, to regulate massage businesses, training, practices, and techniques.

“City” means the City of Huntington Beach.

“Establishment Registration Certificate” means a City permit issued by the Police Chief to operate a Massage Establishment in Huntington Beach.

“Manager” (or “Operator”) means the person(s), who is 18 years of age or older, managing day-to-day operations of a Massage Establishment. A Manager must be an employee or Owner of the Massage Establishment. A Manager may not be an independent contractor of the Massage Establishment.

“Massage Establishment” means any massage business located in, and permitted by, the City, including a Sole Provider, where Massage Therapy for compensation occurs. Massage Establishments must possess all City permits and licenses including a City Business License, and an Establishment Registration Certificate.

“Massage Therapy” (or “Massage”) means any method of person-to-person contact by a Massage Therapist that involves pressure on, friction against or stroking, kneading, rubbing, tapping, pounding, or vibrating the external parts of the human body, except for genitals. These person-to-person contact methods may include use of a Massage Therapist’s hands, the aid of any mechanical or electrical apparatus or appliance, and/or other similar preparations commonly used in this practice.

“Massage Therapist” means any person who is 18 years of age or older, who maintains a current CAMTC Certificate pursuant to Division 2, Chapter 10.5 of the California Business and Professions Code.

“Owner” means the individual or corporation listed as the Owner on the City Business License.

“Police Chief” means the Police Chief of the Huntington Beach Police Department or his or her designee.

“Sole Provider” means a massage business where the Owner owns 100 percent of the business, is the only person who provides Massage Therapy for compensation for that business, and maintains a current CAMTC Certificate. (4049-5/15)

 

5.24.015 Authority
A.    This Chapter is intended to supplement State Law, including Division 2, Chapter 10.5 of the Business and Professions Code, Government Code Section 51034, and any other applicable State Law, for the regulation of massage businesses.

B.     The Police Chief has the authority, at his or her sole discretion and without prejudice to the aforementioned State Laws, to permit, inspect, or otherwise regulate Massage Establishments established in Huntington Beach. The Police Chief may revoke, suspend, or deny any Establishment Registration Certificate. Any and all of these rights and/or duties provided to the Police Chief by this Chapter are delegable at his or her discretion to other City authorities, departments, or agencies. (4049-5/15)

 

5.24.020 Establishment Registration Certificate
All Massage Establishments seeking to open and/or conduct business in Huntington Beach must first obtain an Establishment Registration Certificate. It is unlawful to open or operate a massage business in Huntington Beach without having first obtained an Establishment Registration Certificate. (4049-5/15)

 

5.24.025 Application for Establishment Registration Certificate
A City-provided application form must be completed before obtaining an Establishment Registration Certificate. The Applicant must provide all information required on the application, provide any supplemental information requested by the City, and attest under penalty of perjury that all information presented on the application is true and correct.

A.    All Applicants must submit to, and participate in, a background check either by the City or as part of his or her prior CAMTC Certification. No Establishment Registration Certificate will be issued if the background check reveals any of the following:

1.     The Applicant has been convicted of any felony, or conspiracy to commit, or attempt to commit, the same, as defined by Federal or State law; or

2.     The Applicant has been convicted of any misdemeanor, or conspiracy to commit, or attempt to commit, the same, which is sexual in nature, as defined by State and/or local law; or

3.     The Applicant has been convicted of any crime of moral turpitude, or conspiracy to commit, or attempt to commit, the same, as defined by State and/or local law; or

4.     The Applicant has had an individual or business permit or license with any agency, board, city, county, territory, or state denied, revoked, restricted, or suspended within the last five years; or

5.     The Applicant has been subject to an injunction for nuisance, as defined by State or local laws, within the last five years.

B.     The Applicant shall provide the non-refundable Establishment Registration Certificate application fee at the time the application is submitted in an amount established by Resolution of the City Council.

C.     Upon receipt of the completed Establishment Registration Certificate application, the Police Chief will commence an application review and background check, if applicable. The Police Chief will approve or deny the application within 60 days. If 60 days pass without a response from the Police Chief, the application is automatically deemed denied. (4049-5/15)

 

5.24.035 Approval or Denial of Establishment Registration Certificate
A.    An Establishment Registration Certificate may be issued by the Police Chief to any Applicant that demonstrates all of the following:

1.     The Applicant’s background check does not reveal violations contemplated by Section 5.24.025(A) of this Chapter; and

2.     For new Massage Establishments, the proposed location for the Massage Establishment is no fewer than 1,000 feet from another Massage Establishment as measured from the property lines. For existing Massage Establishments that are located within 1,000 feet of another Massage Establishment at the time this Chapter is enacted, those Massage Establishments are not required to relocate but are subject to the provisions of this Chapter for continued operation, transfer of ownership, and/or sale of the Massage Establishment; and

3.     The Massage Establishment complies or will comply with all applicable Federal, State, and local laws, including the City’s Building Codes, Zoning Codes, State Health Regulations, and all requirements of this Chapter; and

4.     The Applicant possesses a valid City Business License; and

5.     The Applicant truthfully, accurately, and completely provided all information, assurances, and/or documentation required by the City on the Establishment Registration Certificate application and/or additional information required by the Police Chief; and

6.     The Massage Establishment employs only CAMTC Certified Massage Therapists.

B.     The Applicant for the Establishment Registration Certificate may be denied for failure to satisfy any of the requirements in this Chapter. (4049-5/15)

 

5.24.040 Transfer of Establishment Registration Certificate
An Establishment Registration Certificate is generally not transferrable. Transfers may be granted at the sole discretion of the Police Chief and no transfer of an Establishment Registration Certificate will be allowed in the event that a Massage Establishment has pending investigations, reviews, or citations; or in certain instances where Massage Establishments are located within 1,000 feet of another Massage Establishment. (4049-5/15)

 

5.24.045 Establishment Registration Certificate Expiration and Renewal
An Establishment Registration Certificate shall be valid for one year; renewals will be required thereafter. Term of renewal will coincide with the dates appearing on the Applicant’s City-issued Business License. (4049-5/15)

 

5.24.050 Revocation or Suspension of Establishment Registration Certificate
A.    In addition to civil and criminal penalties, Establishment Registration Certificates may be suspended or revoked upon any of the following grounds:

1.     The City has determined that an Establishment Registration Certificate holder has made a material misrepresentation on the application for an Establishment Registration Certificate or renewal; or

2.     The City determines that the Establishment Registration Certificate holder has violated any of the provisions of this Chapter, or for any violation of Federal, State, or local laws, or any conditions of the Establishment Registration Certificate; or

3.     Any employee or independent contractor of the Massage Establishment violates any provisions of this Chapter.

B.     The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to all existing Establishment Registration Certificates regardless of the date any Establishment Registration Certificate was issued.

C.     No Massage Establishment shall be opened at the same address where a Massage Establishment was closed and/or Establishment Registration Certificate revoked in violation of any provision of this Chapter, or for any violation of Federal, State, or local laws, for at least 24 months at location(s) where the closure(s) occurred.

D.    Following suspension or revocation, the Police Chief may post a notice of revocation or suspension on the premises, and the notice shall state the reasons for the revocation or suspension. The Police Chief may direct the premises to be closed and/or locked, thereby prohibiting any public access.

E.     It is unlawful for any person to conduct the business of a Massage Establishment after the Establishment Registration Certificate has been suspended or revoked. (4049-5/15)

 

5.24.055 Establishment Registration Certificate Revocation or Suspension Hearing
Notice of a revocation or suspension by the City of an Establishment Registration Certificate will be provided to the Establishment Registration Certificate holder and will contain a statement of the violation(s) that constitute(s) the basis for such revocation or suspension. The notice will also include information regarding the steps that must be taken for an appeal.

A.    Appeals to the Police Chief under this Chapter shall be in writing, shall clearly state all applicable grounds for the appeal, and shall be filed with the City Clerk not later than 15 calendar days following the date of notice of revocation or suspension issued by the Police Chief.

B.     The City will not accept an appeal, and no hearing may be conducted, unless the appellant has paid a filing fee at the time of serving the appeal papers, in an amount set by Resolution of the City Council.

C.     The scope of the appeal hearing pursuant to this section shall be limited to those issues raised by the appellant in the appeal papers, as submitted pursuant to Subsection A of this Section.

D.    Ten days after the Police Chief renders a decision, the Establishment Registration Certificate holder may timely-file a written appeal to the City Manager. The Police Chief shall set the matter for hearing before the City Manager or his or her designee within 30 days of the receipt of the appeal. Unless mutually agreed, the hearing shall be held not fewer than 10 calendar days and not more than 30 calendar days from the date of the appeal request. The hearing may be continued from time to time upon the mutual consent of the parties.

E.     The appellant shall be provided with notice of the time and place of the appeal hearing, as well as a copy of all relevant materials at least 10 calendar days prior to the hearing.

F.     The City will provide a written decision no more than 30 days after the hearing is conducted. (4049-5/15)

 

5.24.060 Re-Application after Denial
After an Establishment Registration Certificate has been revoked or denied, no re-application for an Establishment Registration Certificate will be accepted within two years from any person, Applicant, Owner, Operator, Manager, Massage Therapist, Sole Provider, or any other person or persons, partnership, or corporation who was listed on an Establishment Registration Certificate. If, however, an Establishment Registration Certificate was denied for the sole reason that a Massage Therapist did not maintain CAMTC Certification, re-application may occur after proper CAMTC Certification has been reinstated. (4049-5/15)

 

5.24.065 Exemptions
The provisions of this Chapter shall not apply to the following:

A.    Physicians, surgeons, chiropractors, osteopaths, acupuncturists, and physical therapists duly licensed to practice in the State of California and hospitals, nursing homes, sanitariums, or other health care facilities duly licensed by the State of California; or

B.     Registered or licensed vocational nurses duly registered by the State of California; or

C.     Barbershops and beauty salons; or

D.    Accredited high schools and colleges and their employees; or

E.     Trainers of any amateur, semi-professional, or professional athlete or athletic team; or

F.     Massage Therapy provided by a Massage Therapist according to the terms of a prescription for certain treatment issued by a California licensed health care provider; or

G.    Physical therapy students and Massage Therapy students who are currently enrolled in a licensed program for physical therapy or Massage Therapy in a State recognized or accredited school/educational program, and who provide massage services under the direct supervision of a California licensed instructor; or

H.    Owners of stand-alone hotels with more than 100 on-site rooms for rent, which provide Massage Therapy for their guests on site by a Massage Therapist. (4049-5/15)

 

5.24.070 Massage Establishment Requirements
All Massage Establishments shall comply with the following requirements:

A.    Subject to applicable provisions of the Huntington Beach Municipal Code, a legible and easy to read sign shall be posted at the main entrance of the Massage Establishment identifying the business as a Massage Establishment; and

B.     A minimum level of artificial lighting sufficient to discern the activity occurring in the Massage Establishment and/or each separate massage room must be present at all times. This minimum level of artificial lighting is equivalent to an activated 40-watt light bulb in each approximate 100 square feet of indoor space; and

C.     Only equipment and/or chemicals approved by the Orange County Health Department for disinfecting, cleaning, and/or sterilizing shall be used in the Massage Establishment; and

D.    Hot and cold running water shall be provided within the Massage Establishment at all times; and

E.     Clean linen shall be stored in a closed cabinet. Approved receptacles acceptable to the Orange County Health Department shall be provided for the deposit of used linens; and

F.     Only professional massage tables that are generally accepted in the professional massage industry may be placed in massage rooms and utilized for Massage Therapy. No beds, mattresses, or waterbeds are allowed in Massage Establishments; and

G.    All Massage Establishments shall be subject to periodic inspections by the City, or other government agencies, for compliance with applicable Federal, State, and local health, safety, and building laws and standards. (4049-5/15)

 

5.24.075 Massage Establishment Operation
Every Massage Establishment shall comply with the following operating requirements:

A.    Only a Massage Therapist may provide Massage Therapy; and

B.     Massage Therapists must wear their CAMTC issued identification card on the outside of their clothing and in plain view as a name badge at all times while in the Massage Establishment. All non-CAMTC Certified employees and/or independent contractors working at the Massage Establishment must wear a name badge displaying his or her true and correct name as it is reflected on any government issued document bearing his or her name; and

C.     Massage Establishments may only be open between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. The hours of operation must be displayed in a conspicuous place in the lobby and/or in any front window clearly visible from outside the Massage Establishment. All massages must conclude at or before 10:00 p.m.; and

D.    Massage Therapists shall be clothed at all times. Clothing shall be of completely non-transparent material. Massage Establishment employees and/or independent contractors may not:

1.     Wear attire that substantially exposes the undergarments; or

2.     Wear swimsuit attire, unless the Massage Therapist is providing water-based Massage Therapy approved by CAMTC; or

3.     Dress in a manner that exposes the employee’s/contractor’s breasts, buttocks, or genitals; or

4.     Dress in a manner that violates the indecent exposure provisions of the California Penal Code Section 314 (as may be amended); and

E.     A Manager must be present at the Massage Establishment and on the premises at all times during the Massage Establishment’s operating hours; and

F.     Towels, linens, and coverings may not be used on more than one patron unless the towel, linen, or covering has first been laundered and disinfected. Disposable towels, linens, and/or coverings shall not be used on more than one patron; and

G.    Wet and dry heat rooms, steam or vapor rooms or cabinets, warming appliances, shower rooms and compartments, and toilet rooms and pools, shall be thoroughly cleaned and disinfected at least once each day the Massage Establishment is open. Bathtubs shall be thoroughly cleaned after each use; and

H.    Instruments utilized in Massage Therapy shall not be used on more than one patron unless they have been sterilized using approved sterilizing methods; and

I.      The Owner and/or Manager of the Massage Establishment shall keep a complete and current list/roster of the legal names, residential addresses, and CAMTC Certificate numbers of all Massage Therapists, and the legal names and residential addresses of all non-CAMTC Certified employees and/or independent contractors working at the Massage Establishment. That list shall also include the legal name and residential address of the Manager of the Massage Establishment. This roster shall be kept at the Massage Establishment premises and be available at all times for inspection by the City; and

J.      Except as provided for in this Chapter, friends, family, and visitors are not allowed in the Massage Establishment while it is open for business. Only the Owner, Manager, Massage Establishment employees or independent contractors, and patrons are allowed in the Massage Establishment during operating hours; and

K.    All doors leading into a Massage Establishment or area where Massage Therapy is performed shall remain unlocked during business hours. Internal offices or areas where cash or valuables are stored may be locked; and

L.     Every Massage Establishment Owner or Operator shall report in writing immediately to the Police Chief any and all changes of the Massage Establishment address or ownership of the Massage Establishment; and

M.    The following notice shall be posted in a conspicuous place in the Massage Establishment. The notice must be easy to read by any person, must be displayed in English and Spanish, and must be visible to anyone entering the Massage Establishment:

NOTICE TO ALL PATRONS: THIS MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT AND THE MASSAGE ROOMS DO NOT PROVIDE COMPLETE PRIVACY AND ARE SUBJECT TO INSPECTION BY AUTHORIZED CITY OF HUNTINGTON BEACH PERSONNEL WITHOUT PRIOR NOTICE.

and

N.    A list of all Massage Therapy services and their costs shall be posted in an open and conspicuous place near the entrance of the Massage Establishment. No Massage Establishment Owner or Manager shall permit, and no employee or independent contractor of the Massage Establishment shall offer to perform, any Massage Therapy services, or charge any fees, other than those posted; and

O.    No portion of the Massage Establishment will be used for sleeping/residential purposes; and

P.     A sign at least 8.5 inches by 11 inches in size, containing the following written notice in minimum 16-point font, shall be posted in a conspicuous place in the Massage Establishment, displayed in English, Vietnamese, Mandarin, Spanish, Cantonese, Korean, and easy to read by any person entering the premises:

If you or someone you know is being forced to engage in any activity and cannot leave – whether it is commercial sex, housework, farm work, construction, factory, retail, or restaurant work, or any other activity – call the National Human Trafficking Resource Center at 1-888-373-7888 or the California Coalition to Abolish Slavery and Trafficking (CAST) at 1-888-KEY-2-FRE(EDOM) or 1-888-539-2373 to access help and services.

Victims of slavery and human trafficking are protected under United States and California Law. These hotlines are:

•       Available 24 hours a day, 7 days a week

•       Toll-free

•       Operated by nonprofit, nongovernmental organizations

•       Anonymous and confidential

•       Accessible in more than 160 languages

•       Able to provide help, referral to services, training, and general information

(4049-5/15)

 

5.24.080 Outcall Massages
No Massage Therapy shall be conducted in a hotel or motel room, or in the private residence of the Massage Therapist. A Massage Therapist is permitted to provide outcall massage services at a private residence only between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. (4049-5/15)

 

5.24.085 Massage Establishment—Prohibited Conduct
In addition to the conduct/activities, items, and/or substances prohibited by Federal and State Laws, the following conduct is prohibited at Massage Establishments:

A.    The sale, service, or consumption of alcohol or marijuana; and

B.     Audio and/or video recording of, or monitoring of, the patron, the Massage Therapist, or the Massage Therapy, without the prior written consent of the patron; and

C.     Massage Therapy, touching, fondling, or otherwise intentional contact with the genitals, breasts of a female patron, or anus of any patron. To perform Massage Therapy on the breasts of a female patron, the Massage Therapist must have obtained prior written consent from the patron and a prior written referral from a licensed California health care provider; and

D.    Massage Therapy at any time while breasts of female patrons are uncovered and/or the genitals of any patron is uncovered; and

E.     Advertising or marketing illegal activity, advertising or marketing sexual content related to Massage Therapy, or advertising or marketing sexual content in the promotion of the Massage Establishment; and

F.     Use or possession of adult-oriented merchandise, including “sex toys” and/or condoms, in any part of a Massage Establishment; and

G.    Any sexual activity at a Massage Establishment.

During the hours of operation, only the client receiving Massage Therapy is allowed in the massage rooms except as follows: (1) the parents or guardian of a patron who is a minor child may be present; (2) the minor child of a patron may be present in the Massage Therapy room with the patron; or (3) the conservator, aide, or other caretaker of a patron may be present in the massage room. (4049-5/15)

 

5.24.090 Inspection by Officials
The City, County, or any investigating official shall have the right to enter the premises of the Massage Establishment from time to time during regular business hours to conduct reasonable inspections to enforce compliance with this Chapter and with building, fire, electrical, plumbing, and/or State and local health and safety regulations.

No person shall refuse to permit or interfere with a lawful inspection of the Massage Establishment by City or County investigating officials. (4049-5/15)

 

5.24.095 Violation—Penalty
Any person violating provisions of this Chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of $1,000.00 or by imprisonment in the County jail for a period not to exceed six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Whenever any City official inspects a Massage Establishment and finds that any provision of this Chapter has been violated, a notice of such violation shall be issued by means of a written notice, including, but not limited to, a letter, an inspection report, a notice of violation, or by issuing a civil or criminal citation for each and every violation, including those contemplated by this Chapter, and Federal, State, City, and/or other applicable laws. (4049-5/15)

 

5.24.100 Separate Violations
Each violation described in this Chapter, or those provided for by State Laws, shall constitute a separate violation. Each violation may be charged as a separate count in the event of administrative or criminal enforcement action. Violations by employees or independent contractors of Massage Establishments shall be considered violations committed by the Massage Establishment, and termination of the employee/contractor shall not relieve the Owner or Establishment Registration Certificate holder of any civil or criminal liability. (4049-5/15)

 

5.24.105 Unlawful Operation Declared Nuisance or Civil Citation
Any Massage Establishment operated, conducted, or maintained contrary to the provisions of this Chapter and State laws shall be and the same is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. The City Attorney may, in addition to, or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal action hereunder, commence an action or actions, proceeding or proceedings for abatement, removal, or enjoinment thereof, in the manner provided by law. The City Attorney shall take such other steps and shall apply to such court or courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as shall abate or remove such Massage Establishment and restrain and enjoin any Owner, Operator, Manager, Massage Therapist, or any other person from operating, conducting, or maintaining a Massage Establishment in the City. (4049-5/15)

 

5.24.110 Severability
Nothing in this Chapter is intended to conflict or supersede Division 2, Chapter 10.5 of the Business and Professions Code as may be amended. If any Section, subsection, phrase, or clause of this Chapter is for any reason held to be invalid by a Court of law, such judicial decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portion(s) of this Chapter. The City Council declares that it would have adopted this Chapter and each Section, subsection, phrase, or clause contained herein irrespective of the fact that any one or more Sections, subsections, sentences, phrases, or clauses may be declared invalid. (4049-5/15)

 

Chapter 5.28 DANCE HALLS
Note
*       Note: § 5.28.090 repealed by Ord. 2668-3/84.

 

5.28.010 Permit Required
No person shall maintain, conduct, manage or operate a public dance hall or public dance within the City of Huntington Beach without a permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. A public dance permit shall be valid only for the dance or dances enumerated therein and shall not be transferable. (230-1/22, 2668-3/84)

 

5.28.011 Application
Any person or entity desiring to obtain a permit to operate or conduct a public dance hall or public dance shall make application to the Police Chief and pay the fee established by resolution of the City Council. Such application shall be on a form approved by the City and shall be filed at least 30 days prior to the proposed dance. (2668-3/84)

 

5.28.012 Issuance of Permit
Upon completion of investigation, the Police Chief shall grant the permit if he or she finds that:

A.    The required fee has been paid.

B.     The application conforms in all respects to the provisions of this chapter.

C.     The applicant has not knowingly made a material misrepresentation in the application.

D.    The applicant, if an individual, or any of the stockholders of the corporation, any officers or directors, if the applicant is a corporation, or any of the partners, including limited partners, if the applicant is a partnership, has not been convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction of an offense involving conduct which requires registration under California Penal Code Section 290, or of conduct violating Penal Code Sections 314, 315, 316, 318, 647(a), 647(b) and 647(h), or convicted of an attempt to commit any of the abovementioned offenses or convicted in any state of any offense which if committed or attempted in this state, would have been punishable as one or more of the abovementioned offenses, or any crime involving dishonesty, fraud, deceit, or moral turpitude.

E.     Applicant, or any of its owners, partners, officers or directors has not had a public dance hall or public dance permit or similar license or permit issued by this City denied or revoked within five years prior to application.

F.     The proposed dance hall or public dance would comply with all applicable laws, including but not limited to, health, zoning, fire and safety requirements and standards. Prior to granting a permit, the Chief shall obtain a certificate from the Community Development Director certifying that the proposed use is in compliance with the land use and zoning provisions of the applicable municipal and ordinance codes. In the event that land use and/or zoning approvals are required, they shall be obtained prior to issuance of a permit.

G.    Applicant is at least 18 years of age.

H.    The applicant possesses good moral character and is a proper person to conduct such a business. (2668-3/84)

 

5.28.013 Denial of Permit
If the Police Chief, following investigation of the applicant, finds that the applicant does not fulfill the requirements of this chapter, he or she shall notify the applicant in writing within 30 days after receipt of the application. However, failure to notify the applicant shall not constitute a basis for granting the permit. The applicant shall have 10 days after notification of denial is mailed to appeal such denial to the City Manager, pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. (2668-3/84)

 

5.28.020 Hours
No person maintaining or carrying on a public dance hall, or having charge or control thereof, or employed in and about the same, shall hold, conduct or carry on, or cause or permit to be held, conducted or carried on any dance or dancing in any such public dance hall and/or dancing pavilion in this City between the hours of 1:00 a.m. of any day and 7:00 a.m. of the same day except upon special permission in writing, signed by the Police Chief. In determining whether to allow dances outside the hours specified herein, the Chief shall consider:

A.    The health, safety, and welfare of persons attending;

B.     The peace, quiet and safety of persons and uses of property in the surrounding area; and

C.     Whether the proposed hours are in conformance with applicable laws, ordinances, and land use permits. (230-1/22, 414-6/38, 2668-3/84)

 

5.28.030 Beverage License—Minors on Premises
No person conducting, maintaining or carrying on a business, or having charge or control thereof, which permits public dancing to be allowed on its premises shall permit to be admitted on such business premises any minor under the age of 21 years, if any alcoholic beverages are consumed, dispensed or sold on the premises, unless the minor is accompanied and under the care at all times of his or her parent or parents or legal guardian. (1143-6/65)

 

5.28.040 Beverage License—Minors Entering
It is unlawful for any minor under the age of 21 years to enter or to be in or remain on any business premises of this City at any time when a public dance is in progress, or being held, conducted or carried on therein when any alcoholic beverages are consumed, dispensed or sold on the same premises, unless the minor is accompanied or under the care at all times in said dance hall, of his or her parent or parents, or legal guardian. (1143-6/65)

 

5.28.050 Proprietor Allowing Children Inside
No person conducting, maintaining or carrying on a public dance hall, or having charge or control thereof, shall permit to be admitted to such public dance hall, or to dance therein, any minor under the age of 15 years at any time while a dance or dancing is in progress or being held, conducted or carried on therein, unless while in said dance hall the minor is accompanied and under the care at all times of his or her parent or parents or legal guardian. (230-1/22, 233-2/22, 2668-3/84)

 

5.28.060 Children Under 15
It is unlawful for any minor under the age of 15 years to enter, or to be or remain in any public dance hall in this City at any time when a dance or dancing is in progress or being held, conducted or carried on therein, or to dance therein, unless while in the dance hall the minor is accompanied and under the care at all times of his or her parent or parents or guardian. Any person attending a dance shall furnish acceptable proof of identity and age upon request. (230-1/22, 233-2/22, 2668-3/84)

 

5.28.065 Curfew Exception
While attending any dance permitted under this chapter and for one-half hour thereafter, with proof of attendance at such dance, a minor shall be excepted from the curfew provision contained in Section 9.68.010 of this Code. (2668-3/84)

 

5.28.070 Allowing Disorderly Persons
It is unlawful for any person maintaining, conducting or carrying on any public dance hall or public dance or having charge or control thereof, or for any person employed in and about the same, to allow or permit any intoxicated or disorderly person, as defined in California Penal Code subsections 647(a), (b), (c), (d), (f) and (ff), to enter, be or remain, or to dance at a public dance hall or dance, or to permit possession or consumption of any controlled substance, as defined in the Health and Safety Code, at any dance. (230-1/22, 1935-11/74, 2668-3/84)

 

5.28.080 Persons to Maintain Decorum
No person as principal, agent, or otherwise, carrying on, maintaining or conducting a public dance hall or public dance in this City shall permit any person or persons to indulge in any act which injures the person or property of another, or which disturbs or endangers the public peace or health, or which outrages public decency in such public dance hall or in any of the hallways leading thereto. (230-1/22, 587-6/52, 1935-11/74, 2668-3/84)

 

5.28.100 Lighting—Required
It is unlawful for any person conducting, maintaining or carrying on a public dance hall, or having charge or control thereof, or for any person employed in and about the same, to hold or conduct, or to cause or permit to be held or conducted, any dance or dancing in any dance hall after sunset of any day, unless such public dance hall be lighted or illuminated either by gas or electric light, or other means, in such manner and to such extent as is usual or customary for lighting or illuminating halls or rooms of like dimensions in the nighttime for public assemblies, before any person is admitted thereto and before any dance or dancing is commenced therein. (230-1/22)

 

5.28.110 Lighting—Minimum Intensity
The intensity of such lighting or illumination shall at no time be less than one candle power at a plane three feet above the floor of such dance hall at all parts of such hall. (230-1/22)

 

5.28.120 Lighting—Maintained During Dance
Such lighting or illumination shall be maintained thereafter throughout the entire time while such dance or dancing is in progress, without a diminution and without interruption, until such dance or dancing is concluded and until such hall is cleared and closed. (230-1/22)

 

5.28.130 Lighting—Tampering With, to Reduce
No person shall shut or turn off the lights or lighting, or reduce the intensity thereof below the minimum in this chapter prescribed in any public dance hall at any time after sunset or any day while a dance or dancing is in progress or being conducted therein, or during any recess or other intermission in such dance or dancing. (230-1/22)

 

5.28.140 Permit—Revocation for Violation
In the event that any person holding a permit to conduct a public dance hall or public dance shall violate or cause or permit to be violated any condition of such permit, or any provision of this chapter, or shall conduct such public dance hall or dance, or otherwise cause or permit the same to be conducted in an illegal, disorderly or improper manner, such permit may be revoked by the Police Chief in the manner hereinafter provided, and such revocation shall be in addition to the other penalties provided for a violation of any of the provisions of this Code. Said notice to revoke may be issued whether or not the dance has been held. (230-1/22, 2668-3/84)

 

5.28.150 Hearing—Notice Service
Upon receipt of the notice of appeal the City Manager, or his or her designee, shall set the matter for hearing. Notice of hearing shall be in writing and served at least five days prior to the date of such hearing upon the appellant. (230-1/22, 2668-3/84)

 

5.28.160 Emergency Appeals
Where a dance has been scheduled within five days after revocation, the permittee may waive time and, if feasible, have an immediate hearing before the City Manager or designee. (230-1/22, 2668-3/84)

 

5.28.170 Notice—Personal Service
Any notice shall be served by delivering the same personally to the holder of such permit, or to his or her or its manager or agent, or person in charge of the office or residence of permittee, listed in the application, if any of them can be found. (230-1/22, 2668-3/84)

 

5.28.180 Notice—Mail Service
If the holder of such permit, or such manager, agent or person in charge of such public dance hall or dance, or the office of permittee cannot after due diligence be found in this City, and personal service of such notice cannot be made in this City, then a copy of such notice shall be mailed postage prepaid, addressed to the holder of such permit at his or her place of business or residence, if known, at least five days prior to the date of such hearing, and if not known, then a copy of such notice shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises where the dance is to be conducted. (230-1/22, 2668-3/84)

 

5.28.182 Appeal Procedure
Any person aggrieved by denial of an application may file a written appeal from such denial within 10 days with the City Manager. The notice of appeal shall specify the subject matter of the appeal, the date of application, the date of denial, the basis for appeal, and the name and address of appellant. (2668-3/84)

 

5.28.184 Hearing Before City Manager
A hearing shall be held within a reasonable time before the City Manager or his or her designee. The appellant shall be notified of the hearing by notice sent by mail at least 10 days before the hearing to the appellant at the address set forth in the notice of appeal. The City Manager may sustain, modify, or overrule the decision of the Police Chief, based upon the criteria set forth in this chapter for issuance or denial of the permit sought. (2668-3/84)

 

5.28.186 Appeal
Any person aggrieved by a decision of the City Manager may appeal to the City Council within 10 days; provided, however, that any decision revoking a permit shall suspend the permit pending appeal or until further order of the City Council, and no dance may be held under such revoked permit. (2668-3/84)

 

5.28.188 Violation—Denial of Subsequent Application
Any violation of this chapter and/or the terms and conditions of a permit granted hereunder shall constitute grounds for denial of any subsequent application for a permit for a dance to be held within one year of such violation. (2668-3/84)

 

5.28.190 Violation—Penalty
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine or by imprisonment or by both such fine and imprisonment, as provided in this Code. (230-1/22)

 

5.28.200 Violation—Permit Revocation
Upon such conviction, any permit which may have been granted to such person to conduct, maintain or carry on any public dance hall, or dance, shall be rendered void ipso facto, and shall be revoked as hereinbefore provided. (230-1/22, 2668-3/84)

 

5.28.210 Exemptions—Noncommercial Dances
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any dance or ball given, held or conducted by any bona fide club, society or association organized or conducted for benevolent, charitable, dramatic or literary purposes, having an established membership of persons regularly elected or admitted thereto, and which shall hold meetings, other than such balls or dances, at regular stated intervals, when the proceeds arising from such ball or dance shall be intended to be used and be used for the promotion of the purposes of such club, society or association, or to any private dance or ball, held or conducted for social purposes only and not for profit, to which persons are admitted or at which persons are allowed to dance without payment of a fee or charge therefor, except such as may be required for the purpose of defraying the actual expenses of holding or conducting such dance or ball. (230-1/22)

 

5.28.220 Application to General Public Dance
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to any dance or ball, other than a dance or ball of the character hereinbefore in Section 5.28.210 referred to, when invitations or tickets for admission to such dance or ball are sold or offered for sale publicly, or to the public generally. (230-1/22)

 

Chapter 5.32 NATURAL RESOURCES PRODUCTION
5.32.010 License—Required
It is unlawful for any person to conduct, manage, carry on or engage in the business or activity of producing crude oil, gas, petroleum or other hydrocarbon substances or products from any well or wells located in the City without first obtaining a license therefor from the City. (1652-9/71)

 

5.32.020 License—Terms
A.    The term of such license shall be one year, commencing on July 1st of each year beginning with July 1, 1978.

B.     At the end of the term of any license issued or renewed hereunder, such license shall be of no further force or effect unless renewed as hereinafter provided. (1652-9/71, 1924-7/74, 2298-6/78)

 

5.32.030 License—Fees
Every person required by this chapter to have a license shall pay to the City of Huntington Beach the fees hereinafter provided, in the manner hereinafter provided:

A.    Prior to the issuance or renewal of such license, a base annual fee of $100.00 per well, which shall apply to each well producing oil or gas, or both.

B.     For the period commencing July 1, 1978, and for each succeeding fiscal year, and in addition to the base annual fee, an amount equaling the following:

1.     Ten cents per barrel of oil produced and sold per well per quarter, except for stripper well crude oil.

2.     Eight cents per barrel of stripper well crude oil, as defined and used in the Emergency Petroleum Allocation Act of 1975 as amended and recodified (15 U.S.C.A. Section 757) and regulations promulgated thereunder, produced and sold per well per quarter, less a credit of $25.00 per well per quarter. No carry-over of credit shall be permitted.

3.     One cent per thousand cubic feet (MCF) of dry or wet gas, produced and sold for delivery outside the Huntington Beach oil and gas field.

Further, in lieu of the alternative tax of two percent of the gross market price provided in Ordinance No. 2298, the taxes imposed by this subsection shall be increased or decreased annually as of July 1st of each year, commencing July 1, 1979, in an amount equal to the increase or decrease from the base index in the then latest available consumer price index, as prepared and released by the United States Department of Labor, Bureau of Statistics for the Los Angeles-Long Beach area. The last index published for the month of June, 1978 shall be deemed to be the base index for the purposes of this subsection. (1652-9/71, 1759-8/72, 1924-7/74, 2298-6/78, 2321-10/78)

 

5.32.040 Base Annual Fee—Due When
The base annual fee shall be due and payable on or before July 1st of each fiscal year. Such base annual fee shall be delinquent on the day following such due date; provided, however, that for the period beginning July 1, 1978, every person required by this chapter to pay such base annual fee shall be granted a grace period in which to meet the requirements imposed by this chapter, and no penalty shall be exacted therefor for the period up to and including October 31, 1978. (1652-9/71, 1759-8/72, 1924-7/74, 2298-6/78, 2302-9/78, 2321-10/78)

 

5.32.050 Quarterly Payments—When Due
Payment for the quarter consisting of October, November and December shall be due and payable on January 1st; payment for the quarter consisting of January, February and March shall be due and payable on April 1st; payment for the quarter consisting of April, May and June shall be due and payable on July 1st; and payment for the quarter consisting of July, August and September shall be due and payable on October 1st. (1652-9/71)

 

5.32.060 Quarterly Payments—When Delinquent
All payments for all quarters, as required by this chapter, shall be delinquent on the day following the due date for any such quarterly payment; provided, however, that the quarterly payment due October 1, 1978 shall not be delinquent until October 31, 1978. (1652-9/71, 2097-9/76, 2321-10/78)

 

5.32.070 Definitions
For the purpose of determining the license fee:

A.    A “well” is located within the City if the surface location of the well, the surface of the well itself, or if any portion of the well is located within the City, irrespective of the subsurface location of the well, the production interval thereof, or where the hole of the well may be bottomed.

B.     A “barrel of oil” consists of 42 U. S. gallons of crude petroleum of hydrocarbon substances corrected for temperature variations in accordance with methods generally approved in the petroleum industry.

C.     “Petroleum or hydrocarbon substances” means crude oil remaining after the removal therefrom of water or other impurities by preliminary processing in the vicinity of the well site, preparatory to the shipment thereof.

D.    If oil produced from two or more wells shall be commingled without the production of the respective wells being separately measured, each well whose production has been commingled shall be considered as having produced an equal part of the total. (1652-9/71)

 

5.32.080 License—Renewal
Any license issued under this chapter shall be renewed annually provided all delinquencies are paid in full and the annual base fee for the renewal term is paid in full prior to such renewal. (1652-9/71)

 

5.32.090 License—Suspension
The license required under this chapter shall be automatically suspended on any one or more of the following grounds:

A.    Fees required by this chapter have not been paid and are delinquent;

B.     Production statements have not been filed with the City when and as required by Section 5.32.110;

C.     Failure to comply with Section 5.32.120.

Any suspension of license shall be removed upon compliance with all provisions of this chapter. (1652-9/71)

 

5.32.100 License—Suspension Not Bar to Prosecution
The suspension of any license, as herein provided, shall not be a bar to prosecution of the holder thereof for a violation of any provision of this chapter or of any law or ordinance of the state or City. (1652-9/71)

 

5.32.110 Production Statement Required
Every person required to have a license under this contract shall on or before the 30th day of January, April, July, and October file with the City Clerk a statement setting forth such information as the City Clerk shall require, including:

A.    The name or other identification of all oil and gas wells located in the City operated by him or her during any quarter;

B.     The number of barrels of oil produced from each of said wells during such quarter;

C.     The amount of wet or dry gas measured in thousands of cubic feet (MCF) produced for delivery outside the Huntington Beach oil and gas field, from each of said wells during such quarter; and

D.    The computation of the amount of fee with respect to such production due the City. The statement shall be signed by the person required to have the license, or by a managing officer or agent thereof, and shall include a declaration substantially worded as follows:

I declare under penalty of perjury that I am authorized to make this statement, and that to the best of my knowledge and belief it is a true, correct and complete statement made in good faith for the period stated, in compliance with the provisions of the Huntington Beach Municipal Code. Executed at_________, California on__________.

Such statement shall not be conclusive against the City, nor shall it be conclusive as to the information set forth therein, nor shall the filing of such statement preclude the City from collecting by appropriate action any additional fee that is later determined to be due and payable. (1652-9/71, 1759-8/72, 2321-10/78)

 

5.32.120 Records Required
Every person required to have a license under this chapter shall keep full, true and accurate records as to the amount of oil or gas produced by him or her from wells located within the City, and shall upon demand of the City Clerk, or his or her representative, make said records, together with any shipping documents or sales invoices pertaining to such oil and gas available for the inspection of the City Clerk, or his or her representative, at all reasonable times. (1653-12/71)

 

5.32.130 Exception
Those businesses and activities for which a fee is required under this chapter shall be exempt from any other fee required by this title. (1653-12/71)

 

5.32.140 Penalty for Delinquency
If any fee herein required to be paid to the City is not paid before it becomes one month delinquent, as provided in this chapter, a penalty in an amount equal to 10% of such fee shall be added thereto, and an additional penalty in an amount equal to 10% of such fee for each one month period during which such fee continues or remains delinquent shall be assessed. Such penalties shall be and become a part of such fee and shall be enforced and collected as part of such fee; provided, however, that the aggregate of such penalties shall not exceed 100% of the amount of the delinquent license fee. (1652-9/71, 1759-8/72)

 

Chapter 5.34 GASOLINE PRICING
5.34.010 Signs Required
Every person offering for sale or selling gasoline to the public from any place of business shall display at least one but not more than four signs, clearly visible to motorists on adjacent streets or highways, containing the following information:

A.    The net tax-included price per gallon or liter of each grade or type of gasoline being sold or offered for sale on the premises; and

B.     What grade or type of gasoline, normally being sold or offered for sale, is not currently available to the motoring public. (2416-4/80)

 

5.34.020 Sign Size and Area
All signs required by this chapter shall meet applicable requirements of Article 961 of the Huntington Beach Ordinance Code. (2416-4/80)

 

5.34.030 State Law
All signs required by this chapter shall meet the requirements of the California Business and Professions Code Sections 20880 et seq. (2416-4/80)

 

5.34.040 Violation—Penalty
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine of not more than $500.00 or by imprisonment in the county jail for a period not to exceed six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment, and each such person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted. (2416-4/80)

 

Chapter 5.44 ENTERTAINMENT PERMITS
Note
*       Note: Ord. 3915-9/11 repealed and replaced Ch. 5.44, derived from Ord. Nos. 1265-12/66, 1444-10/68, 1454-12/68, 3213-11/93, 3247-8/94, 3341-10/96, 3449-2/00, 3618-11/03 and 3862-2/10.

 

5.44.010 Definitions
The following definitions shall be for purposes of this chapter only, unless specifically adopted by another section of the Huntington Beach Municipal Code for use therein.

Ambient Music. Prerecorded music which is audible from a distance of no more than 10 feet from any portion of the exterior of the premises.

Police Chief. Shall include employee(s) of the Police Department designated by the Police Chief to act on his or her behalf.

Establishment(s). Any area within the limits of the City of Huntington Beach to which the public may be invited and where alcoholic beverages are served and entertainment is provided.

Entertainment. An event or series of events, or activities or business, occurring alone or as part of another business, to which the public is invited to watch, listen, or participate, (including dancing) or is conducted for the purposes of holding the attention of, gaining the attention of or diverting or amusing guests or patrons, including, but not limited to: live music, recorded music played by a disc jockey (DJ) or other performance which is knowingly permitted by the establishment and attended by members of the public and whether said activities are compensated by the establishment.

Dance or Dancing. Movement of the human body accompanied by music or rhythm.

Land Use Approval. Includes conditional use permit(s), or any other land use discretionary permit. (3915-9/11)

 

5.44.020 Entertainment Permit Required
No person shall provide or allow any type of entertainment at an establishment without an entertainment permit issued by the Police Chief as hereinafter provided. (3915-9/11)

 

5.44.030 Entertainment Permit—Application and Renewal
Applicants for entertainment permit(s) must be at least the age of 21 and shall first complete a written, signed and acknowledged under penalty of perjury application providing the following applicable or additional information as determined by the Police Chief:

A.    A state driver license or identification card number of the applicant in the event any other names, including aliases are used by the applicant, additional information regarding identity may be required. The applicant shall also provide his or her permanent address.

B.     The address as well as days and specific hours of operation and entertainment and where the entertainment is proposed.

C.     The full name(s) including aliases of the person or persons having the management or supervision of applicant’s business.

D.    A statement describing the applicant’s business and the proposed entertainment.

E.     Criminal records (including misdemeanors) of management or supervisory personnel of applicant’s business.

F.     Information identifying person(s) managing or supervising applicant’s business.

G.    A floor plan and site plan showing the building interior and grounds, including specific area(s) where entertainment will take place, parking spaces, queuing area if applicable and the dimension of each portion.

H.    A copy of any other licenses, permits, or entitlements (including conditions of approval) issued to the applicant.

I.      A copy of any building or property lease or contract for the address for which the entertainment will take place.

J.      The name and address of the owner and lessor of the real property upon which the business is to be conducted.

K.    The address to which the entertainment permit and any legal notice is to be mailed.

L.     A statement under oath that the applicant has read and understands the provisions of this chapter. (3915-9/11)

 

5.44.040 Zoning and Land Use Laws
A.    Prior to applying for zoning or land use approval (if so required) the applicant will first apply to the Police Chief for an entertainment permit. The Police Chief will receive the application, investigate, and make tentative written findings for approval or denial and conditions of permit approval as set forth herein within 30 calendar days of receipt of a complete application. Upon receipt of tentative findings and conditions of permit approval from the Police Chief, the applicant may apply for zoning or land use approval and may present the tentative findings and conditions of permit approval to the applicable zoning or land use approval body as evidence of tentative approval by the Police Department. If the zoning or land use approval is granted, the entertainment permit may be automatically approved and subsequently issued by the Police Chief for one year unless at any time prior to final approval of an entertainment permit, additional facts are discovered; the permit will not be automatically approved and the Police Chief may impose additional conditions or deny the permit as provided herein.

B.     If the land use approval is denied the tentative findings and conditions of permit approval shall become void and without any legal effect. This additional process will not be applicable to permit renewals. (3915-9/11)

 

5.44.050 Permit Application and Renewal Fee
A separate fee shall be paid at the time of filing of each application for a permit. The fee shall be set by resolution of the City Council. (3915-9/11)

 

5.44.060 Permit Approval and Renewal
In order to approve an entertainment permit the Police Chief will investigate the facts and shall approve or deny and/or condition an entertainment permit upon making the following written findings:

A.    The granting of previous entertainment and other related permits to the applicant has not, in the past, resulted in the operation of an establishment which has (1) created public or private nuisances; (2) violated any noise regulations; or (3) created other disturbances to the surrounding community such that calls for services to the Police Department have exceeded five in the preceding 12 months.

B.     The business or applicant has not received four or more administrative citations which have been upheld at an administrative hearing, or been convicted of, or has entered a plea of guilty to four or more violations of the provisions of this chapter, or of any other law or ordinance relating to such business.

C.     The entertainment will not attract crowds exceeding applicable capacity limits for that location or would not compromise the public safety and/or peace and welfare of the surrounding area or the business.

D.    The entertainment will be compatible with the surrounding community considering proximity to other businesses, residences, etc.

E.     The granting of an entertainment permit will not violate the Huntington Beach Municipal Code or other applicable state, or federal laws or regulations.

F.     No outstanding debt, including any fees taxes or charges exist with the City of Huntington Beach.

G.    All land use approval(s) have been obtained. (3915-9/11)

 

5.44.070 Entertainment Restrictions
The Police Chief may impose the following restrictions on the entertainment permit to mitigate health, welfare and safety concerns.

A.    That entertainment is not audible beyond 50 feet from the exterior walls of the business in any direction. That doors and windows be closed during performances to alleviate noise issues.

B.     That the premises has sufficient sound-absorbing insulation such that noise generated within the premises shall not be audible from the exterior.

C.     For new permits or locations where structural modifications have been made, the applicant shall submit a sound survey prepared by a licensed engineer showing that the proposed entertainment will not create undue noise or violate the decibel limits for the zoning district. This survey shall state the maximum allowable interior decibel limits.

D.    That activities taking place at the establishment are only those specified in the entertainment permit and/or in the license issued by the State of California Alcoholic Beverage Control, conditional use permit, California Civil Code, or any other restriction issued by any regulatory power with authority over the business or premises.

E.     That all areas of the establishment that are accessible to patrons shall be illuminated to make easily discernible the appearance and conduct of all persons in the business.

F.     That the entertainment permit is conspicuously posted in establishment.

G.    That conditions imposed herein apply at all hours, regardless if entertainment is present.

H.    That persons under the age of 21 be accompanied and under the care at all times of a parent or legal guardian.

I.      Limit hours when entertainment is permitted including days of the week and hours of the day.

J.      That the types of entertainment be restricted; for example amplified vs. non-amplified, live bands vs. DJ, number of performers and where entertainment can be performed such as inside, stage location, dance floor location and size and where dancing may take place, if at all.

K.    In addition to any requirements by State of California Alcohol Beverage Control, the City may condition alcohol activities not preempted by state law such as requirements for “cover charge,” minimum drink purchases, happy hour or reduced price drink promotions, games or contests involving the consumption of alcohol.

L.     That additional security be provided including:

1.     Uniformed or non-uniformed security officers certified by State of California;

2.     Number of security officers;

3.     Security cameras/system requirements;

4.     Areas security must patrol.

The above conditions are intended to protect the health, safety and welfare of citizens of Huntington Beach. The Police Chief may impose additional conditions if unique circumstances at a particular establishment demonstrate health, safety and welfare issues that must be mitigated (unique conditions). If unique conditions are imposed, the Police Chief will provide written statement with facts demonstrating the need for the unique conditions. (3915-9/11)

 

5.44.080 Permit—Period Valid
The permit shall be granted for the specific occasion requested, or if the request is for continuous permit, the permit shall be issued for not longer than one year. (3915-9/11)

 

5.44.090 Permit—Notice to Applicant of Action Taken
If no land use approval is required, within 30 calendar days after the filing of the application, unless the applicant signs a written waiver of notice, the Police Department shall mail or personally deliver written notice to the applicant stating the action that was taken on the application, together with a list of any conditions imposed if the application is granted or, if the application is denied, the specific grounds for the denial. The notice shall also advise the applicant of his or her right to appeal the denial of his or her application or any of the conditions imposed. (3915-9/11)

 

5.44.100 Exceptions
The following activities shall not require an entertainment permit:

A.    Establishments which provide juke boxes, televisions, video games, video programs, or recorded music and no other entertainment, as herein defined, are not required to comply with the provisions of this chapter, unless the recorded music is played on equipment which is operated by an agent or contractor of the establishment for a period exceeding 10 minutes per hour.

The intent of this subsection is to require a permit of establishments which provide that which is commonly known as a “DJ” and to exempt establishments which provide incidental or ambient music.

B.     The issuance of a sex-oriented business permit pursuant to Chapter 5.70 of this Code if applicable satisfies the entertainment requirement of this chapter. A separate entertainment permit is not required.

C.     For any entertainment provided for members and their guests at a private club where admission is not open to the public.

D.    For entertainment conducted by or sponsored by any bona fide club, society or association, organized or incorporated for benevolent, charitable, dramatic or literary purposes having an established membership and which holds meetings other than such entertainment at regular intervals, when proceeds, if any, arising from such entertainment are used for the purposes of such club, society or association.

E.     Any form of entertainment that state or federal law preempts the City from regulating. (3915-9/11)

 

5.44.110 Revocation and/or Suspension of Permit
The Police Chief may revoke or suspend an entertainment permit upon receiving satisfactory evidence that:

A.    Administrative or criminal citation(s) which have been upheld and which the Police Chief determines evidence that continued operation of the entertainment will constitute public health, safety and welfare problems.

B.     The entertainment (including employee or patron behavior) is detrimental to the public welfare.

C.     The application contains incorrect, false, or misleading information.

D.    The permit holder has had an entertainment permit or other similar permit or license denied or revoked for cause by the City of Huntington Beach or any other jurisdiction located in or out of this state prior to the date of application.

E.     The permit holder caused or permitted to be caused a violation of any provision of this chapter, conditions of entertainment permit or land use approval. (3915-9/11)

 

5.44.120 Suspension/Revocation of Permit—Notice to Applicant of Action Taken
Upon determining that grounds for permit revocation or suspension exist, the Police Chief shall furnish written notice of the revocation to the permit holder. Such notice shall summarize the principal reasons for the revocation. If the notice is mailed, it shall be deposited in the United States mail, first class postage prepaid, to the address shown on the application. Service shall be deemed complete upon personal service or mailed in the United States mail. The notice shall also advise the applicant of his or her right to appeal the revocation or suspension of the permit. (3915-9/11)

 

5.44.130 Revocation of Permit—Reapplication
Whenever a permit or license is revoked under the terms of this chapter, no other application for a permit under this chapter shall be considered for a period of one year from date of such revocation. (3915-9/11)

 

5.44.140 Permit Violations
All owners, employees, representatives, and agents shall obey all state, local, and municipal laws, conditions of the conditional use permit, entertainment permit, Alcoholic Beverage Control License, or any other regulations, provisions, or restrictions prescribed at all times. Any violations of any law or conditions will be considered violations of the permit to constitute permit suspension or revocation in addition to civil or criminal enforcement. (3915-9/11)

 

5.44.150 Separate Violations
Any permit violation described in Section 5.44.110 shall constitute a separate violation of and each violation may be charged as a separate count in the event of administrative or criminal enforcement action. (3915-9/11)

 

5.44.160 Appeal Process
Only applicants and/or permit holders have standing to administratively appeal a decision of the Police Chief. Appellee shall file an appeal with the Police Chief within 10 days of receipt of decision. In the event an appeal is not filed, appellee shall be precluded from further administrative appeal or judicial action.

A.    Appellee shall submit a form to the Police Chief detailing the facts/support and/or legal argument as to why his or her decision is being appealed. The Police Chief shall forward the appeal form to the City Manager or his or her designee who shall be the adjudicative officer deciding the appeal.

B.     A hearing will be set by the adjudicative officer within 30 days after receipt of the appeal from the Police Chief.

C.     The adjudicative officer will consider relevant evidence which may be written or oral in relation to the Police Chief’s decision to deny or impose conditions regarding the permit as set forth above. The appellee bears the burden of proving (civil standard) that the Police Chief’s decision was arbitrary or capricious. The formal rules of evidence will not apply and cross examination will not be permitted. The hearing officer will provide written determination within 10 days after the hearing and that determination will be considered a final decision for purposes of administrative mandate. (3915-9/11)

 

Chapter 5.48 TAXICABS—VEHICLES FOR HIRE
Note
*       Note: Ord. 3377-12/97 amended Ch. 5.48, derived from Ord. Nos. 1368-12/67, 1882-1/74, 2032-2/76, 2088-8/76, 2140-1/77, 2288-8/78, 2633-8/83, 3043-7/90 and 3161-8/92.

 

5.48.010 Definitions
For the purpose of this chapter, the words and phrases herein defined shall be construed in accordance with the following definitions:

“City” means the City of Huntington Beach.

“City authorization” means City authorization to operate a taxicab business in the City.

“Driver” means a person who drives a taxicab and who has a valid OCTAP-issued driver permit.

“Driver’s permit” means a valid permit issued by OCTAP authorizing a person to drive or control the movements of a taxicab.

“Exclusive ride” means one or more passengers hiring a driver for a ride to a specified destination. As part of an exclusive ride, the passenger may direct the driver to pick up additional passengers en-route to a destination and incur the additional metered time and/or distance that would be required.

“OCTAP” means the Orange County Taxi Administration Program administered by the Orange County Transportation Authority of which the City is a member.

“OCTAP regulations” means the current regulations of OCTAP.

“Operate a taxicab” means to drive a taxicab and either solicit or pick up passengers for hire in the City.

“Owner” means the registered owner or lessor of a taxicab.

“Person” includes natural person, firm, association, organization, partnership, business, trust, corporation, or public entity.

“Prearranged trip” means a trip using an online enabled application, dispatch, or Internet website. A taxicab company may provide prearranged trips anywhere within the County in which it has obtained a taxicab company permit.

“Substantially located” means the primary business address of the taxicab company or driver is located, and the City within Orange County which accounts for the largest share of that company or driver’s total number of trips within Orange County over the past year and determined every five years thereafter, as further defined at Government Code Section 53075.5(k)(2).

“Taxicab” means a vehicle operated within the jurisdiction of the City, capable of carrying not more than eight persons, excluding the driver, and used to carry passengers for hire. The term shall exclude a vehicle operating as a Charter Party Carrier licensed as such by any State agency, including the Public Utilities Commission, or any other vehicle having a Certificate of Public Convenience and Necessity issued by any State agency, including the Public Utilities Commission.

“Taxicab company” means a passenger-for-hire business either based in the City or elsewhere whose business activity includes picking up any passengers in the City by on-demand requests, a radio dispatched service, or referral which results in charging the passenger by metered time and/or distance to a destination identified by the hiring passenger for an exclusive ride. Such taxi services are a business that is required to be permitted under this chapter. Taxi services which have picked up passengers outside of the City and delivered the passengers to a location within the City are excluded from the permitting requirements under this chapter.

“Taxicab company permit” means a valid permit issued by OCTAP authorizing a company to operate a taxicab business within those cities and jurisdictions participating in OCTAP.

“Taxicab vehicle permit” means a valid permit issued by OCTAP authorizing a particular vehicle to be operated as a taxicab. (3377-12/97, 4178-5/19)

 

5.48.020 OCTAP Authorization Required
A.    No person shall only operate a taxicab in the City without an OCTAP issued taxicab company permit.

B.     Only an owner authorized by OCTAP may operate its taxicabs in the City. (3377-12/97, 4178-5/19)

 

5.48.030 Driver Permit Required
No person shall operate a taxicab in the City without an OCTAP issued driver’s permit. No owner shall permit a person to operate the owner’s taxicab unless the person possesses an OCTAP issued driver’s permit. (3377-12/97, 4178-5/19)

 

5.48.040 Taxicab Vehicle Permit Required
No person shall operate a taxicab unless his or her vehicle displays an OCTAP issued taxicab vehicle permit. No owner shall permit his or her taxicab to be operated in the City unless the taxicab displays a taxicab vehicle permit. (3377-12/97, 4178-5/19)

 

5.48.050 Taxicab Business Permit Required
No person shall operate a taxicab company in the City without an OCTAP issued taxicab company permit. (3377-12/97, 4178-5/19)

 

5.48.060 Application for Permits
Applications for a driver permit, taxicab vehicle permit or taxicab company permit shall be made to
OCTAP, upon a form provided by OCTAP and shall be accompanied by an application fee sufficient to cover the administrative costs of processing said application as established by OCTAP. (3377-12/97, 4178-5/19)

 

5.48.070 Equipment
A taxicab operated under the authority of this chapter shall be equipped according to the OCTAP regulations. (3377-12/97, 4178-5/19)

 

5.48.080 Data Collection to Determine Substantially Located
Pursuant to Government Code Section 53075.52 beginning January 1, 2019, all taxicab companies and drivers shall collect data to determine which jurisdiction each company and driver are substantially located. Beginning January 1, 2019, data for prearranged and non-prearranged trips collected in the previous 12 months shall be provided upon the date of renewal to the City of any taxicab company. (4178-5/19)

 

5.48.090 Notice of Substantially Located in City
Any taxicab company or driver who changes from being substantially located in another jurisdiction to be substantially located in the City shall provide the City with six months’ notice prior to making that change. (4178-5/19)

 

5.48.100 Mechanical Condition
A taxicab operated under the authority of this chapter shall be maintained according to the OCTAP regulations. (3377-12/97, 4178-5/19)

 

5.48.110 Operational Requirements
A.    A driver shall only carry a passenger to his or her destination by the most direct and accessible route.

B.     A taxicab shall have all permits issued by OCTAP conspicuously displayed according to the standards established by OCTAP.

C.     A taxicab shall have the following information continuously posted in a prominent location in the taxicab passenger’s compartment according to the standards established by OCTAP:

1.     A schedule of rates and charges for the hire of said taxicab;

2.     The driver’s name and address;

3.     The owner’s name, address and telephone number;

4.     The taxicab identification number;

5.     The driver’s permit issued pursuant to this chapter;

6.     The taxicab vehicle permit issued pursuant to this chapter; and

7.     Any other information required by the City.

D.    A driver shall give a receipt for the amount charged upon the request of the person paying the fare.

E.     A taxicab shall only be operated if the passenger compartment is kept in a clean and sanitary condition.

F.     A driver shall not leave his or her taxicab to solicit passengers.

G.    The name or trade name of the owner and the number by which the taxicab is designated shall be printed, stamped or stenciled conspicuously on the outside of each taxicab according to the standards established by OCTAP and adopted by separate resolution of the City Council. (3377-12/97, 4178-5/19)

 

5.48.120 Rates and Charges
No driver shall charge fares and charges higher than those established by OCTAP. (3377-12/97, 4178-5/19)

 

5.48.130 Separate from Business Licensing
The requirements of this chapter are separate and independent from the business licensing and any other provisions under this Code. (3377-12/97, 4178-5/19)

 

5.48.140 Penalty
A.    The City intends to secure compliance with the provisions of this chapter by any of the following alternate, separate and distinct methods. Each method set forth herein is intended to be mutually exclusive and does not prevent concurrent or consecutive methods being used to achieve compliance against continuing violations. Each day a violation exists constitutes a separate offense.

B.     Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, each violation of the provisions of this chapter may be enforced alternatively as follows:

1.     Infraction. Any person violating any of the provisions or failing to comply with any of the mandatory requirements of this chapter may be prosecuted for an infraction. Written citations for infractions may be issued by police officers. Any person convicted of an infraction under the provisions of this chapter shall be punished either by fines as specified in the currently adopted Uniform Infraction Bail Schedule used by the Orange County Municipal Courts, or, where no fine is specified therein, by:

a.     A fine not exceeding $100.00 for a first violation;

b.     A fine not exceeding $200.00 for a second violation within one year;

c.     A fine not exceeding $500.00 for each additional violation within one year.

2.     Misdemeanor. Any person violating any of the provisions or failing to comply with any of the mandatory requirements of this chapter may be prosecuted for a misdemeanor. Any person convicted of a misdemeanor under the provisions of this chapter shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00 or by imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.

3.     Civil Action. The City Attorney by and at the request of the City Council, may institute an action in any court of competent jurisdiction to restrain, enjoin or abate the condition(s) found to be in violation of the provisions of this chapter, as provided by law.

4.     Administrative Hearing.

a.     Upon a finding by the City official vested with the authority to enforce the various provisions of this chapter that a violation exists, he or she may notify the person(s) deemed responsible for said violation(s) that a public hearing shall be held before the City Council to hear and determine the existence of said violation(s) and the anticipated compliance necessary, i.e., abatement or other action required.

b.     Said notification shall be in writing setting forth the alleged violation(s) and the anticipated action sought, and shall be given not later than 10 days prior to the scheduled date of the hearing.

c.     The City Council may preside over the hearing or, in the alternative, appoint a hearing officer to conduct the hearing, receive relevant evidence and to submit to the City Council findings and recommendations to be considered by the City Council.

d      The City Council shall render its decision within 45 days from the date of the hearing or, in the event that a hearing officer has been appointed, within 45 days from the date on which the City Council receives the findings and recommendations of the hearing officer. The decision of the City Council shall be final and enforceable as provided by law. (3377-12/97, 4178-5/19)

 

Chapter 5.50 MOBILE VENDING
5.50.010 Purpose and Findings
The City Council of the City of Huntington Beach finds that mobile vending vehicles pose traffic hazards, public health hazards and impact the safety of residents within the City of Huntington Beach. The intent of this chapter is to provide clear and concise regulations to ensure public safety and prevent traffic and health hazards. This chapter is also intended to preserve the peace and welfare of the residents of Huntington Beach. (3345-2/97)

 

5.50.020 Definitions
For the purposes of this chapter:

“City Attorney” means the City Attorney or his or her designee.

“City Manager” means the City Manager or his or her designee.

“City Treasurer” means the City Treasurer or his or her designee.

“Director of Planning” means the Planning Director (herein “director”) or his or her designee.

“Goods or merchandise” means items and products of every kind and description, including all foods, produce, and beverage items.

“Human-powered device” means any device moved by human power including but not necessarily limited to any pushcart, wagon, bicycle, tricycle, grocery cart, or other wheeled container or conveyance.

“Ice cream truck(s)” means a motor vehicle engaged in the curbside vending or sale of frozen or refrigerated desserts, confections, or novelties commonly known as ice cream, or prepackaged candies, prepackaged snack foods, or soft drinks, primarily intended for the sale to children under 12 years of age.

“Mobile vending vehicle” means any vehicle, as that term is defined in the California Vehicle Code, which is equipped or primarily used for retail sales of fruits, vegetables or produce, and/or prepared, pre-packaged, or unprepared, unpackaged food of any kind on any public street, alley or highway or private street or alley within the City of Huntington Beach. The inventory of these vehicles is not necessarily limited to edible items and may include non-food sundries. A human-powered device is not a mobile vending vehicle.

“Mobile vendor” means any person, as defined in this chapter, who:

1.     Owns, controls, manages and/or leases a vending vehicle; and/or

2.     Contracts with a person(s) to drive, operate, prepare foods and/or vend from a food vending vehicle.

“Operator” means any and all person(s) who drive, operate, prepare foods and/or vend from a food vending vehicle.

“Person” means any natural person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, or other entity of any kind or nature.

“Police Chief” means the Police Chief or his or her designee.

“Public property” means any real property, or interest therein, owned, leased, operated, or otherwise controlled by the City of Huntington Beach other than a street, alley, parkway or sidewalk.

“Restocking” means any transfer of goods or merchandise to a mobile vending vehicle from any other person or vehicle and includes, but is not limited to loading and delivery.

“Risk manager” means the City’s risk manager or his or her designee.

“Vehicle” means as defined in the Vehicle Code of the State of California and shall not include any human-powered device.

“Vend” or “vending” means soliciting, displaying, or offering produce, fruits, vegetables, prepared food, pre-packaged food or non-food sundries of any kind for sale or barter or exchange from a vehicle on a public or private street, alley, highway or public place within the City of Huntington Beach and includes the movement or standing of a vending vehicle for the purpose of searching for, obtaining or soliciting retail sales of produce, fruits, vegetables, prepared food, pre-packaged food or non-food sundries, including but not limited to goods, wares, or merchandise.

“Vendor” means any person who engages in the act of vending from a vehicle or who drives or otherwise operates any such vehicle for the purpose of vending therefrom. (3345-2/97, 3493-5/01, 3622-12/03)

 

5.50.030 Permit Required
No person shall own, control, manage, lease or contract with other persons for the operation of a vending vehicle in the City of Huntington Beach without the appropriate valid permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this article in addition to any other license or permit required by the City of Huntington Beach. (3345-2/97)

 

5.50.040 Vendor’s Permit Required
Any person desiring to obtain a vendor’s permit to engage in the vending of goods or merchandise from a vehicle, or driving of such vehicle, pursuant to this section shall make application to the director, or his or her designee. Such application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee in such amount as established by resolution of the City Council. Any such permit shall be required to be renewed annually and a separate nonrefundable application fee paid yearly for such renewal application. Each applicant for a vendor’s permit, or an operator or applicant for an operator’s permit on behalf of such proposed vendor, shall furnish the following information and documentation as part of or in conjunction with such application:

A.    The present or proposed address from which the business is to be conducted, including the location of, restocking and overnight parking of the mobile vending vehicle;

B.     The full and true name under which the business will be conducted;

C.     The full and true name and any other names used by the applicant;

D.    The present residence address and telephone number of the applicant;

E.     California driver’s license number of the applicant;

F.     Acceptable written proof that the applicant is at least 18 years of age;

G.    The applicant’s height, weight, color of eyes and hair, and date of birth;

H.    The business, occupation or employment history of the applicant for the three-year period immediately preceding the date of the application;

I.      The permit history of the applicant, for the three-year period immediately preceding the date of the filing of the application, including whether such applicant, in previously operating in this or any other city, county, state or territory, has ever had any similar license or permit, or franchise revoked or suspended, and if so, the circumstances of such suspension or revocation;

J.      Written proof satisfactory to the City Attorney or risk manager that the applicant is insured under the policy of insurance required for such business pursuant to Section 5.50.140 of this chapter;

K.    When any change occurs regarding the written information required in this chapter, prior to issuance of a permit, the applicant shall give written notification of such change to the director within two weeks after such change;

L.     If the applicant is an individual who intends to own, operate and drive his or her own vehicle, it is not necessary to pay a fee for the vendor’s permit application separate from the fee paid for the operator’s permit application. (3345-2/97, 3622-12/03)

 

5.50.050 Operator’s Permit Required—Application for Operator’s Permit—Contracts—Required Fee
Any person desiring to obtain an operator’s permit to conduct or otherwise operate the business of vending goods or merchandise from a vehicle pursuant to this section shall make application to the director or his or her designated representative. Such application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee in such amount as established by resolution of the City Council. Any such permit shall be required to be renewed annually and a separate nonrefundable application fee paid yearly for such renewal application. Each applicant for an operator’s permit shall furnish the following information and documentation as part of or in conjunction with such application:

A.    The present or proposed address from which the business is to be conducted.

B.     The full and true name under which the business will be conducted.

C.     The full and true name and any other names used by the applicant.

D.    The present residence and business addresses and telephone numbers of the applicant.

E.     A description of the goods or merchandise which the business will vend.

F.     The number of vehicles to be owned, operated, or controlled by the applicant and the makes, body styles, years, serial and engine numbers, state license plate numbers, and names and addresses of the registered and/or legal owners of each vehicle.

G.    A description of the logo, color scheme, insignia, and any other distinguishing characteristics of the applicant’s vehicles. (3345-2/97, 3622-12/03)

 

5.50.060 Issuance of Permit
The director shall grant the vendor’s permit or operator’s permit within 10 days after receiving the completed application only if he or she finds that all of the following requirements have been met:

A.    The required fees have been paid.

B.     The application conforms in all respects to the provisions of this section.

C.     The applicant has not made a material misrepresentation of fact in the application.

D.    The applicant has not had a similar permit denied or revoked by the City of Huntington Beach within a period of one year prior to the date of such application.

E.     The applicant does not have any outstanding debt owing to the City of Huntington Beach. (3345-2/97, 3622-12/03)

 

5.50.070 Denial of Permit
A.    If the director does not find that all of the requirements set forth in Section 5.50.060 as applicable have been met, he or she shall deny the application for the vendor’s or operator’s permit. In the event the application for the permit is denied by the director, written notice of such denial shall be given to the applicant specifying the ground or grounds of such denial. Notice of denial of the application for the permit shall be deemed to have been served upon the date it is personally served on the applicant or when deposited in the United States mail with postage prepaid and addressed to the applicant at his or her residence address as set forth in the application for the permit.

B.     Any applicant whose application for a vendor’s or operator’s permit has been denied by the director may appeal such denial to the City Manager by filing a written notice of appeal with the director within 10 days following the date of service of the decision and payment of the appeal fee prescribed by resolution of the City Council. The date of filing of said notice of appeal shall be the date said notice and appeal fee are received by the director.

C.     No person or entity whose permit is finally denied shall be eligible to apply for a new permit for a period of one year following such final denial. (3345-2/97, 3622-12/03)

 

5.50.080 Revocation of Permit
Any vendor’s or operator’s permit may be revoked by the director for good cause shown including but not necessarily limited to any of the following reasons:

A.    Falsification of any information supplied by the permittee upon which issuance of the permit was based.

B.     Failure of the permittee, or any employees or subcontractors of the permittee, to comply with the regulations set forth in this section.

C.     Conviction of a violation, or plea of guilty or nolo contendere, by the permittee, or any employee, subcontractor or independent contractor of the permittee, of any state law or municipal ordinance while in the course of conducting vending operations from a vehicle pursuant to the permit.

D.    Conviction of a violation, or a plea of guilty or nolo contendere, by the permittee of any applicable provision or requirement of this section.

E.     No such revocation shall become effective until expiration of the appeal period. Notification of the permit holder shall be made either by personal delivery or by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, addressed to the permit holder at such permit holder’s residence address as set forth on the application for a permit. Service shall be deemed made on the permit holder on the date personally delivered or on the date of mailing. A permit holder may appeal such revocation to the City Manager by filing a written notice of appeal with the director within 10 days following the date of service of such decision and payment of the appeal fee as prescribed by resolution of the City Council. The date of filing of said notice of appeal shall be the date said notice and appeal fee are received by the director. If a timely appeal is filed, the revocation shall be stayed pending the decision of the City Manager. Otherwise the suspension or revocation shall become effective immediately upon expiration of said appeal period.

F.     No person or entity whose permit is revoked shall be eligible to apply for a new permit for a period of one year following such revocation. (3345-2/97, 3622-12/03)

 

5.50.090 Appeals
Upon receipt of a timely appeal by the City Manager or his or her designated representative, shall hear such appeal within 20 days following the date of such appeal and shall give the appellant not less than five days advance notice of the date of such hearing. The decision of the City Manager shall be based upon the same criteria as set forth in this chapter which are applicable to the issuance or revocation of such permit. The appellant shall be notified of the decision of the City Manager by mailed, written notice. The decision of the City Manager shall be final. No revocation of a permit pursuant to this section shall be deemed effective during the pendency of a timely filed appeal until the date of mailing of the City Manager’s decision; provided, however, no permit holder shall operate during any period of time in which the insurance coverage required by this chapter is not in full force and effect. (3345-2/97)

 

5.50.100 Enforcement
The director and the Police Chief have the authority to enforce the provisions of this chapter. (3345-2/97, 3622-12/03)

 

5.50.110 Temporary Special Events Permit
Peddlers and vendors wishing to conduct business at any special event shall apply to the City for a temporary vending license. Application for such a license must be made at least 30 days prior to the beginning of the event. Applicants must meet the same application requirements as other peddlers and vendors. The license is valid only for the duration of the special event. Peddlers and vendors granted a temporary license are subject to the same operating regulations as other vendors, except where otherwise specified. (3345-2/97)

 

5.50.120 Trash Receptacles and Removal
A.    All mobile vending vehicles shall be equipped with refuse receptacles large enough to contain all refuse generated by the operation of such vehicle.

B.     The operator of the mobile vending vehicle shall pick up all refuse generated by such operation within a 50-foot radius of the vehicle before such vehicle is moved, all refuse shall be disposed of at an approved solid waste facility. (3345-2/97)

 

5.50.130 Hours of Operation
A.    No vehicle or stand used for vending shall remain on public property during non-operating hours. Overnight parking of mobile vending vehicles on a public street or alley is prohibited.

B.     No vending shall be permitted by any operator or conducted by a vendor except between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. (3345-2/97)

 

5.50.140 Insurance Provisions
All operations shall have liability insurance covering the vehicle in accordance with the State of California. (3345-2/97)

 

5.50.160 Noise Level
A.    Any use of amplified sound making devices, including vehicle horns, to advertise, draw attention to, or announce the presence of any such vehicle shall comply with the limitations and provisions set forth in the Huntington Beach Municipal Code. No amplified sound making devices shall be used for such purposes upon any public street immediately contiguous to any property zoned for residential use within the City.

B.     Non-amplified sound making devices shall not be made while the vehicle is stopped, parked, or otherwise in a stationary position, on any public street in an area zoned for residential use within the City; and such sounds shall not be audible to a person with normal hearing for a distance of more than 200 feet in an area zoned for residential use within the City. (3345-2/97)

 

5.50.170 Prohibited Conduct
A.    No person shall vend from a mobile vending vehicle, except for ice cream trucks, which is stopped, parked or standing on any public street, alley or highway in any of the following situations:

1.     Within 300 feet of any public school property, park, playground or recreational facility.

2.     Within 300 feet of any other mobile vending vehicle which is engaged in the operation of vending.

3.     Within 100 feet of an intersection (including public alleys).

4.     When the posted speed limit on the public street, alley or highway is greater than 35 miles per hour.

5.     When the mobile vending vehicle is parked in violation of any other provision of this Code or the California Vehicle Code.

6.     When the mobile vending vehicle is duly registered and licensed by the State of California with an unladen weight exceeding 6,000 pounds.

7.     When any part of the mobile vending vehicle is open to prospective customers other than on the side of the vehicle next to the right side of the street or highway.

8.     When the mobile vending vehicle is not stopped, parked or standing on the right side of the street or highway.

9.     When the prospective customer is standing or sitting in another vehicle.

10.   When the prospective customer is located in that portion of the street, alley or highway which is open to vehicular traffic.

11.   When the mobile vending vehicle is within any parkway, alley, sidewalk or within a no parking area as defined by Huntington Beach Municipal Code Section 10.40.050, or other public property.

B.     Re-stocking of a mobile vending vehicle is prohibited on a public street or alley.

C.     No mobile vending vehicle shall attach to or receive any utilities from private or public property.

D.    No additional lighting other than that required by the California Vehicle Code may be installed or operated on a mobile vending vehicle.

E.     All mobile vending vehicles are prohibited from operating on private property except mobile vending vehicles shall be permitted to provide meals/snacks for employees at the private property for a period of 30 minutes or less (such as construction sites). (3345-2/97, 3493-5/01, 3622-12/03, 4179-6/19)

 

5.50.180 Applicability of Regulations to Existing Businesses
The provisions of this article shall be applicable to all persons and businesses described herein whether the herein described activities were established before or after the effective date of the ordinance enacting this chapter into law. All such persons and businesses shall have 30 days from said effective date to file a completed application for a vendor’s or operator’s permit with the City of Huntington Beach. (3345-2/97)

 

5.50.190 Conducting as a Nuisance
Any mobile vending vehicle operated contrary to the provisions of this chapter shall be hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance, and the City Attorney may, in addition to or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal action hereunder, commence an action or actions, proceeding or proceedings, for the abatement, removal or enjoinment thereof, in the manner provided in Chapter 17.10 of the Huntington Beach Municipal Code, and may take such other steps and may apply to such court or courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or remove such establishment and restrain and enjoin any person from operating a mobile vending vehicle contrary to the provisions of this chapter. (3345-2/97, 3622-12/03)

 

5.50.200 Penalty for Violation
Every violation of the provisions of this article shall be deemed to be a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment not exceeding four months or by fine not exceeding $500.00, or by both fine and imprisonment. Each day any violation of any said provision of this article shall constitute a separate offense. (3345-2/97)

 

5.50.210 Exemptions
The requirements of this section shall not apply to:

A.    Any person delivering any goods or merchandise by vehicle where such goods or merchandise has been ordered in advance for such delivery from any business located at a permanent location and which goods or merchandise is being delivered from such location to the customer by vehicle, regardless of the point of sale thereof.

B.     Any person engaged in the vending of goods or merchandise on public property where such person has been authorized by the City of Huntington Beach to engage in such activity by a permit, lease, real property license, agreement, or other entitlements issued by the City for such purpose. (3345-2/97)

 

5.50.220 Severability
If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase in this chapter or any part thereof is for any reason held to be unconstitutional or invalid or ineffective by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of the remaining portions of this chapter or any part thereof. The City Council hereby declares that it would have passed each section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase thereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more subsections, subdivisions, paragraphs, sentences, clauses, or phrases be declared unconstitutional, or invalid, or ineffective. (3493-5/01)

 

Chapter 5.54 COMMERCIAL PHOTOGRAPHY
5.54.010 Definitions
As used in this chapter, commercial or professional photography shall mean the use for profit or commercial purposes outside a studio, of electronic or film equipment, which employs tape, wire or direct transmission, film or some other medium, to record, project and transmit, with or without sound, images of moving or stationary objects or persons. For the purpose of this chapter, still photography shall mean the art or process of producing images on a sensitized surface by the action of light or other radiant energy. (2812-2/86)

 

5.54.020 Permit Required
No person shall engage in any commercial or professional photography which uses public property in this City as a location site without first applying to and obtaining from the City Manager, or his or her authorized representative, a permit therefor. (2812-2/86)

 

5.54.030 Application—Contents
A written application shall be made on a form provided by the City Manager, and shall contain the following information:

A.    Name of applicant and its authorized agent;

B.     Address and telephone number of applicant and its authorized agent;

C.     A description of the nature and location (including the common street address if applicable) of the proposed activity;

D.    Dates and times for which the permit is requested;

E.     Agreement that the City shall be reimbursed when any City personnel and equipment is used in connection with such activity;

F.     Agreement that the site shall be cleaned and restored to its original condition; and

G.    Any other information which the City Manager, or his or her authorized representative, may deem necessary. (2812-2/86)

 

5.54.040 Insurance
The applicant shall furnish public liability and property damage insurance, together with evidence of workers’ compensation coverage, where applicable, conditioned that the City, its elective and appointive officers, employees, and all Council-appointed commissions, boards and committees shall be indemnified and held harmless from all loss, cost, damage, expense and liability which may arise out of the proposed activity, and all loss or damage which may be sustained by any person as a result of, or which may be caused by or arise out of the conduct of such activity. Such insurance shall be written on an insurance company licensed to do business in the State of California, in a form approved by the City Attorney, and in an amount established by resolution of the City Council. Such insurance shall be at the permittee’s sole expense and shall remain in force during the time the permit is in effect. (2812-2/86)

 

5.54.050 Fees and Deposit
A.    Prior to issuance of a permit, a nonrefundable fee shall be paid to defray the cost of processing the application, to cover the use of the property described in the application, and to ensure that all equipment belonging to the permittee is removed at the completion of the activity. An additional fee shall be required in the event permittee requests the use of any City personnel and equipment. All fees shall be established by resolution of the City Council.

B.     The City Manager, or his or her authorized representative, may also require deposit of a reasonable sum to be refunded unless such cleanup and restoration of the location site is performed by the City. (2812-2/86)

 

5.54.060 Rescheduling
Dates and times, set out in the permit, may be changed at the request of permittee who shall inform the City Manager, or his or her authorized representative, of the need therefor at least five working days in advance of the time originally set for starting such activity. (2812-2/86)

 

5.54.070 Temporary Street Closure
If the location site includes the use of a City street which may require temporary closure, the Police Chief, Fire Chief and the Director of Public Works shall investigate and furnish the following information to the City Manager:

A.    Whether the time, duration and size of the temporary street closure will substantially disrupt the orderly, safe movement of other traffic;

B.     Whether the concentration of persons will unduly interfere with proper fire and police protection of or ambulance service to areas contiguous to such street closure;

C.     Whether there will be undue interference with the orderly operation of parks, hospitals, churches, schools or other public and quasi public institutions in adjacent areas;

D.    Whether parking is requested to be restricted or prohibited;

E.     Whether such temporary street closure will occupy all or only a portion of a street, and whether an intersection is involved.

The permittee shall provide barricades and warning lights as are deemed necessary by and are acceptable to the Director of Public Works. (2812-2/86)

 

5.54.080 Exception
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to persons employed by another governmental agency, or to photographers, motion picture or television cameramen employed by a major news network or bona fide news publication, or to aerial photography, including aero mapping and survey. (2812-2/86)

 

5.54.090 Penalty
The failure of any person to comply with the provisions of this chapter shall constitute unlawful trespass on public property and shall be a misdemeanor. Upon conviction thereof, any person, firm or corporation shall be punished for each offense by a fine not to exceed $500.00 or six months in the county jail, or both such fine and conviction, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during which a violation occurs or continues. (2812-2/86)

 

Chapter 5.56 ALARM SYSTEMS
5.56.010 Purpose
The City of Huntington Beach Council finds and declares that:

A.    The vast majority of alarms to which the Police Department responds are False Alarms, which are reported to the Police by alarm companies.

B.     Most False Alarms are the result of improper maintenance or improper or careless use of an Alarm System.

C.     The public and Police Officers are subjected to needless danger when the Officers are called to respond to False Alarms.

D.    Officers responding to False Alarms are not available to carry out other Police duties.

E.     In the interest of using limited Police resources most effectively and efficiently, the number of False Alarms can and must be reduced.

F.     The purpose of this chapter is to reduce the dangers and inefficiencies associated with False Alarms and to encourage alarm companies and property owners to maintain the operational reliability, properly use Alarm Systems, and to reduce or eliminate False Alarm Dispatch Requests.

G.    This chapter governs systems intended to summon a Police response, establishes fees, fines, establishes a system of administration, sets conditions for the suspension of a Police response and establishes a public education and training program. (4163-3/19)

 

5.56.020 Definitions
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings:

“Alarm Administrator” means the person or persons designated by the Police Department to administer the provisions of this chapter.

“Alarm Agreement” means the legal contract or agreement by and between the Alarm Installation Company and/or Monitoring Company and the Alarm User.

“Alarm Agreement Holding Company” means the Alarm Installation Company or Monitoring Company that holds the Alarm Agreement with the Alarm User.

“Alarm Dispatch Request” means a notification to the Police Department that an alarm, either manual or automatic, has been activated at a particular Alarm Site.

“Alarm Installation Company” means a person in the business of selling, providing, maintaining, servicing, repairing, altering, replacing, moving or installing an Alarm System at an Alarm Site for compensation, and includes individuals or firms that install and service Alarm Systems used in a private business or proprietary facility.

“Alarm Registration” means a registration and unique Number issued by the Alarm Administrator to an Alarm User, which authorizes the operation of an Alarm System.

“Alarm Response Manager (ARM)” means a person designated by an Alarm Installation Company and Monitoring Company to handle alarm issues for the company and act as the primary point of contact for the City’s Alarm Administrator.

“Alarm Site” means a location served by one or more Alarm Systems. In a multi-unit building or complex, each unit shall be considered a separate Alarm Site if served by a separate Alarm System. In a single unit building that houses two or more separate businesses with separate Alarm Systems, each business will be considered a separate Alarm Site.

“Alarm System” means a device or series of devices, which emit or transmit an audible or remote visual or electronic alarm signal, which is intended to summon Police response. The term includes hardwired systems, surveillance cameras and systems interconnected with a radio frequency method such as cellular or private radio signals, and includes Local Alarm Systems, but does not include an alarm installed in a motor vehicle or a system which will not emit a signal either audible or visible from the outside of the building, residence or beyond, but is designed solely to alert the occupants of a building or residence.

“Alarm User” means any person who has contracted for Monitoring, repair, installation or maintenance service for an Alarm System from an Alarm Installation Company or Monitoring Company, or who owns or operates an Alarm System which is not monitored, maintained or repaired under agreement.

“Alarm User Awareness Class” means a class conducted for the purpose of educating Alarm Users about the responsible use, operation, and maintenance of Alarm Systems and the problems created by False Alarms.

“Alarm User List” means a list provided by the Alarm User’s Alarm Installation Company or if no Alarm Agreement exists between the Alarm User and an Alarm Installation Company, the Alarm User’s Monitoring Company.

“Arming Station” means a device that controls an Alarm System.

“Automatic Voice Dialer” means any electronic, mechanical, or other device which, when activated, is capable of being programmed to send a prerecorded voice message to the Police Department or City requesting an officer dispatch to an Alarm Site.

“Burglar Alarm” means an alarm intended to identify the presence of an intruder in either a business or residence.

“Business License” means a Business License issued by the City of Huntington Beach Business License Division to an Alarm Installation Company or Monitoring Company to conduct business in the City.

“Cancellation” means the termination of a Police response to an Alarm Site after an Alarm Dispatch Request is made but before an Officer’s arrival at the Alarm Site.

“City” means City of Huntington Beach.

“Conversion of Alarm User” means the transaction or process by which one Alarm Installation Company or Monitoring Company begins the servicing or monitoring of a previously unmonitored Alarm System or an Alarm System that was previously serviced or monitored by another alarm company.

“Duress Alarm” means a silent Alarm System signal generated by the entry of a designated code into an Arming Station in order to signal that the Alarm User is being forced to turn off the system and requires an Officer response.

“Enhanced Call Confirmation (ECC)” means an attempt by the Monitoring Company, or its representative, to contact the Alarm Site and/or Alarm User and/or the Alarm User’s designated representatives by telephone and/or other electronic means, whether or not actual contact with a person is made, to determine whether an alarm signal is valid before requesting a Police Burglar Alarm Dispatch, in an attempt to avoid an unnecessary Alarm Dispatch Request. For the purpose of this chapter, telephone confirmation shall require, as a minimum that a second call be made to a different number, if the first attempt fails to reach an Alarm User who can properly identify themselves to determine whether an alarm signal is valid before requesting an officer dispatch. Names and numbers of those contacted or attempted to contact, shall be provided when requested.

“False Alarm” means an Alarm Dispatch Request to the Police Department, which results in the responding officer finding no evidence of a criminal offense or attempted criminal offense after completing an investigation of the Alarm Site.

“Hold-Up Alarm” means a silent alarm signal generated by the manual activation of a device intended to signal a robbery in progress.

“Local Alarm System” means an unmonitored Alarm System that annunciates an alarm only at the Alarm Site or is a self-monitored Alarm Site.

“Monitoring” means the process by which a Monitoring Company receives signals from an Alarm System and relays an Alarm Dispatch Request to the Police Department.

“Monitoring Company” means a person in the business of providing Monitoring services.

“One Plus Duress Alarm” means the manual activation of a silent alarm signal by entering a code that adds one number to the last digit of the normal arm/disarm code (e.g., normal code = 1234, one plus duress code = 1235).

“Panic Alarm” means an Alarm System signal generated by the manual activation of a device intended to signal a life threatening or emergency situation requiring an officer response.

“Person” means an individual, corporation, limited liability company, partnership, association, organization or similar entity.

“Police Department” means the Huntington Beach Police Department.

“Protective or Reactive Alarm System” means an Alarm System that produces a temporary disability or sensory deprivation through use of chemical, electrical, sonic or other means, including use of devices that obscure or disable a person’s vision.

“Registration Number” means a unique individual number assigned to an Alarm User as part of Alarm Registration issued by the Police Department.

“Responsible Party” means a person capable of appearing at the Alarm Site upon request who has access to the Alarm Site, the code to the Alarm System and the authority to approve repairs to the Alarm System.

“Robbery Alarm” means an alarm signal generated by the manual or automatic activation of a device, or any system, device or mechanism on or near the premises intended to signal that a robbery is in progress and that a person is in need of immediate Police assistance in order to avoid bodily harm, injury or death. The term has the same general meaning as “Hold-Up Alarm or Duress Alarm.”

“Takeover” means the transaction or process by which an Alarm User takes over control of an existing Alarm System that was previously controlled by another Alarm User.

“Zones” mean a division of devices into which an Alarm System is divided to indicate the general location from which an Alarm System signal is transmitted. (4163-3/19)

 

5.56.030 Administration—Funding—Increases in Fees and Fines—Annual Evaluation
A.    Responsibility for administration of this chapter is vested with the Police Department.

B.     The Police Department shall designate an Alarm Administrator to carry out the duties and functions described in this section.

C.     Monies generated by fees and fines assessed pursuant to this section shall be deposited into the City’s General Fund.

D.    The amount of the fees and fines set forth in this section shall be specified in the City Fee Schedule, which may only be revised by a duly adopted resolution of the City Council. For purposes of this subsection, “fees” include any type or class of fee and includes late charges.

E.     The Alarm Administrator shall conduct an annual evaluation and analysis of the effectiveness of this chapter and identify and implement system improvements as warranted. (4163-3/19)

 

5.56.040 Alarm Registrations Required—Terms—Fees and Fee Collection
A.    An Alarm User shall not operate, or cause to be operated, any Alarm System without a valid Alarm Registration. A separate Alarm Registration is required for each Alarm Site having a distinct address or business name. A registration fee including a completed Alarm Registration application shall be received and approved by the Alarm Administrator prior to any Alarm System activation. A 30-day grace period shall be granted from the date of all new alarm installations or takeovers between two alarm users, to accommodate the registration application process. There shall be reduced residential registration fees for senior citizens, low-income and disabled persons. The City Council shall establish such classes of persons by resolution.

B.     Owners of Local Alarm Systems are required to adhere to all sections of this chapter and are subject to all fees, fines, suspensions, penalties or other requirements that are applicable.

C.     The fee for a new initial Alarm Registration and the Alarm Registration renewal fee shall be collected by the Alarm Administrator.

D.    Existing Alarm Systems

1.     Any Alarm System that has been installed before the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall be registered and a registration fee collected by the Alarm Administrator.

a.     The Alarm Agreement Holding Company shall provide within 40 days of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, an Alarm User List of existing Alarm Users in the City, in a format approved by the Alarm Administrator, including name, address, billing address and telephone number to the Alarm Administrator.

b.     The Alarm Agreement Holding Company may apply to the Alarm Administrator for an extension of the time limit in subsection (D)(1)(a) based on extenuating circumstances.

2.     The Alarm Agreement Holding Company may, through a mutual written agreement, have another Alarm Company provide the Alarm User’s list.

E.     New Alarm Systems

1.     Any Alarm Installation Company that installs an Alarm System on premises located within the City of Huntington Beach shall notify the Alarm Administrator within 20 days that an Alarm System has been installed and send the Alarm Administrator the required information.

2.     In the case of self-installed alarm systems that are to be monitored by a Monitoring Company, the Monitoring Company shall act as the Alarm Installation Company regarding the duties to notify the Alarm Administrator.

3.     Failure of an Alarm Installation Company to notify the Alarm Administrator of a new Alarm System installation within 20 days of installation shall result in a fine as established by resolution of the City Council to be imposed on the Alarm Installation Company.

4.     The initial Alarm Registration fee shall be collected by the Alarm Administrator. Failure of the Alarm User to submit an application and registration fee within the 30 days after notice shall result in the Alarm System being classified as non-registered and late charges being assessed.

F.     Alarm Registration and Renewal Fees

1.     An Alarm Registration shall expire one year from the date of issuance, and must be renewed annually by the Alarm User. The Alarm Administrator shall notify the Alarm User of the need to renew their registration 30 days prior to the expiration of the registration. It is the responsibility of the Alarm User to submit the updated information and renewal fees prior to the registration expiration date. Failure to renew shall be classified as use of a non-registered Alarm System and subject the Alarm Site to a suspension and late charge.

2.     Registration fees shall be collected annually based on a one-year registration period. The amount of the registration and renewal fees required are established by resolution of the City Council.

G.    Late Charge. Alarm Users who fail to make payment for an Alarm Registration prior to the registration’s expiration date will be assessed a late charge as established by resolution of the City Council.

H.    Refunds. No refund of a registration fee or registration renewal fee will be made.

I.      Upon receipt of a completed Alarm Registration application form and the Alarm Registration fee, the Alarm Administrator shall issue a Registration Number or Alarm Registration renewal to the applicant unless:

1.     The applicant has failed to pay any fee or fine assessed under this chapter; or

2.     An Alarm Registration for the Alarm Site has been suspended, and the condition causing the suspension has not been corrected; or

3.     The Alarm Installation Company and/or the Monitoring Company listed on the registration application are not in possession of a current valid State of California Department of Consumer Affairs Alarm Company Operators License.

Any false statement of a material fact made by an applicant for the purpose of obtaining an Alarm Registration shall be sufficient cause for refusal to issue an Alarm Registration.

J.      Exceptions

1.     Government entities, including, but not necessarily limited to, the City, County, State, Federal and School Districts, must obtain Alarm Registrations for all Alarm Systems on property under their control within the boundaries of Huntington Beach, but are exempt from payment of Alarm Registration and renewal fees.

2.     All registration-fee-exempted alarm sites are required to obtain and maintain a valid Alarm Registration for a Police response and are subjected to all other fees, fines and suspension enforcements, except when this action is prohibited by statute or through a court ruling. (4163-3/19)

 

5.56.050 Registration Application—Contents
An application for an Alarm Registration must be in a format provided by the Police Department. The information required on such forms shall be determined by the Alarm Administrator. Registration applicants acknowledge that the Police response may be influenced by factors including, but not limited to, the availability of Officers, priority of calls, traffic conditions, weather conditions, emergency conditions, prior alarm history, administrative actions and staffing levels. (4163-3/19)

 

5.56.060 Transfer of Registration Prohibited
A.    An Alarm Registration cannot be transferred to another person or Alarm Site. An Alarm User shall inform the Alarm Administrator and their Alarm Company of any change to the information listed on the Alarm Registration application within 10 business days after such change.

B.     Exceptions may be made at the discretion of the Alarm Administrator when the transfer proposed is among members of the family of the original registration holder or successors in interest to the property for which the Alarm Registration has been issued. (4163-3/19)

 

5.56.070 Duties of Alarm Users
A.    An Alarm User shall:

1.     Maintain the Alarm Site and the Alarm System in a manner that will minimize or eliminate False Alarms;

2.     Make every reasonable effort to arrive at the Alarm System’s location within 30 minutes after being requested by the Monitoring Company or Police Department in order to:

a.     Deactivate an Alarm System,

b.     Provide access to the Alarm Site, and/or

c.     Provide alternative security for the Alarm Site;

3.     Provide his, her, or its Monitoring Company with the updated names and telephone numbers of at least two individuals who are able and have agreed to:

a.     Receive notification of an Alarm System activation at any time,

b.     Respond to the Alarm Site at any time, and

c.     Provide access to the Alarm Site and deactivate the Alarm System, if necessary;

4.     Not activate an Alarm System for any reason other than an occurrence of an event that the Alarm System was intended to report;

5.     Notify his, her, or its Monitoring Company of any suspension of Police response (as provided for under this chapter) and request that the Monitoring Company not make a Burglar Alarm Dispatch Request.

B.     No person shall operate or cause to be operated any Automatic Voice Dialer which, when activated, uses a telephone device or attachment to automatically dial a telephone line leading into the Police Department or the City and then transmit any pre-recorded message or signal.

C.     An Alarm User shall keep a set of written operating instructions for each Alarm System at each Alarm Site. (4163-3/19)

 

5.56.080 Audible Alarms—Restrictions, Abatement of Malfunctioning Alarm
A.    No Alarm System shall emit a sound resembling an emergency vehicle siren or civil defense warning. The Chief of Police shall make the final determination regarding any question of an audible alarm within this section.

B.     After the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, no one shall install, modify or repair an Alarm System in the City of Huntington Beach that has a siren, bell or other signal that is audible from any property adjacent to the Alarm Site that sounds for longer than 15 consecutive minutes after the alarm is activated, or that repeats the 15-minute audible cycle more than two consecutive times during a single armed period.

C.     In the event that an audible alarm is activated and fails to reset itself or continues to activate for more than 60 minutes and the responsible person listed on the Alarm Registration or other responsible person cannot or will not respond and silence the alarm, and the continued activation of the alarm is creating a disturbance, the Police Department may cause the alarm to be silenced in a manner determined appropriate for the circumstances. The Alarm User shall be held responsible for the actual costs involved to abate the malfunctioning alarm up to a maximum of $300.00. The City, its employees or agents shall not be responsible or liable for damage resulting from such disconnection. (4163-3/19)

 

5.56.090 Registration and Duties of Alarm Installation Companies and Monitoring Companies
A.    Registration.

1.     No alarm company operator or alarm agent, as defined by the Business and Professions Code, shall install, maintain, or repair any Alarm System within the City unless the Alarm Company operator or alarm agent has, prior to performing such work, obtained a City Business License.

2.     Each Alarm Installation Company and Alarm Monitoring Company must designate one individual as the Alarm Response Manager (ARM) for the company. The individual designated as the ARM must be knowledgeable of the provisions of this chapter, as well as have the knowledge and authority to deal with False Alarm issues and respond to requests from the Alarm Administrator. The name, contact number, and email address of the ARM shall be provided to the Alarm Administrator. Failure to comply within 30 days after being notified in writing from the Alarm Administrator may result in the suspension of Police Department response to Alarm Dispatch Requests from the non-complying Alarm Installation Company or Monitoring Company.

3.     Each Alarm Installation Company shall provide the name, address and phone number of any Monitoring Company it is using to monitor its Alarm Sites within the City, and Monitoring Companies shall do the same for Alarm Installation Companies that use their monitoring services within the City.

B.     Alarm Installation Companies shall:

1.     Upon the installation or activation of an Alarm System, the Alarm Installation Company shall distribute to the Alarm User information summarizing:

a.     The applicable law relating to False Alarms, including the Registration Fee and the potential for fines and suspension of an Alarm Registration;

b.     How to prevent False Alarms; and

c.     How to operate the Alarm System.

2.     After the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, Alarm Installation Companies shall not program Alarm Systems so that they are capable of sending One Plus Duress Alarms. Monitoring Companies may continue to report One Plus Duress Alarms received from Alarm Systems programmed with One Plus Duress Alarms installed prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter.

3.     After the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, Alarm Installation Companies shall not install, modify or repair “single action” devices for the activation of Hold-Up, Robbery or Panic Alarms. New devices shall require two actions or an activation time delay to provide more positive assurance that the user intends to activate the device.

4.     All audible Alarm Systems shall include a device which will limit the duration of the audible alarm to a period of not more than 15 minutes per activation.

5.     An Alarm Installation Company shall not use an Automatic Voice Dialer for any Alarm System which, when activated, uses a telephone device or attachment to automatically dial a telephone line leading into the Police Department or the City and then transmit any pre-recorded message or signal.

6.     Ensure that Alarm Users of Alarm Systems equipped with a Duress, Robbery, Holdup or Panic Alarm has been provided adequate training as to the proper use of the Alarm System’s operation and function.

7.     All Alarm Systems shall be supplied with an uninterrupted power supply in such a manner that the failure or interruption of the normal electric utility service for a period of up to four hours will not activate the Alarm System.

C.     A Monitoring Company shall:

1.     Report alarm signals by using telephone numbers or procedures designated by the Alarm Administrator or other approved communication processes.

2.     Employ Enhanced Call Confirmation procedures on All Burglar Alarm Dispatch Requests. The Huntington Beach Police Department may refuse to accept an Alarm Dispatch Request from a Monitoring Company that has failed to comply with the procedures required by Enhanced Call Confirmation. This subsection becomes effective 90 days after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter.

3.     Communicate Alarm Dispatch Requests to the Police Department in a manner and form determined by the Alarm Administrator.

4.     Communicate Cancellations to the Police Department in a manner and form determined by the Alarm Administrator.

5.     Communicate all available Zone activations information (north, south, front, back, door, window, etc.) about the location of an alarm signal(s) as part of an Alarm Dispatch Request.

6.     Communicate the type of alarm activation (silent or audible, interior or perimeter), if available, on any Alarm Dispatch Request.

7.     Notify Communications (Dispatch) of any Alarm Site that it knows, or reasonably should know has guard dog(s), pets or is fitted with a Protective-Reactive Alarm System. During any alarm at such a site, a Responsible Party must be contacted and confirm that he or she will respond to the Alarm Site to disarm the device or take control of the guard dog(s).

8.     After an Alarm Dispatch Request, promptly advise the Police Department if the Monitoring Company knows that the Alarm User or a Responsible Party is on the way to the Alarm Site.

9.     Each Monitoring Company must maintain, for a period of at least one year after the date of an Alarm Dispatch Request, all records relating to the Alarm Dispatch Request. Records must include the name, address and telephone number of the Alarm User, each Alarm System zone activated, the time of Alarm Dispatch Request and evidence of all attempts to verify. The Alarm Administrator may request copies of such records for any individual Alarm User. If the request is made within 60 days after an Alarm Dispatch Request, the Monitoring Company shall furnish requested records within three business days after receiving the request. If the records are requested between 60 days and one year after an Alarm Dispatch Request, the Monitoring Company shall furnish the requested records within 30 days after receiving the request.

10.   Each Monitoring Company shall, upon request, immediately provide the Police Department with the names and phone numbers of the Alarm User’s emergency contacts at the time of each Alarm Dispatch Request.

D.    Conversion of Alarm Users. An Alarm Installation Company or Monitoring Company that converts the servicing of any Alarm System account from another company shall notify the Alarm Administrator of such conversion and shall make a reasonable effort to provide to the Alarm Administrator, within 60 days from the date of conversion, an Alarm User List of the converted accounts, in a format acceptable to the Alarm Administrator. (4163-3/19)

 

5.56.100 Duties and Authority of the Alarm Administrator
A.    The Alarm Administrator shall:

1.     Designate the manner and form of Alarm Dispatch Requests and the telephone numbers and/or communication process that are to be used for such requests; and

2.     Establish a procedure to accept Cancellation of Alarm Dispatch Requests.

B.     The Alarm Administrator shall establish a procedure to acquire and record information on Alarm Dispatch Requests.

C.     The Alarm Administrator shall establish and implement a procedure to notify the Alarm User of a False Alarm. The notice shall include the following:

1.     The date and time of an Officer’s response to the False Alarm; and

2.     Any False Alarm fine incurred.

D.    The Alarm Administrator may require that a conference be held with an Alarm User and the Alarm Installation Company or Monitoring Company responsible for repairing or monitoring of the Alarm System to review the circumstances of each False Alarm. The conference may be held in person or through a conference telephone call, at the Alarm Administrator’s discretion. Failure to participate may result in suspension of the Alarm Registration, as indicated by the facts of the case.

E.     The Alarm Administrator may establish an Alarm User Awareness Class. The Alarm Administrator may request the assistance of associations, alarm companies and law enforcement agencies in developing and implementing the class. The class shall inform Alarm Users of the Alarm Ordinance; problems created by False Alarms and teach Alarm Users how to avoid creating False Alarms.

F.     If a false Robbery, Hold-Up or Panic Alarm has occurred and the alarm was triggered using a single action, non-recessed device, the Alarm Administrator may consider a waiver or partial waiver of the False Alarm fine, if action is taken by the Alarm User to remove or replace the single action, non-recessed device.

G.    The Alarm Administrator shall make a copy of this chapter and/or an ordinance summary sheet available to each Alarm User.

H.    The Alarm Administrator may use electronic means to communicate with Alarm Users, Alarm Installation Companies and Monitoring Companies when applicable or when requested by the recipient and at the Alarm Administrators discretion. (4163-3/19)

 

5.56.110 False Alarm Fines—Fees—Late Charges
A.    The Alarm Administrator may assess the Alarm User a fine for a False Alarm occurring at that Alarm User’s Alarm Site. The amount of said fines for the listed categories shall be established by City Council and may be subsequently amended by resolution of the City Council.

1.     Burglar False Alarm Fines;

2.     Robbery False Alarm Fines;

3.     Panic False Alarm Fines.

B.     If a False Alarm fine is not paid within 30 days after the invoice is mailed, a late charge as established by resolution of the City Council shall be imposed.

C.     Fines for False Alarms from Non-Registered Alarm Systems. For person(s) operating a Non-Registered Alarm System incurring a False Alarm, fines shall be imposed as established by resolution of the City Council.

D.    Any Monitoring Company after five business days of receiving notice from the Alarm Administrator that an Alarm User’s registration status is that of Non-registered shall not make a Burglar Alarm Dispatch Request from that Alarm User.

E.     If Cancellation of a Police response occurs prior to the Officer’s arrival at the Alarm Site, the response is not considered a False Alarm and no False Alarm fine will be assessed.

F.     The Alarm Installation Company shall be assessed a fine in an amount established by resolution of the City Council if the Officer responding to a False Alarm determines that an on-site employee of the Alarm Installation Company directly caused the False Alarm. Such False Alarms are not included in the total number of False Alarms for the Alarm User, nor is the Alarm User to be held liable for any False Alarm fine resulting from such alarm activation.

G.    A fine in an amount established by resolution of the City Council shall be imposed against any Monitoring Company that fails to verify Alarm System signals as required in Section 5.56.090(C)(2) of this chapter.

H.    Notice of the right of appeal under this chapter will be included with notice of any fine.

I.      All registration fees, renewal registration fees or fines assessed under this section are due within 30 days of written notice unless otherwise noted. A late charge in an amount established by resolution of the City Council shall be imposed for each individual fee or fine due that is not paid within 30 days.

J.      The Alarm Administrator may waive the False Alarm fine for the first chargeable False Alarm during the Alarm User’s one-year registration period, pending the successful completion of the Online Alarm User Awareness Class available through the Alarm Administrator. In order to have the fine waived, the Alarm User shall have successfully completed the class within 30 days of the fine notice. Alarm Users without online access may request the online school and test be mailed to them. Reasonable additional time to complete the Alarm User Awareness Class shall be allowed for mail delivery. (4163-3/19)

 

5.56.120 Notice to Alarm Users of False Alarms and Suspension of a Police Response
A.    The Alarm Administrator shall notify the Alarm User in writing or by other electronic means after each False Alarm. The notice shall include the amount of the fine for the False Alarm, the fact that Police response to further alarms may be suspended after the fourth False Alarm during the Alarm User’s one-year Alarm Registration period, (excluding Duress, Robbery, Holdup and Panic Alarms), and that the Alarm User has the right to appeal.

B.     The Alarm Administrator shall notify the Alarm User in writing 30 days beforehand that a Police Department response to further alarms is to be suspended. The right of appeal under this chapter shall be included with the notice. The notice of suspension shall also include the amount of any fees and/or fines due and a description of the reinstatement process. (4163-3/19)

 

5.56.130 Alarm Registration Suspension, Fees, Fines, Violation to Make Alarm Dispatch Request for Suspended Alarm Site
A.    The Alarm Administrator shall notify the Police Department of each Alarm User whose Alarm Registration qualifies for suspension under this section. The Alarm Administrator may suspend an Alarm Registration if it is determined that:

1.     There is a false statement of a material fact in the registration application; or

2.     The Alarm User has had four or more False Burglar Alarms within the one-year registration period, except that the Alarm Administrator may waive a suspension of a registration upon receipt of documented work orders showing reasonable attempts to repair the Alarm System prior to the notice of suspension; or

3.     The Alarm User fails or refuses to pay an Alarm Registration or Alarm Registration Renewal fee, False Alarm fine, late charge, or any other fee, fine, or charge assessed under this section.

B.     It is a violation of this section for a person to operate a Burglar Alarm System during the period in which the Alarm Registration is suspended. It is a violation of this chapter for a Monitoring Company to make an Alarm Dispatch Request to a Burglar Alarm Site after the Monitoring Company’s Alarm Response Manager (ARM) has been notified by electronic mail by the Alarm Administrator that the registration for that Alarm Site has been suspended. A grace period of five business days after the ARM’s notification shall be granted the Monitoring Company to comply. The Alarm Monitoring Company shall be assessed a fine in an amount established by resolution of the City Council for requesting a Burglar Alarm Dispatch Request on a suspended Alarm Site.

C.     False Alarm Fines Under Suspension Status. In addition to the fines set forth in Section 5.56.110(A), a supplemental fine is hereby imposed upon any person operating a suspended Burglar Alarm System. The amount of said fines shall be established by resolution of the City Council.

D.    It shall be the responsibility of the Alarm User to notify their respective Alarm Monitoring Company of their suspension status. An Alarm User shall be held financially accountable for all false alarm fines incurred.

E.     Unless there is a separate indication that there is a crime in progress, the Police Department may or may not dispatch an Officer to an Alarm Site for which an Alarm Registration is suspended. (4163-3/19)

 

5.56.140 Appeals of Determinations Regarding Alarm Registrations, Fees and Fines
A.    If the Alarm Administrator assesses a fee or fine, suspends an Alarm Registration or denies the issuance, renewal or reinstatement of an Alarm Registration, the Alarm Administrator shall send notice of the action and a statement of the right to appeal to the affected applicant, Alarm User, Alarm Installation Company or Alarm Monitoring Company.

B.     The applicant, Alarm User, Alarm Installation Company or Alarm Monitoring Company may appeal any action described in subsection A to the Police Chief (or designee) by setting forth in writing the reasons for the appeal and delivering the appeal to the Police Chief (or designee) within 20 days after receipt of notice of the action. Failure to deliver the appeal within that time period is a waiver of the right to appeal.

C.     The procedure for an appeal to the Police Chief (or designee) is as follows:

1.     The applicant, Alarm User, Alarm Installation Company or Monitoring Company may file a written request for appeal by paying an appeal fee and setting forth the reasons for the appeal. The appeal must be entitled “Appeal from Alarm Administrator’s Action.” The appeal fee shall be in an amount established by resolution of the City Council and will be returned to the appealing party if the appeal is successful.

2.     The Police Chief (or designee) shall conduct a hearing on the appeal within 30 days after the Police Department’s receipt of the request for appeal and appeal fee and shall consider the evidence submitted by the appealing party and the Alarm Administrator. The Police Chief (or designee) must base the decision on the preponderance of evidence presented at the hearing and must render a decision within 15 days after the date of the hearing. The decision shall affirm or reverse the decision or action taken by the Alarm Administrator.

3.     Filing of an appeal stays any action by the Alarm Administrator to suspend an Alarm Registration or require the payment of a fee or fine until the appeal process has been exhausted. This provision applies only to the action of the Alarm Administrator that is the subject of the appeal. This provision does not operate as a bar to enforcement action on violations of this section that occur thereafter.

D.    The Alarm Administrator or the Police Chief, or their respective designees, may adjust the count of False Alarms or assessed fees based on:

1.     Evidence that a False Alarm was caused by action of a communications services provider (i.e., telephone, cellular, cable company);

2.     Evidence that a False Alarm was caused by a power outage of more than four hours or severe weather such as a tornado, earthquake, or excessive winds (35 m.p.h. or above as measured by the Huntington Beach (LIST LOCATION such as their International Airport weather monitoring station);

3.     Evidence that an Alarm Dispatch Request was not a False Alarm; or

4.     The occurrence of multiple alarms within a 24-hour period, which may be considered as one False Alarm if the Alarm User has taken corrective action, unless the False Alarms are directly caused by the Alarm User.

E.     The Alarm Administrator may waive all or part of a False Alarm fine due to extenuating circumstances or to encourage corrective action with supervisor approval. (4163-3/19)

 

5.56.150 Reinstatement of Suspended Alarm Registrations
A.    On the suspension of an Alarm Registration, a person whose Alarm Registration has been suspended may obtain reinstatement of the registration by the Alarm Administrator if the person:

1.     Pays a reinstatement fee as established by resolution of the City Council;

2.     Pays, or otherwise resolves, all outstanding fees, fines, and other charges;

3.     Submits a written notice from an Alarm Installation Company stating that the Alarm System has been inspected and repaired (if necessary) by the Alarm Installation Company;

4.     The Alarm User successfully completes an Alarm User Awareness Class and test.

B.     The Police Department shall reinstate its response to an Alarm Site as soon as is practicable after receiving notice of reinstatement from the Alarm Administrator. The Alarm User and Monitoring Company shall take notice that the Alarm Site has been officially reinstated only after receiving notice from the Alarm Administrator of that fact. It shall be the responsibility of the Alarm User to verify that his, her, or its registration status and future Police response has been properly restored. (4163-3/19)

 

5.56.160 Suspension of Police Response to Dispatch Requests from Certain Alarm Installation Companies and Monitoring Companies
A.    The Police Chief or Command Staff designee may suspend Police response to an Alarm Dispatch Request from an Alarm Installation Company or Monitoring Company if it is determined that:

1.     There is a violation of this chapter by the Alarm Installation Company or Monitoring Company and the condition causing the violation has not been corrected; and/or

2.     The Alarm Installation Company or Monitoring Company has failed to pay any fee, fine, or other charge assessed under this section, more than 60 days after the fee, fine, or other charge is due.

B.     The Police Department may not respond to any Alarm Dispatch Request where the Alarm Installation Company or Monitoring Company who installed or monitors that alarm has failed to comply with California licensing requirements or failed to maintain a valid copy of the State of California Department of Consumer Affairs Alarm Company Operators License.

C.     A suspension of Police response made pursuant to this subsection is subject to the appeal process provided for within this chapter. In addition, the Alarm Administrator has the ability to accept a workable solution from the affected party prior to an appeal. The affected party has 60 days after the written notice of suspension before Police response is suspended to its alarm customers.

D.    The Alarm Administrator shall notify all known Alarm Users subscribing to an Alarm Installation Company or an Alarm Monitoring Company that the Police Department has suspended response to the company’s Alarm Dispatch Requests.

E.     The City shall assess the Alarm Installation Company or Monitoring Company a reinstatement fee in an amount established by resolution of the City Council. In addition, if the Alarm Administrator has incurred costs in notifying Alarm Users by mail of the suspension of their Alarm Installation Company or Monitoring Company, reimbursement to the City of those costs shall be a condition of reinstatement. (4163-3/19)

 

5.56.170 Police Department Response
A.    Subject to the suspension provisions in Section 5.56.130 and the discretion discussed in Section 5.56.190, the Police Department at its discretion will respond to all “in progress” Robbery, Panic or Burglar Alarms as promptly as possible, taking into account pending calls for service and any policy establishing priority of dispatched calls following notification of the receipt of the alarm from the Monitoring Company. Police supervisors may, at their discretion, cancel a Police response to any or all alarms based on weather or other factors affecting Police service needs.

B.     The Police Chief or designee may re-prioritize assignment of Burglar Alarms and response time at any time during a 24-hour period as may be necessary due to the service needs of the community. (4163-3/19)

 

5.56.180 Confidentiality of Alarm Information
All information contained in documents gathered through Alarm Registrations, the submission of customer lists, the alarm appeal process and records relating to Alarm Dispatch Requests must be held in confidence by all employees of the Alarm Administrator, City of Huntington Beach and any third-party alarm administrator. Such information is proprietary and is hereby declared confidential and not a public record. Absent special circumstances, such information must not be released to the public or any person other than a law enforcement agency, third party administrator or the applicable Alarm User, Alarm Installation Company or Alarm Monitoring Company except pursuant to court order. Per California Government Code Section 6254(f). (4163-3/19)

 

5.56.190 Scope of Police Duty—Immunities Preserved
The issuance of Alarm Registrations does not create a contract between the Police Department and/or the City of Huntington Beach and any Alarm User, Alarm Installation Company or Monitoring Company, nor does it create a duty or obligation, either expressed or implied, on the Police Department to respond to any alarm. Any and all liability and consequential damage resulting from the failure of the Police Department to respond to an Alarm Dispatch Request is hereby disclaimed and full governmental immunity as provided by law is retained. By applying for an Alarm Registration, the Alarm User acknowledges that the Police Department response is influenced by the availability of officers, priority of calls, traffic conditions, weather conditions, emergency conditions, staffing levels, prior response history and administrative actions. (4163-3/19)

 

Chapter 5.60 FIGURE MODEL STUDIOS
5.60.010 Definitions
The following terms used in this chapter shall have the meanings indicated below:

“Figure model” means any person, male or female, who poses to be observed, viewed, sketched, painted, drawn, sculptured, photographed, or otherwise similarly depicted.

“Figure model studio” means any premises where there is conducted the business of furnishing, providing, or procuring figure models who pose for the purpose of being observed or viewed by any person, or being sketched, painted, drawn, sculptured, photographed or otherwise similarly depicted in the nude or seminude before persons who pay a fee, or any other thing of value, as consideration, compensation, or gratuity, for the right or opportunity so to depict a figure model, or for admission to, permission to, or as a condition of, remaining upon the premises. Figure model studio does not include any studio or classroom which is operated by any state college or public junior college or school wherein the person operating said studio or classroom has met the requirements established in Division 21 of the Education Code for the issuance or conferring of, and is in fact authorized thereunder to issue and confer a diploma or honorary diploma.

“Nude” or “seminude” means the exposure of male or female genitals, vulva, anus, pubic hair or cleft of the buttocks; or the exposure of any device which is intended to simulate either the male or female genitals, vulva, anus, pubic hair or cleft of the buttocks; or the exposure by any female of any portion of her breasts at or below the areola. (2045-5/76)

 

5.60.012 Disrobing Prohibited
No person operating a figure model studio shall allow any customer or patron to disrobe while on the premises. (2087-7/76)

 

5.60.015 Disrobing Prohibited—Sign
A person operating a figure model studio shall cause a sign to be posted in a conspicuous place visible from the main entrance of the establishment. Said sign shall contain the following message in letters of at least one and one-half inches in height and a corresponding width: “PATRONS ARE PROHIBITED FROM DISROBING ON PREMISES.” (2087-7/76)

 

5.60.020 Permit—Required
A.    No person shall engage in, conduct, manage or carry on the business of nude or semi-nude modeling, simulated nude or semi-nude modeling, or conduct, manage or carry on any place where such modeling is available or open to the public without a written permit. No person shall act as a nude or semi-nude model or simulated nude or semi-nude model for a fee or gratuity without a written permit from the Police Chief.

B.     A figure model studio permit shall not be issued to any person under 18 years of age or to a partnership, association or corporation, any officer or manager of which is under 18 years of age. (2045-5/76)

 

5.60.030 Permit—Application
Each person, before obtaining a permit to carry on the business of nude or semi-nude modeling or any form of simulated nude or semi-nude modeling for a fee or gratuity, shall make a written application to and upon forms furnished by the Police Chief, which shall be signed by such applicant. In addition to any other information which may reasonably be required by the Police Chief, the application shall show the true name of the applicant, any previously used fictitious name or names, his or her age, present address, proposed business address, and the business name and address of any similar businesses previously or currently conducted by the applicant. The applicant shall furnish his or her fingerprints and a recent photograph of him or herself to the Police Chief. (2045-5/76)

 

5.60.040 Permit—Issuance
The Police Chief shall issue such permit to such applicant if it shall reasonably appear to him or her, after investigation, that the applicant possesses good moral character and is a proper person to conduct or work at such business. The Police Chief shall issue such permit to the applicant or deny such application within 60 days from the date of receipt of the application and investigation fees. (2045-5/76)

 

5.60.050 Investigation Fees
A fee of $25.00 shall be paid upon the filing of each application for a permit for the purpose of defraying investigation costs and expenses incidental to the processing of said application. The fee shall be payable to the City Clerk. Fees are not refundable. (2045-5/76)

 

5.60.060 Permit—Refusal—Appeal
Any applicant for a permit as defined in Section 5.60.030 which is refused a permit by the Police Chief may within 10 days of notice of refusal, appeal the refusal to the City Council. (2045-5/76)

 

5.60.070 Permit—Temporary—Suspension
Upon recommendation of the Police Chief, the City Manager may temporarily suspend the permit of any person holding same in the City, upon receiving satisfactory evidence that the permittee has been arrested or indicted for any violation of the provisions of this chapter or any other law or ordinance of the City or state relating to such business. Said temporary suspension shall remain in effect until such time as the criminal charges are dismissed entirely or the permittee is acquitted of the pending criminal charges or the permit is revoked, according to Section 5.24.080 of this Code. Whenever the permit shall have been temporarily suspended under the terms of this section, no other application for permit to carry on a similar business by such person shall be considered during the period of suspension. The action of the City Manager in temporarily suspending a permit under this section is appealable by the permittee to the City Council. Such appeal must be taken in writing within 10 days after notice is given by the City Manager to the permittee of such suspension. The City Council may sustain, overrule or modify the Manager’s order of suspension. (2045-5/76)

 

5.60.080 Permit—Revocation
The City Council may revoke or suspend the permit and license of any person holding same in the City, upon receiving satisfactory evidence that the permittee or licensee has been convicted of, or has entered a plea of guilty to any violation of the provisions of this section or any other law or ordinance of the City or state relating to such business, or upon the recommendation of the Police Chief. The Police Chief may recommend revocation of any permit issued or granted under Section 5.60.040 of this Code if, after investigation the permittee is determined to be a person who is not of good moral character or who is determined not to be a proper person to conduct or work at said business, or upon receipt of evidence that the permittee is engaging in immoral, improper or otherwise objectionable conduct or behavior. Whenever permit or license shall have been revoked under the terms of this section, no other application for a permit to carry on a similar business by such person shall be considered for a period of one year from the date of such revocation. (2045-5/76)

 

5.60.090 Permit—Revocation—Hearing
No permit shall be revoked until a hearing thereon shall have been had by the City Council, notice of which hearing shall have been given in writing and served at least 10 days prior to the date of such hearing upon the holder of such permit, his or her manager or agent, which notice shall state the grounds of the complaint against the holder of such permit, and the time and place where the hearing will be held. The notice shall be served on the holder of such permit by delivering the same to the holder, his or her manager or agent, or by leaving the notice at the place of business or residency of such holder with some adult person. If the holder of the permit cannot be found and service of such notice cannot be made upon him or her in the manner herein provided, then a copy of the notice shall be addressed to the holder of such permit at his or her place of business and deposited in the United States mail at Huntington Beach, California, with postage thereon fully prepaid, at least 10 days prior to date of such hearing. The time of such notice may be shortened by the City Council with the written consent of the holder of the permit. (2045-5/76)

 

5.60.100 Premises Open for Inspection
A.    Every person engaged in the business of operating a figure model studio shall be open at all times during business hours to the inspection of the Police Chief or any other officer of the City.

B.     A person operating a figure model studio shall be responsible for and shall provide that any room or area used for the purpose of figure modeling shall be readily accessible at all times and shall be open to view in its entirety for inspection by the Police Chief or any other officer of the City. No door shall be secured in any manner so as to impede inspection during normal business hours. (2045-5/76)

 

5.60.110 Premises Open for Inspection—Communication Device
No person operating a figure model studio shall permit any type of communication device to be installed or used in any manner on the premises so as to interfere with or hinder inspections by the Police Chief or any other officer of the City. (2045-5/76)

 

5.60.120 Employment of Unlicensed Figure Models
No permittee or operator of a figure model studio shall employ, or utilize the services in any way of a figure model who does not possess a valid and subsisting permit to work for the permittee. (2045-5/76)

 

5.60.130 Figure Model Permit—Display
The permit issued by the Police Chief to a figure model shall be retained on the person of such figure model while actually engaged in such activity and shall be displayed to any police officer or another officer of the City upon demand. (2045-5/76)

 

5.60.140 Figure Model Permit—Return Upon Nonemployment
The permit issued by the Police Chief to a person to act as a figure model for a licensed figure model studio shall be returned by such figure model to the Police Chief within five days after such figure model is no longer so employed. (2045-5/76)

 

5.60.150 Rules and Regulations
Subject to the approval of the City Manager, the Police Chief may make such rules and regulations, not inconsistent with the requirements hereof, governing figure model studios and/or figure models. (2045-5/76)

 

Chapter 5.64 BINGO GAMES
5.64.010 Definitions
“Bingo game,” as used in this chapter, means a game of chance in which prizes are awarded on the basis of designated numbers or symbols on a card which conform to numbers or symbols selected at random and which game is either:

A.    Conducted among persons any or all of whom have paid or promised to pay, any valuable consideration for the right to participate in such game; or

B.     Conducted among persons none of whom has paid, or promised to pay, any valuable consideration for the right to participate where the total value of the prizes awarded in such game exceeds $25.00. (2102-9/76, 2220-10/77, 2446-9/80)

 

5.64.015 Permit—Required
No person shall conduct any bingo game within the City of Huntington Beach without first obtaining a permit to do so from the City pursuant to this chapter. Any person conducting a bingo game without a permit to do so as required by this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (2220-10/77)

 

5.64.020 Organizations Eligible for City Permit to Conduct Bingo Games
No person shall be eligible for a bingo permit unless such person is a mobile home park association or a senior citizens organization or is an organization exempt from the payment of the bank and corporation tax by any one of the following: Sections 23701(a), 23701(b), 23701(d), 23701(e), 23701(f), 23701(g) or 23701(l) of the California Revenue and Taxation Code; and provided that the proceeds of such games are used only for charitable purposes. (2102-9/76, 2220-10/77)

 

5.64.030 Applications for Permit
Eligible organizations desiring to obtain such permit to conduct bingo games in the City of Huntington Beach shall file an application in writing therefor in the office of the license supervisor on a form to be provided by the license supervisor. The issuing authority shall be the City Manager. (2102-9/76, 2220-10/77)

 

5.64.040 Applicant Must Be Qualified
No permit shall be issued to any organization unless such applicant is an eligible organization under Section 326.5 of the California Penal Code and Section 5.64.020 of this chapter and its application conforms to the requirements, terms and conditions of this chapter. (2102-9/76, 2220-10/77)

 

5.64.050 Contents of Application
Said application for a permit shall contain the following:

A.    The name of the applicant organization and a statement that applicant is an eligible organization under Section 5.64.020.

B.     The name and signature of at least two officers, including the presiding officer, of the organization.

C.     The particular property within the City of Huntington Beach, including the street number, owned or leased by the applicant, used by such applicant for an office or for performance of the purposes for which the applicant is organized, on which property bingo games will be conducted, together with the occupancy load as noted on the certificate of occupancy issued for such property. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to require that the property owned or leased by the organization be used or leased exclusively by such organization.

D.    Proposed days of week and hours of day for conduct of bingo games.

E.     That the applicant agrees to conduct bingo games in strict accordance with the provisions of Section 326.5 of the Penal Code and this chapter as they may be amended from time to time, and agrees that the permit to conduct bingo games may be revoked by the City Manager upon violation of any of such provisions.

F.     Said application shall be signed by the applicant under penalty of perjury.

G.    An annual permit fee fixed by the City Council by resolution shall accompany the application. The annual fee, whether for the initial permit or renewal shall not exceed $50.00. If an application for a license is denied, one-half of any license fee paid shall be refunded to the organization.

H.    The applicant shall also submit, with its application, written proof that it is a mobile home park association or a senior citizens organization or written proof from the state franchise board that it is an organization exempt from the payment of the bank and corporation tax by any one of the following: Sections 23701(a), 23701(b), 23701(d), 23701(e), 23701(f), 23701(g) or 23701(l) of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the State of California. Such written proof must be in a form acceptable to the City of Huntington Beach. (2102-9/76, 2220-10/77)

 

5.64.060 Investigation of Applicant
Upon receipt of the completed application and the fee, the Finance Director shall refer the same to interested departments of the City, including but not limited to the City Manager, Police Department, and the Fire Department for investigation as to whether or not all the statements in the application are true and whether or not the property of the applicant qualifies, and the extent to which it qualifies, as property on which bingo games may lawfully be conducted as to fire, occupancy and other applicable restrictions. (2102-9/76, 2220-10/77)

 

5.64.070 Contents of Permit
Upon being satisfied that the applicant is fully qualified under law to conduct bingo games in the City of Huntington Beach, the City Manager shall issue a permit to said applicant, which shall contain the following information:

A.    The name and nature of the organization to whom the permit is issued.

B.     The address where bingo games are authorized to be conducted.

C.     The occupancy load is noted on the certificate of occupancy issued for the property in which bingo games are to be conducted.

D.    The date of the expiration of such permit.

E.     Such other information as may be necessary or desirable for the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. (2102-9/76, 2220-10/77)

 

5.64.080 Suspension of Permit
A.    Whenever it appears to the City Manager that the permittee is conducting a bingo game in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, the City Manager shall have the authority to suspend the permit and order the permittee to cease and desist immediately any further operation of any bingo game.

B.     Any person who continues to conduct a bingo game after suspension thereof under subsection A of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (2102-9/76, 2220-10/77)

 

5.64.090 Suspension of Permit—Appeal Procedure
The procedure for appeal following suspension of permit is as follows:

A.    Within seven days after the receipt of the notice of suspension, the applicant shall file a notice of appeal with the City Clerk, addressed to the City Council, and stating the basis of the appeal.

B.     The City Clerk shall schedule a hearing to be held within 15 days of the filing of the notice of appeal. The City Clerk shall cause the applicant to be given notice of the hearing by certified mail at least five days in advance of the date of the hearing. The applicant, or his or her designated representative, may appear before the City Council, and make an oral presentation of the appeal, or he or she may make the appeal through a written statement, or he or she may do both. The City Council shall rule on the appeal within 15 days after it is heard and such ruling shall be final. (2102-9/76, 2220-10/77)

 

5.64.100 Maximum Amount of Prize
The total value of prizes awarded during the conduct of any bingo game shall not exceed $250.00 in cash or kind, or both, for each separate game which is held. (2102-9/76, 2220-10/77)

 

5.64.110 Profits to Be Kept in Separate Fund or Account
With respect to organizations exempt from payment of the bank and corporation tax by Section 23701(d) of the Revenue and Taxation Code, all profits derived from a bingo game shall be kept in a special fund or account and shall not be commingled with any other fund or account. Such profits shall be used only for charitable purposes. With respect to other organizations authorized to conduct bingo games pursuant to this section, all proceeds derived from a bingo game shall be kept in a special fund or account and shall not be commingled with any other fund or account. Such proceeds shall be used only for charitable purposes, except as follows:

A.    Such proceeds may be used for prizes.

B.     A portion of such proceeds, not to exceed 20% of the proceeds before the deduction for prizes, or $2,000.00 per month, whichever is less, may be used for rental of property, overhead, including the purchase of bingo equipment, administrative expenses, security equipment, and security personnel.

The City of Huntington Beach, by and through its authorized officers, shall have the right to examine and audit all books and records of any permittee hereunder at any reasonable time and permittee shall fully cooperate with the City of Huntington Beach by making such books and records available. (2102-9/76, 2220-10/77, 3190-5/93, 3704-5/05)

 

5.64.115 Disbursements From Fund or Account
All disbursements from the special bingo fund or account shall be by consecutively-numbered checks, signed by two authorized officers of the permittee organization and shall be payable to a specific individual or organization. There shall be written on each check the nature of the expenditure for which the check is drawn. No checks shall be payable to “cash” except those written to establish and maintain a petty cash fund which shall contain no more than $25.00 at any time. The check shall be marked “For deposit to petty cash fund.” Any disbursement from the petty cash fund shall be evidenced by a receipt showing the amount, reason for disbursement, and the name of the individual or organization receiving the money. (2694-7/84)

 

5.64.120 Financial Interest in Permittee Only
No individual, corporation, partnership, or other legal entity except the permittee, shall hold a financial interest in the conduct of such bingo game. (2102-9/76, 2220-10/77)

 

5.64.130 Exclusive Operation by Permittee
A.    A bingo game shall be operated and staffed only by members of the permittee organization. Such members shall not receive a profit, wage or salary from any bingo game. Only the permittee shall operate such game, or participate in the promotion, supervision, or any other phase of such game.

B.     One member of the permittee organization shall be designated as the “bingo manager,” and shall be responsible for the conduct and operation of bingo games, and for compliance with all applicable laws, rules and regulations promulgated thereunder.

C.     All staff members of permittee organization shall wear on the outside of their clothing an identification tag or badge, not less than 2 1/2″ x 3 1/2″ in dimension, bearing the name of the staff member and the permittee organization. (2102-9/76, 2220-10/77, 2694-7/84)

 

5.64.140 Bingo Games Open to Public
All bingo games shall be open to the public, not just to the members of the permittee organization. (2102-9/76, 2220-10/77)

 

5.64.150 Attendance Limited to Occupancy Capacity
Notwithstanding that bingo games are open to the public, attendance at any bingo game shall be limited to the occupancy capacity of the room in which such game is conducted as determined by the Fire Department and Community Development Department of the City of Huntington Beach in accordance with applicable laws and regulations. Permittee shall not reserve seats or space for any person. (2102-9/76, 2220-10/77)

 

5.64.160 Bingo Games Conducted Only on Permittee’s Property
A permittee shall conduct a bingo game only on property owned or leased by it, and which property is used by such organization for an office or for performance of the purposes for which the organization is organized. The permit issued under this chapter shall authorize the holder thereof to conduct bingo games only on such property, the address of which is stated in the application. In the event the described property ceases to be used as an office and as a place for performance of the purposes for which the permittee is organized, the permit shall have no further force or effect. A new permit may be obtained by an eligible organization, upon application under this chapter, when it again owns or leases property used by it for an office or for performance of the purposes for which the organization is organized. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to require that the property owned or leased by the organization be used or leased exclusively by such organization. (2102-9/76, 2220-10/77)

 

5.64.170 Minors Not to Participate
No person under the age of 18 years shall be allowed to participate in any bingo game. (2102-9/76, 2220-10/77)

 

5.64.180 Intoxicated Persons Not to Participate
No person who is obviously intoxicated shall be allowed to participate in a bingo game. (2102-9/76, 2220-10/77)

 

5.64.190 Hours and Days of Operation
No permittee shall conduct bingo games on more than one day during any seven-day period, or more than six hours out of any 24 hours during such seven-day period; provided, however, that one week each year, a permittee, upon written application to the City License Division, filed 30 days prior to the first bingo game, after approval thereof, may conduct games either three days during one seven-day period, or one game for no more than 12 hours. Operation shall otherwise be in compliance with this chapter. No bingo games shall be conducted between 2:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m. of any day. (2102-9/76, 2220-10/77, 2446-9/80, Ord. 2728-9/84, 3137-6/92)

 

5.64.200 Participant Must Be Present
No person shall be allowed to participate in a bingo game unless the person is physically present at the time and place at which the bingo game is being conducted. (2102-9/76, 2220-10/77)

 

Chapter 5.66 POLICE-DIRECTED MOTOR VEHICLE TOWING SERVICE
5.66.010 Scope of Chapter
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all persons and businesses providing nonconsensual police-directed vehicle tow service which is directed by the Huntington Beach Police Department whether established before or after the effective date hereof. (2445-7/80, 2789-9/85, 3330-6/96, 3481-1/01, 3503-10/01)

 

5.66.020 Towing Operation Defined
A.    As used in this chapter, “towing operation” means the activity of towing and storing of vehicles, and the performance of other services incident thereto, for compensation within the City of Huntington Beach which is directed by the Huntington Beach Police Department without the consent of owner(s) of the vehicle at the direction of the Huntington Beach Police Department. Such towing shall include:

1.     Any official police impound garage and towing service, as designated by the City Council or its designee;

2.     Any police-directed tow, including but not limited to any tow from the scene of an accident, arrest, or issuance of a citation.

B.     The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any towing operation:

1.     That provides tow service exclusively to members of an association, automobile club or similar organization, and receives remuneration only from the sponsoring association, automobile club or similar organization;

2.     That provides tow service without charge or fee for other vehicles owned or operated by the individual or organization furnishing tow service;

3.     That provides tow service for other vehicles owned or operated by the individual or organization furnishing the tow service, but which are being operated under terms of a rent or lease agreement or contract, and such towing is performed on a nonprofit basis or said fee is a part of the rent or lease agreement or contract;

4.     That provides exclusively consensual, nonemergency towing assignments which include towing of vehicles that have been involved in a collision, but have been removed from the scene; that have experienced mechanical failure, but have been removed from the roadway and no longer constitute a hazard; or that, being mechanically operative, are towed for convenience. All non-emergency towing assignments require authorization from the registered owner, legal owner, driver, or other person in control of such vehicle; and/or

5.     That provides tow service without the implied or express consent or knowledge of the owner(s) of the vehicle which is not directed by the Huntington Beach Police Department, including but not limited to towing initiated pursuant to California Vehicle Code Section 22658(a) [illegal parking on private property] and Section 22953(b) [illegal parking within 15 feet of a fire hydrant, in a fire lane, or in a stall designated for disabled person parking] and any similar or successor statutes. (2445-7/80, 2789-9/85, 3330-6/96, 3481-1/01, 3503-10/01)

 

5.66.030 Agreement Required
No person shall engage in, manage, conduct or operate a towing operation as an official police impound garage and towing service or perform a police-directed tow unless said person is either employed by or under an agreement with the City to provide said services. The City Council shall approve any such agreement or amendment thereto. (2445-7/80, 2789-9/85, 3503-10/01)

 

5.66.035 Agreement—Terms and Conditions
The City shall select the persons or business(es) that provide police impound garage and towing services pursuant to an open bidding procedure. The selection procedure and standards shall provide at a minimum that:

A.    No more than three persons or business entities shall be awarded agreements.

B.     The City shall use its best efforts to assign requests for towing services on the 15th and last day of the month on a rotating schedule.

C.     The tow operator shall be required to respond to the location specified in a call for service within 20 minutes after notification at least 95% of the time.

D.    The tow operator shall maintain a tow storage yard within the City limits.

E.     The tow operator shall meet all insurance requirements as established by resolution of the City Council, in addition to insurance requirements as set forth in the agreement.

F.     The agreement will be for a term of no more than five years subject to an option for five additional years. (3503-10/01)

 

5.66.170 Rates and Charges—Signs—Change of
A.    Rates and charges for all tows and vehicle storage shall be established by resolution of the City Council of the City of Huntington Beach. Written notice of proposed changes shall be mailed to the affected tow services a minimum of 45 days prior to the date set for City Council approval by the Police Chief or his or her designee.

B.     No tow or storage fee charged shall be higher than the fees authorized by resolution of the City Council. (3395-8/98, 3503-10/01)

 

5.66.310 Violation—Penalty
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine of not more than $500.00 or by imprisonment in the county jail for a period not to exceed six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment, and each such person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is committed, continued, or permitted. (2445-7/80, 2789-9/85)

 

Chapter 5.67 NONCONSENSUAL MOTOR VEHICLE TOWING SERVICE
5.67.010 Scope of Chapter
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all persons and businesses providing nonconsensual vehicle tow service pursuant to California Vehicle Code Sections 22658 and 22953, and similar successor statutes which are not directed by the Huntington Beach Police Department or other law enforcement agency whether established before or after the effective date hereof. (3480-1/01)

 

5.67.020 Towing Operation Defined
A.    As used in this chapter, “towing operation” means the activity of towing and storing of vehicles, and the performance of other services incident thereto, for compensation within the City of Huntington Beach, without the implied or express consent or knowledge of the owner(s) of the vehicle pursuant to California Vehicle Code Section 22658(a) [illegal parking on private property] and Section 22953(b) [illegal parking within 15 feet of a fire hydrant, in a fire lane, or in a stall designated for disabled person parking] and related and successor statutes, and which is not directed by the Huntington Beach Police Department.

B.     The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any other towing operation, including, but not limited to, towing operations:

1.     That provides tow service exclusively to members of an association, automobile club or similar organization, and receives remuneration only from the sponsoring association, automobile club or similar organization;

2.     That provides tow service without charge or fee for other vehicles owned or operated by the individual or organization furnishing tow service;

3.     That provides tow service for other vehicles owned or operated by the individual or organization furnishing the tow service, but which are being operated under terms of a rent or lease agreement or contract, and such towing is performed on a nonprofit basis or said fee is a part of the rent or lease agreement or contract;

4.     That provides exclusively consensual, nonemergency towing assignments which include towing of vehicles that have been involved in a collision, but have been removed from the scene; that have experienced mechanical failure, but have been removed from the roadway and no longer constitute a hazard; or that, being mechanically operative, are towed for convenience. All non-emergency towing assignments require authorization from the registered owner, legal owner, driver, or other person in control of such vehicle;

5.     That provides tow service which is directed by the Huntington Beach Police Department pursuant to Huntington Beach Municipal Code Chapter 5.66. (3480-1/01)

 

5.67.030 Rates and Charges
A.    Pursuant to California Vehicle Code Section 22658(i) and (j) the City Council of the City of Huntington Beach shall establish by resolution rates and charges for all towing operations.

B.     No tow fee charged shall be higher than the fees authorized by resolution of the City Council. (3480-1/01)

 

Chapter 5.70 SEX-ORIENTED BUSINESSES
Note
*       Note: §§ 5.70.055—5.70.065 repealed by Ord. 3431-6/99.

 

5.70.005 Purpose
A.    The intent of this chapter is to regulate businesses which, unless closely regulated, tend to have serious secondary effects on the community, which effects include, but are not limited to, the following: depreciation of property values and increase in vacancies in residential and commercial areas in the vicinity of sex-oriented businesses; interference with residential property owners’ enjoyment of their property when such property is located in the vicinity of sex-oriented businesses as a result of increases in crime, litter, noise and vandalism; higher crime rates in the vicinity of sex-oriented businesses; and blighting conditions such as low level maintenance of commercial premises and parking lots, which thereby have a deleterious effect upon adjacent areas. Special regulation of these businesses is necessary to prevent these adverse effects and the blighting or degradation of the neighborhoods in the vicinity of the sex-oriented businesses.

B.     It is neither the intent nor the effect of this chapter to impose limitations or restrictions on the content of any communicative material. Similarly, it is neither the intent nor the effect of this chapter to restrict or deny access by adults to sex-oriented materials or to deny access by the distributors or exhibitors of sex-oriented businesses to their intended market.

C.     Nothing in this chapter is intended to authorize, legalize or permit the establishment, operation or maintenance of any business, building or use which violates any City ordinance or any statute of the State of California regarding public nuisances, unlawful or indecent exposure, sexual conduct, lewdness or obscene or harmful matter or the exhibition or public display thereof. (3341-10/96)

 

5.70.010 Definitions
“Cabaret” means a nightclub, theater or other establishment which regularly features live performances distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.

“Distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon” means and refers to the dominant or essential theme of the object described by such phrase. For instance, when the phrase refers to films “which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon” the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, the films so described are those whose dominant or predominant character and theme are the depiction of the enumerated sexual activities or anatomical areas. See Pringle v. City of Covina, 115 Cal.App.3 151 (1981).

“Encounter center” or “rap studio” means any business, agency or person who, for any form of compensation, consideration or gratuity, regularly provides a place where two or more persons may congregate, assemble or associate for the primary purpose of engaging in, describing or discussing specified sexual activities, or exposing specified anatomical areas.

“Entertainment” means any human body activity in a sex-oriented business, whether performed alone or with other persons, including but not limited to singing, speaking, dancing, acting, posing, modeling, simulating sexual activity, wrestling, pantomiming, or the public display of specified anatomical areas for the purpose of holding or gaining the attention of, diverting or amusing guests or patrons. “Entertainment” shall be synonymous with “performance.”

“Performer” means any person who dances, models, engages in entertainment, and/or performs specified sexual activities or displays specified anatomical areas in a sex-oriented business. Performer shall include persons engaged in or providing entertainment whether they are employees or independent contractors of a sex-oriented business and whether or not they entertain with or without compensation or other form of consideration, and whether clothed or unclothed.

“Permit holder” or “permittee” shall refer to the person or entity to whom the permit is issued and shall include, but not be necessarily limited to the following:

1.     The sole proprietor of a sex-oriented business;

2.     The partnership owning a sex-oriented business, and each of the partners; or

3.     The corporation owning a sex-oriented business and each of its officers and directors, but not individual shareholders. For purposes of this chapter, “corporation” shall also include not-for-profit corporations and limited liability corporations.

“Police Chief” means the Police Chief or his or her designee.

“Operator” means the permittee or the owner(s) or manager(s) as identified by the permittee, as identified by the manager him or herself or by the employees; or the person, who at any given time, is primarily responsible for the operation of the business.

“Regularly features” with respect to a sex-oriented theater or sex-oriented cabaret means a regular and substantial course of conduct. The fact that live performances which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the display of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities occur on two or more occasions within a 30-day period; three or more occasions within a 60-day period; or four or more occasions within a 180-day period, shall to the extent permitted by law be deemed to be a regular and substantial course of conduct.

“Seminude” means a state of dress in which clothing covers no more than the genitals, pubic region, buttocks, areola of the female breast, as well as portions of the body covered by supporting straps or devices.

“Sex-oriented bookstore” means an establishment having as a regular and substantial portion of its stock, revenue, interior business or floor space for display or distribution in trade, books, magazines or other periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas or an establishment with a segment or section devoted to the sale or display of such material.

“Sex-oriented business” means any business establishment or concern which as a regular and substantial course of conduct performs or operates as a sex-oriented bookstore, sex-oriented theater, sex-oriented motion picture arcade, cabaret, encounter center, sex-oriented motel/hotel, or sells, displays or distributes sex-oriented merchandise or sex-oriented material, or any other business or concern which as a regular and substantial portion of its business offers to its patrons products, merchandise, services or entertainment which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas but not including those uses or activities, the regulation of which is preempted by state law. “Sex-oriented business” shall also include any establishment which as a regular and substantial course of conduct provides or allows performers, models, or employees to appear in any public place in lingerie to a point where specified anatomical parts are exposed. As used in this chapter, the terms “regular and substantial course of conduct” and “regular and substantial portion of its business” shall mean any sex-oriented business where one or more of the following conditions exist:

1.     The area(s) devoted to the display of sex-oriented merchandise and/or sex-oriented material exceeds 25% of the total stock, inventory, interior business display or floor space, total display area of the business;

2.     A business or concern which presents any type of live entertainment which is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the display of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities and which occurs on two or more occasions within a 30-day period; three or more occasions within a 60-day period; or four or more occasions within a 180-day period, shall to the extent permitted by law be deemed to be a regular and substantial course of conduct; or

3.     At least 25% of the revenue of the business is derived from the sale, trade, display or presentation of services, products, or entertainment which are characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.

 

“Sex-oriented hotel/motel” means a hotel or motel, which:

1.     As a regular and substantial course of conduct provides to its patrons, through the provision of rooms equipped with closed circuit television, video recorders or players or other medium, material which is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical parts; and/or

2.     Rents, leases, or lets any room for less than a 10-hour period, or advertises the provision of sexually explicit material. See sex-oriented business for definition of “regular and substantial course of conduct.”

“Sex-oriented material” means any sex-oriented merchandise, or any book, periodical, magazine, photograph, drawing, sculpture, motion picture film, video tape recording, or other visual representation, characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.

“Sex-oriented merchandise” means sex-oriented implements or paraphernalia, such as, but not limited to, dildos, auto sucks, sex-oriented vibrators, edible underwear, benwa balls, inflatable orifices, anatomical balloons with orifices, simulated and/or battery operated vaginas, and similar sex-oriented devices which are designed or marketed primarily for the stimulation of human genital organs or sadomasochistic activity.

“Sex-oriented mini-motion picture theater” means an enclosed building with a capacity for less than 50 persons regularly used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein.

“Sex-oriented motion picture arcade” means any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin or slug operated or electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.

“Sex-oriented motion picture theater” means an enclosed building with a capacity of 50 or more persons regularly used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein.

“Specified anatomical areas” means any of the following:

1.     Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals or pubic region; buttock; or female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola;

2.     Human male genitalia in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered;

3.     Any device, costume, or covering that simulates any of the body parts included in the definition of specified anatomical areas.

“Specified sexual activities” means any of the following:

1.     Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral anal copulation, bestiality, masturbation, including masturbation with the use of inanimate objects, flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual relationship, or the use of excretory functions in the context of a sexual relationship, and any of the following sexually oriented acts or conduct: analingus, buggery, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus, fellatio, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, piquerism, sapphism, urophilia, zooerasty, zoophilia;

2.     Clearly depicted human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence;

3.     Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus, or masturbation;

4.     Actual or simulated fondling, erotic or sexually touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, cleft of the buttocks, female breast, or anal region;

5.     Masochism, erotic or sexually oriented torture, beating or the infliction of pain;

6.     Erotic or lewd touching, fondling or other sexually oriented contact with an animal by a human being;

7.     Human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal or anal irrigation;

8.     Striptease, or the removal of clothing, or the wearing of transparent or diaphanous clothing, including models appearing in lingerie, to the point where specified anatomical areas are exposed. (3341-10/96, 3431-7/99, 3470-11/00)

 

5.70.015 Statements and Records
A.    Person(s) required to obtain a sex-oriented business permit shall maintain complete records which can be segregated with regard to all transactions involving such products, merchandise, services or entertainment which are sufficient to establish the percentage of gross receipts of the business which is derived from such transactions.

B.     Such records shall be maintained for a period of at least three years.

C.     No person required to keep records under this section shall refuse to allow authorized representatives of the Finance Director or his or her designee to examine said records at reasonable times and places. (3341-10/96, 3431-7/99, 3751-11/06)

 

5.70.020 Permit Required
A.    No person, association, partnership or corporation shall own, operate, engage in, conduct or carry on, in or upon any premises within the City of Huntington Beach any “sex-oriented business,” defined in this chapter, without a sex-oriented business permit and a business license from the City of Huntington Beach.

B.     To obtain a permit to own, operate, engage in, conduct or carry on any sex-oriented business, the owner shall make application to the Police Chief, on a form provided by the Police Chief. Prior to submitting such application, a non-refundable fee, established by resolution of the City Council, shall be paid to the City to defray, in part, the cost of investigation and report required by this chapter. The receipt, or a copy thereof, shall be supplied to the Police Chief at the time such application is submitted.

C.     The application for permit does not authorize the engaging in, operation of, conducting of, or carrying on of any sex-oriented business.

D.    Only the owner of the sex-oriented business is eligible to obtain a sex-oriented business permit.

E.     The owner shall post the permit conspicuously in the sex-oriented business premises.

F.     The fact that an owner has other types of state or City permits or licenses does not exempt the owner from the requirement of obtaining a sex-oriented business permit. (3341-10/96, 3431-7/99)

 

5.70.030 Application for Sex-Oriented Business Permit
Each application for a sex-oriented business permit shall contain the following information:

A.    Owner Information.

1.     The full, true name and any other names, including aliases, used by the applicant.

2.     The present business address and telephone number of the applicant.

3.     Acceptable written proof that the applicant is at least 18 years of age.

4.     The social security number and state driver’s license or identification card of the applicant.

5.     The applicant’s fingerprints on a form provided by the Police Department and a color photograph clearly showing the applicant’s face. Any fees for the fingerprints or photograph shall be paid by the applicant.

6.     If the applicant intends to operate the sex-oriented business under a name other than that of the applicant the applicant shall file the fictitious name of the sex-oriented business and show proof of registration of the fictitious name.

7.     The business license history of the applicant and whether such applicant, in previous operations in this or any other city, state, or territory under license, has had such license or permit for a sex-oriented business or similar type of business revoked or suspended, the reason therefor and the business activity or occupation subsequent to such action of suspension or revocation.

8.     All felony convictions of the applicant within the last five years; all misdemeanor convictions within the last two years of the applicant of any of the offenses set forth in California Penal Code Sections 315, 316, 266a, 266b, 266c, 266e, 266g, 266h, 266i, 647(a), 647(b) and 647(d) as those sections now appear or may hereafter be amended or renumbered; or any offense requiring registration under California Penal Code Section 290, and the equivalent of the aforesaid offenses outside of the State of California.

9.     If the applicant is a corporation, the name of the corporation shall be set forth exactly as shown in its articles of incorporation or charter, evidence that the corporation is in good standing under the laws of the State of California, the name of the registered corporate agent and the address of the registered office for service of process, together with the place and date of incorporation, and the names and addresses of each of its current officers and directors. If the applicant is a partnership, the applicant shall set forth the name, residence address and dates of birth of the partners, including limited partners, and attach a copy of the partnership agreement. If the applicant is a limited partnership, it shall furnish a copy of its certificate of limited partnership filed with the County Clerk. If one or more of the partners is a corporation, the provisions of this subsection pertaining to corporations shall apply. The applicant corporation or partnership shall designate one of its officers or general partners to act as its responsible managing officer.

B.     Business Information.

1.     The name and address of the owner and lessor of the real property upon which the business is to be conducted.

2.     A description of the type of sex-oriented business for which the permit is requested and the proposed address where the sex-oriented business will operate, plus the names and addresses of the owners and lessors of the sex-oriented business site.

3.     The address to which notice of action on the application is to be mailed.

4.     The name(s) of the responsible person(s) who will be on the premises to act as manager during the times that the business is open, or a statement that the applicant has not yet selected the manager(s).

5.     A site plan including floor plan, building elevations and parking lot diagram showing the interior and exterior configuration of the premises, including a statement of the total floor area occupied by the sex-oriented business.

6.     Any other similar permits obtained in other jurisdictions, including year of issuance and name of jurisdiction. (3341-10/96, 3431-7/99, 3470-11/00)

 

5.70.035 Sex-Oriented Business Permit Issuance
A.    Within 10 business days of receipt of a completed application, as set forth in Section 5.70.030 and payment of the applicable fees, the Police Chief shall issue a sex-oriented business permit. However, issuance of the permit does not preclude revocation of the permit pursuant to Section 5.70.115.

B.     No sex-oriented business shall be issued a permit or permitted to operate within the City if any activity within the establishment is prohibited by federal, state, or local law, provided that the local law is not pre-empted. (3341-10/96, 3431-7/99, 3470-11/00)

 

5.70.040 Sex-Oriented Performer Permit
A.    All performers, as defined herein, must obtain a valid sex-oriented performance permit from the City.

B.     To obtain a sex-oriented performer permit, the individual shall make application to the Police Chief on a form provided by the Police Chief. Prior to submitting such application, a non-refundable fee, established by resolution of the City Council, shall be paid to the City to defray, in part, the cost of investigation and report required by this chapter.

The report, or a copy thereof, shall be supplied to the Police Chief at the time such application is submitted.

C.     The application for a permit does not authorize the engaging in a performance of live performers depicting specified anatomical areas or involving specified sexual activities.

D.    A sex-oriented performer engaged in live entertainment shall provide proof of a valid sex-oriented performer permit upon demand of a police officer. Failure to provide proof shall be a violation of this chapter.

E.     The fact that an applicant possesses other types of state or City permits or licenses does not exempt the applicant from the requirement of obtaining a sex-oriented performer permit.

F.     The completed application shall contain the following information and be accompanied by the following documents:

1.     The applicant’s legal name and any other names (including “stage names” and aliases) used by the applicant;

2.     The applicant’s height, weight, hair and eye color and date and place of birth;

3.     Present residence address and telephone number;

4.     All felony convictions of the applicant within the last five years; all misdemeanor convictions within the last two years of the applicant of any of the offenses set forth in California Penal Code Sections 315, 316, 266a, 266b, 266c, 266e, 266g, 266h, 266i, 647(a), 647(b), and 647(d) as those sections now appear or may hereafter be amended or renumbered, all offenses requiring registration under California Penal Code Section 290, and the equivalent of the aforesaid offenses outside of the State of California;

5.     The social security number and state driver’s license or identification number of the applicant;

6.     Acceptable written proof that the applicant is at least 18 years of age;

7.     The applicant’s fingerprints on a form provided by the Police Department, and a color photograph clearly showing the applicant’s face. Any fees for the photographs and fingerprints shall be paid by the applicant;

8.     The business address and telephone number where the performance will take place;

9.     Any other similar permits obtained in other jurisdictions, including year of issuance and name of jurisdiction. (3341-10/96, 3431-7/99, 3470-11/00)

 

5.70.045 Sex-Oriented Performers Permit Issuance
Within 10 business days of receipt of a completed application, as set forth in Section 5.70.040 and payment of the applicable fees, the Police Chief shall issue a sex-oriented performers permit. However, issuance of the permit does not preclude revocation of the permit pursuant to Section 5.70.120. (3341-10/96, 3431-7/99)

 

5.70.050 Applicant to Appear
The applicant for a sex-oriented business permit or a sex-oriented performers permit shall personally appear during normal business hours at the Police Department of the City of Huntington Beach and produce proof that a non-refundable application fee, established by resolution of the City Council, has been paid and shall present the application containing the aforementioned and described information. (3341-10/96, 3431-7/99)

 

5.70.070 Permit Renewal
A.    Each sex-oriented business permit and sex-oriented performers permit shall expire one year from the date of issuance. The applicant shall make application for renewal to the Police Chief on a form provided by the Police Chief accompanied by the renewal fee and a copy of the permit to be renewed. The request for renewal shall be made at least 30 days before the expiration date of the permit. When made less than 30 days before the expiration date, the expiration of the permit will not be stayed.

B.     If the application conforms to the previously approved application and the sex-oriented business has not changed, the permit shall be renewed by the Police Chief for another year. Notice of such renewal shall be given, in writing, to the permittee within 10 business days following the date of receipt of the completed renewal application. Any change or alteration in the location, nature or operation of the sex-oriented business will require a new application to be processed in the same manner as the original application. The renewal fee shall be established by resolution of the City Council. Applications for renewal shall be acted on as provided herein for action upon applications for permits.

C.     The applicant for renewal of a sex-oriented business permit or a sex-oriented performers permit shall personally appear during normal business hours at the Police Department of the City of Huntington Beach and produce proof that a non-refundable application fee, established by resolution of the City Council, has been paid and shall present the application containing the aforementioned and described information. (3341-10/96, 3431-7/99)

 

5.70.080 Permits Nontransferable
A.    No sex-oriented business permit may be sold, transferred or assigned by a permittee, or by operation of law, to any other person or persons. Any such sale, transfer or assignment, or attempted sale, transfer or assignment, shall be deemed to constitute a voluntary surrender of such permit and such permit shall thereafter be null and void; provided and excepting, however, that if the permittee is a partnership and one or more of the partners should die, one or more of the surviving partners may acquire, by purchase or otherwise, the interest of the deceased partner or partners without effecting a surrender or termination of such permit, and in such case, the permit, upon notification to the Police Chief, shall be placed in the name of the surviving partner. A sex-oriented business permit issued to a corporation shall be deemed terminated and void when there is a change in any officer or director.

B.     Any change in the nature or composition of the sex-oriented business from one type of sex-oriented business use to another type of sex-oriented business use shall also render the permit null and void.

No sex-oriented business performer permit may be sold, transferred or assigned to any other person or persons. (3341-10/96, 3431-7/99)

 

5.70.090 Sex-Oriented Businesses—Change of Location or Name
A.    No sex-oriented business shall move from the location specified on its permit until a change of location fee, established by resolution of the City Council, has been deposited with the City, and approval has been obtained from the Police Chief. Such approval shall not be given unless all requirements and regulations, as provided herein for applications for permits, have been met.

B.     No permit holder shall operate, conduct, manage, engage in, or carry on a sex-oriented business under any name other than his or her name and the name of the business as specified on the applicable permit.

C.     Any application for an extension or expansion of a building or other place of business where a sex-oriented business is located shall require inspection and shall comply with the provisions and regulations of this chapter. (3341-10/96, 3431-7/99)

 

5.70.095 Sex-Oriented Performer—Change of Location or Name
No permit holder shall perform under any name other than the name specified on his or her permit in any other location other than the location specified on his or her permit. (3431-7/99)

 

5.70.100 Sex-Oriented Business Standards of Operation
A.    Except as specifically provided in this chapter, the sex-oriented business shall comply with the zoning, parking, development and design standards applicable to the zone in which the business is located.

1.     The sex-oriented business shall be conducted wholly within a building and shall not be located, in whole or in part, within any portable structure.

2.     All indoor areas of the sex-oriented business within which patrons are permitted, except restrooms, shall be open to view at all times.

B.     General Provisions.

1.     No sex-oriented material or sex-oriented merchandise shall be displayed in such manner as to be visible from any location other than within the premises occupied by the sex-oriented business.

2.     No person under the age of 18 years shall be permitted within the premises at any time except as pursuant to California Penal Code Section 313.2.

3.     The sex-oriented business shall not operate or be open between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 11:00 a.m.

4.     The sex-oriented business shall provide and maintain separate restroom facilities for male patrons and employees and female patrons and employees. Male patrons and employees shall be prohibited from using the restroom(s) for females, and female patrons and employees shall be prohibited from using the restroom(s) for males, except to carry out duties of repair, maintenance and cleaning of the restroom facilities. The restrooms shall be free from all sex-oriented materials and sex-oriented merchandise. Restrooms shall not contain television monitors or other motion picture or video projection, recording or reproduction equipment. The foregoing provisions of this paragraph shall not be applicable to a sex-oriented business which deals exclusively with sale or rental of merchandise which is not used or consumed on the premises, such as a sex-oriented bookstore, and which does not provide restroom facilities to its patrons or the general public.

5.     The sex-oriented business shall not conduct, advertise, offer, or solicit any massage, acupuncture, figure modeling, piercing, tattooing, acupressure or escort services and shall not allow such activities on the premises.

C.     Any sex-oriented business which allows customers to remain on the premises while viewing any live, filmed or recorded entertainment, or while using or consuming the products or services supplied on the premises, shall conform to the following requirements:

1.     At least one security guard who shall possess a valid license from the State of California shall be on duty outside the premises, patrolling the grounds and parking areas, at all times while the business is open. The security guard(s) shall be charged with preventing violations of law and enforcing compliance by patrons with the requirements of this chapter. Any security guard required by this subparagraph shall be uniformed in such manner so as to be readily identifiable as a security guard by the public. No security guard required pursuant to this paragraph shall act as a door person, ticket seller, ticket taker, or admittance person while acting as a security guard hereunder.

2.     Landscaping shall conform to the standards established for the zone, except that, if the sex-oriented business is the sole use on a lot, no planting shall exceed 30 inches in height, except trees with foliage not less than six feet above the ground.

3.     The entire exterior grounds, including the parking lot, shall be lighted sufficiently to permit the security personnel to observe activity on the grounds and within automobiles.

4.     The premises within which the sex-oriented business is located shall provide sufficient sound absorbing insulation so that noise generated inside said premises shall not be audible anywhere on any adjacent property or public right-of-way or within any other building or other separate unit within the same building.

5.     No exterior door or window on the premises shall be propped or kept open at any time while the business is open, and any exterior windows shall be covered with opaque covering at all times.

6.     Permanent barriers shall be installed and maintained to screen the interior of the premises from public view for each door used as an entrance/exit to the business.

D.    The following additional regulations shall pertain to sex-oriented motion picture arcades which provide more than one viewing area:

1.     Upon application for a sex-oriented business permit, the application shall be accompanied by a diagram of the premises showing a plan thereof specifying the location of one or more manager’s stations, the location of all overhead lighting fixtures and designating any portion of the premises in which patrons will not be permitted. A manager’s station may not exceed 32 square feet of floor area with no dimension greater than eight feet. The diagram shall also designate the place at which the sex-oriented business permit and City business license will be conspicuously posted. A professionally prepared diagram in the nature of an engineer’s or architect’s blueprint shall not be required; however, each diagram shall be oriented to the north or to some designated street or object and shall be drawn to a designated scale with marked dimensions sufficient to show the various internal dimensions of all areas of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches. The Police Chief shall waive the foregoing diagram for renewal applications if the owner adopts a diagram that was previously submitted and certifies that the configuration of the premises has not been altered since it was prepared.

2.     No alteration in the configuration or location of a manager’s station(s) may be made without the prior approval of the Police Chief.

3.     It shall be the duty of the owner(s) to ensure that at least one employee is on duty and situated at each manager’s station at all times that any patron is present inside the premises.

4.     The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view from a manager’s station of every area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose excluding restrooms. If the premises has two or more manager’s stations designated, then the interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view of each area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose, excluding restrooms, from at least one of the manager’s stations. The view required in this subsection must be by direct line of sight from the manager’s station.

5.     It shall be the duty of the owner(s) and it shall also be the duty of all employees present on the premises to ensure that the view area specified above remains unobstructed by any doors, walls, persons, merchandise, display racks or other materials at all times and to ensure that no patron is permitted access to any area of the premises which has been designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted in the application filed pursuant to this subsection.

6.     No individual viewing area may be occupied by more than one person at any one time. “Individual viewing area” shall mean a viewing area designed for occupancy by one person. Individual viewing areas of the sex-oriented business shall be operated and maintained without any hole or other opening or means of direct communication or visual or physical access between the interior space of two or more individual viewing areas.

7.     The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted access with an illumination of not less than 10 foot candles as measured at the floor level.

8.     It shall be the duty of the owner(s) and it shall also be the duty of all employees present on the premises to ensure that the illumination described above is maintained at all times that any patron is present on the premises.

E.     The following additional requirements shall pertain to sex-oriented businesses providing live entertainment.

1.     No person shall perform, and no owner, operator, or manager of a sex-oriented business shall permit live entertainment for patrons of a sex-oriented business except where:

a.     If unclothed performed upon a stage or platform located at least 18 inches above the level of the floor; and

b.     Whether clothed or unclothed, a distance of at least six feet is maintained between any performer and any patron.

2.     The sex-oriented business shall provide separate dressing room facilities for performers which are exclusively dedicated to the entertainers’ use.

3.     The sex-oriented business shall provide an entrance/exit to the premises for performers which is separate from the entrance/exit used by patrons.

4.     No performer shall have intentional physical contact with any patron, and no patron shall have intentional physical contact with any performer while on the premises which physical contact involves the touching of the clothed or unclothed genitals, pubic area, buttocks, cleft of the buttocks, perineum, anal region, or female breast with any part or area of such other person’s body.

5.     Fixed rail(s) at least 30 inches in height shall be maintained establishing the separations between performers and patrons required by this section.

6.     The sex-oriented business shall maintain a file containing the performer permits of all performers at the business. The file shall be available for viewing during all police inspections. (3341-10/96, 3431-7/99, 3470-11/00)

 

5.70.110 Inspections
The permit holder shall allow the City of Huntington Beach and its authorized representatives to conduct reasonable unscheduled inspections of the premises of the sex-oriented business for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the law at any time the sex-oriented business is open for business or is occupied; provided, whenever any City official relies upon this section to gain access to the permit holder’s establishment without paying any otherwise applicable admission fee or cover charge, any person employed by the permit holder to collect such admission fees or cover charges may require such official, before admitting such official to the establishment, to produce identification indicating the official’s name, branch of City government by which such official is employed, and the job title such official holds within that branch of City government. (3341-10/96, 3431-7/99)

 

5.70.115 Revocation of a Sex-Oriented Business Permit
A.    The Police Chief shall revoke a sex-oriented business permit when:

1.     The permit holder is convicted of a felony or misdemeanor occurring upon or relating to the premises or lot upon which the sex-oriented business is located which offense is classified by the state as an offense involving sexual crime against children, sexual abuse, rape, distribution of obscene material or material harmful to minors, prostitution or pandering, including, but not necessarily limited to the violation of any crime requiring registration under California Penal Code Section 290, or any violation of Penal Code Sections 243.4, 261, 261.5, 264.1, 266, 266a through 266k, inclusive, 267, 286, 286.5, 288, 288a, 311 through 311.10, inclusive, 314, 315, 316 or 647; or

2.     If, on two or more occasions within a 12-month period, a person or persons has (have) been convicted of a felony or misdemeanor for an offense set forth in this section as a result of such person’s activity on the premises or property on which the sex-oriented business is located, and the person or persons were employees, contractors or agents of the sex-oriented business at the time the offenses were committed; or

3.     If the permit holder or an employee has knowingly allowed prostitution, or solicitation for prostitution, knowingly allowed or permitted any act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, or masturbation to be committed or allowed in or upon the premises where such sex-oriented business is to be located, or to be used as a place in which solicitations for sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation or masturbation openly occur; or

4.     The sex-oriented business has been operated in violation of any of the requirements of the Huntington Beach Municipal Code if:

a.     The violation is of a continuous nature (i.e., cannot be remedied by immediate cessation of the activity such as a building or structural violation), the business continues to be operated in violation of such provision for more than 10 days following the date written notice of such violation is mailed or delivered to the owner; or

b.     The violation is of a noncontinuous nature, two or more violations of the same provision or four or more violations of any other of the provisions of the Huntington Beach Municipal Code occur (regardless of whether notice of each individual violation is given to owner) within any 12-month period; or

5.     The applicant has made material misrepresentations or fraudulent, false, or misleading statements in the application; or

6.     Permit holder has had a sex-oriented business permit or other similar license or permit denied or revoked for cause by this City or any other jurisdiction located in or out of this state prior to the date of application; or

7.     That the permit holder, his or her employee, agent, partner, director, officer, stockholder or manager has not within two years of the date of the application knowingly allowed or permitted any act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, or masturbation to be committed or allowed in or upon the premises where such sex-oriented business is to be located, or to be used as a place in which solicitations for sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation or masturbation openly occur.

B.     Upon determining that grounds for permit revocation exist, Police Chief shall furnish written notice of the revocation to the permit holder. Such notice shall summarize the principal reasons for the revocation.

C.     Upon receipt of written notice of revocation, if the permit holder files within 30 days a petition for writ of mandate in state court to review the revocation, then the City shall not enforce the revocation unless the Superior Court has denied the writ or the City has obtained injunctive relief. The notice will be deemed received if the Police Chief has placed the notice in first class mail and the notice is not returned within 10 days and the City has made a good faith attempt at personal service.

D.    If the permit holder fails to file a writ of mandate within 30 days of receipt of written notice of revocation, the City shall enforce the revocation. (3341-10/96, 3431-7/99, 3470-11/00)

 

5.70.120 Revocation of a Sex-Oriented Performer Permit
A.    The Police Chief shall revoke a sex-oriented performer permit when:

1.     The applicant has made material misrepresentations or false or misleading statements in the application; or

2.     The permit holder is convicted of a felony or misdemeanor which offense is classified by the state as an offense involving sexual crime against children, sexual abuse, rape, distribution of obscene material or material harmful to minors, prostitution or pandering, including, but not necessarily limited to, the violation of any crime requiring registration under California Penal Code Section 290, or any violation of Penal Code Sections 243.4, 261, 261.5, 264.1, 266, 266a through 266k, inclusive, 267, 286, 286.5, 288, 288a, 311 through 311.10, inclusive, 314, 315, 316 or 647(a), 653.22; or

3.     The sex-oriented performer has violated the requirements of the Huntington Beach Municipal Code; or

4.     Permit holder has had a sex-oriented performer permit or other similar license or permit denied or revoked for cause by this City or any other jurisdiction located in or out of this state within one year prior to the date of application.

5.     Upon determining that grounds for permit revocation exist, Police Chief shall furnish written notice of the revocation to the permit holder. Such notice shall summarize the principal reasons for the revocation.

B.     Upon receipt of written notice of revocation, if the permit holder files within 30 days a petition for writ of mandate in state court to review the revocation, then the City shall not enforce the revocation unless the Superior Court has denied the writ, or the City has obtained injunctive relief. The notice will be deemed received if the Police Chief has placed the notice in first class mail and the notice is not returned within 10 days and the City has made a good faith attempt at personal service.

C.     If permit holder fails to file a writ of mandate within 30 days of receipt of written notice of revocation, the City shall enforce the revocation. (3431-7/99, 3470-11/00)

 

5.70.130 Regulations Nonexclusive
The provisions of this article regulating sex-oriented businesses are not intended to be exclusive and compliance therewith shall not excuse noncompliance with any other regulations pertaining to the operation of businesses as adopted by the City Council of the City of Huntington Beach. (3341-10/96)

 

5.70.140 Violation—Penalty
Any violation of this chapter shall be punishable by:

A.    Administrative Citation. Violation of this chapter is subject to the issuance of an administrative citation under the provisions of Chapter 1.18 of this Code. An operator may be cited for violations occurring on the premises in their presence or for knowingly permitting violations of this chapter.

B.     Civil Action. The City Attorney may institute an action in any court of competent jurisdiction, including an action to abate a nuisance, to restrain, enjoin, or abate the condition(s) found to be in violation of the provisions of this chapter, as provided by law.

C.     It shall be a violation of this chapter for any principal, including but not limited to any operator, to permit, procure, counsel or assist any agent of that principal, including but not limited to an employee or independent contractor, to violate any provision of this chapter. (3341-10/96, 3470-11/00)

 

5.70.150 Unlawful Operation Declared Nuisance
Any sex-oriented business operated, conducted or maintained contrary to the provisions of this chapter shall be and the same is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. (3341-10/96, 3470-11/00)

 

5.70.160 Minors and Intoxicated Persons
A.    It shall be a misdemeanor for any person under the age of 18 years or any obviously intoxicated person to enter or remain on the premises of a sex-oriented business at any time except as pursuant to California Penal Code Section 313.2. A sign giving notice of this provision shall be prominently posted at each entrance to the premises of the sex-oriented business.

1.     Every person having responsibility for the operation of a sex-oriented business who, with knowledge that a person is a minor, or who fails to exercise reasonable care in ascertaining the true age of a minor, knowingly allows such minor to enter or remain on the premises of the business is guilty of a misdemeanor.

2.     Every person having responsibility for the operation of a sex-oriented business who allows any obviously intoxicated person to enter or remain on the premises of the business is guilty of a misdemeanor.

B.     For purposes of this section, the holder of a sex-oriented business permit when present on the premises, and the manager or other person(s) in charge of the premises, are persons having responsibility for the operation of the business. The term “minor” shall mean any person under the age of 18 years. (3341-10/96, 3431-7/99)

 

5.70.170 Employment of Persons Without Permits Unlawful
A.    It shall be unlawful for any owner, operator, manager, or permittee in charge of or in control of a sex-oriented business which provides live entertainment depicting specified anatomical areas or involving specified sexual activities to allow any person to perform such entertainment who is not in possession of a valid, unrevoked sex-oriented performer permit.

B.     The owner, operator, manager or permittee in charge of or in control of the sex-oriented business which provides live entertainment shall provide proof of a valid sex-oriented performer permit for each individual engaged in live performance upon demand of a police officer. Failure to provide proof is a violation of this chapter. (3341-10/96, 3431-7/99)

 

5.70.180 Severability
If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase in this chapter or any part thereof is for any reason held to be unconstitutional or invalid or ineffective by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of the remaining portions of this chapter or any part thereof. The City Council hereby declares that it would have passed each section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase thereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more subsections, subdivisions, paragraphs, sentences, clauses, or phrases be declared unconstitutional, or invalid, or ineffective. (3341-10/96)

 

Chapter 5.71 ESCORT SERVICE
5.71.010 Findings and Purpose
The City Council finds and declares as follows:

A.    The permit requirements and restrictions imposed by this chapter are necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of Huntington Beach; and

B.     There has been an increase in the incidence of acts of prostitution, pimping and pandering and robbery by use of debilitating narcotics in escort services and the establishment of standards for issuance of permits and restriction on operation would serve to reduce the risk of illegal activity; and

C.     The restrictions and requirements contained in this chapter reduce the burden on the Police Department and permit the deployment of the police personnel such that more serious crimes may be prevented and more important laws be enforced; and

D.    The regulations and restrictions contained in this chapter tend to discourage escort services from degenerating into houses of prostitution and the means utilized in this chapter bear a reasonable and rational relationship to the goals sought to be achieved. (3565-7/02)

 

5.71.020 Definitions
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall mean and include:

Police Chief. Police Chief of the City of Huntington Beach or his or her designee.

City Manager. City Manager of the City of Huntington Beach or his or her designee.

Employee. Any and all persons who work in or about or render any services whatsoever to the patrons or customers of escort service.

Escort. Any person who, for a fee, commission, hire, reward or profit, accompanies other persons to or about social affairs, entertainments or places of amusement or consorts with others about any place of public resort or within any private quarters. Excluded from this definition are any persons employed by any business, agency or person excluded from the definitions of “escort service” below.

Escort Service. Any business, agency or person who, for a fee, commission, hire, reward or profit, furnishes or offers to furnish names of persons or who introduces, furnishes or arranges for persons, who may accompany other persons to or about social affairs, entertainments or places of amusements, or who may consort with others about any place of public resort or within any private quarters. Excluded from this definition are any businesses, agencies or persons which provide escort services for older persons as defined in California Welfare and Institutions Code Section 9406, when such services are provided as part of a social welfare and health program for such older person.

Operator. Any person operating an escort service, including but not limited to the owner or proprietor of the premises upon which it is located, and the lessee, sublessee, or mortgagee in possession.

Person. An individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate, or any other group or combination of acting as a unit, excepting the United States of America, the State of California and any political subdivision thereof. (3565-7/02)

 

5.71.030 Escort Service Permit Required
No person shall operate an escort service within the City of Huntington Beach without first having obtained an escort service permit and securing the necessary business license as required by this Code. (3565-7/02)

 

5.71.040 Application for Escort Service Permit
A.    Any person desiring an escort service permit shall file a written application on the required form with the Police Chief for an investigation. The applicant shall personally appear at the Police Department of the City of Huntington Beach and produce proof that the application fee as established by resolution of the City Council has been paid and shall present the application.

B.     For purposes of this section, applicant shall mean the owner of the proposed escort service, if a sole proprietorship; one general partner, if a partnership; one officer or director, if a corporation; and one participant, if a joint venture.

C.     The application shall contain or be accompanied by the following information:

1.     The type of ownership of the business, i.e., whether by individual, partnership, corporation or otherwise.

2.     The precise name under which the escort service is to be conducted.

3.     The complete address and all telephone numbers of the escort service.

4.     A complete list of the names and resident addresses of all proposed employees in the escort service and the names and resident address of the manager or managing employee proposed to be principally in charge of the operation of the escort service.

5.     The following personal information concerning the applicant:

a.     The full, true name and any other names, including aliases, used by the applicant.

b.     The present business address and telephone number of the applicant and previous addresses, if any, for a period of five years immediately prior to the present address.

c.     Acceptable written proof that the applicant is at least 18 years of age.

d.     The applicant’s height, weight, color of eyes and hair and date and place of birth, unless applicant is a partnership or corporation, in which case this information shall be supplied for the person or persons authorized to execute the application.

e.     The social security number and state driver’s license or identification card of the applicant.

f.      The applicant’s fingerprints on a form provided by the Police Department and two color photographs at least 2″ x 2″ clearly showing the applicant’s face taken within the last six months. Any fees for the fingerprints or photograph shall be paid by the applicant.

g.     The escort service or similar business history and experience of the applicant, including but not limited to, whether or not such person in previously operating an escort service or similar business in this City or other city under license or permit, has had such license or permit denied, revoked, or suspended and the reasons therefor.

h.     All felony convictions of the applicant within the last five years and all misdemeanor convictions within the last two years of the applicant of any of the offenses set forth in California Penal Code Sections 315, 316, 266a, 266b, 266c, 266e, 266g, 266h, 266i, 647(a), 647(b) and 647(d) as those sections now appear or may hereafter be amended or renumbered or the equivalent of the aforesaid offenses outside of the State of California.

i.      If the applicant intends to operate the escort business under a name other than that of the applicant the applicant shall file the fictitious name of the escort business and show proof of registration of the fictitious name.

j.      If the applicant is:

i.      A corporation, the name of the corporation shall be set forth exactly as shown in its articles of incorporation or charter, evidence that the corporation is in good standing under the laws of the State of California, the name of the registered corporate agent and the address of the registered office for service of process, together with the place and date of incorporation, and the names and addresses of each of its current officers and directors, and each stockholder holding more than 20% of the stock in the corporation;

ii.     A partnership, the applicant shall set forth the name, residence address and dates of birth of the partners, including limited partners, and attach a copy of the partnership agreement. If the applicant is a limited partnership, it shall furnish a copy of its certificate of limited partnership filed with the County Clerk. If one or more of the partners is a corporation, the provisions of this subsection pertaining to corporations shall apply.

The applicant corporation or partnership shall designate one of its officers or general partners to act as its responsible managing officer. All individuals owning a 20% or greater equitable interest in the escort business shall complete and sign all application forms required of an individual applicant under this chapter, but only one application fee shall be charged.

6.     Authorization for the City, its agents and employees to seek verification of the information contained in the application.

7.     The name and address of the owner and lessor of the real property upon which the business is to be conducted, and, if applicable, a copy of the lease or rental agreement.

8.     Such other information and identification as deemed necessary by the Police Chief and approved by the City Council.

9.     A statement in writing signed and dated by the applicant that he or she certifies under penalty of perjury that all of the information contained in the application is true and correct. (3565-7/02)

 

5.71.050 Escort Service Permit Issuance and Denial
A.    Upon receipt of a written application for a permit, the Police Chief shall conduct an investigation in such a manner as he or she deems appropriate in order to ascertain whether such permit should be issued as requested. The Police Chief shall approve, conditionally approve, or deny the application within 60 days of filing of the application unless the Chief makes any of the following findings:

1.     Any person that will be directly engaged or employed in the escort service has been convicted of a violation of Health & Safety Code Section 11550 or a violation of Penal Code Sections 266, 315, 316, 318 or 647(b), or has been convicted in any other state of any offense which, if committed or attempted in this state, would have been punishable as one or more of the above-mentioned offenses, or that any such person is required to register under the provisions of Penal Code Section 290.

2.     If relevant Department of Justice state summary criminal history information is not received within the 60-day investigation period, the Police Chief is authorized to issue a temporary permit. A final decision granting or denying a permit shall be made after receipt of such summary criminal history information. If the permit is granted, its effective date shall be the date of issuance of the temporary permit. If the permit is denied, the temporary permit shall expire upon notice of denial.

3.     Any person that will be directly engaged or employed in the escort service has been convicted of any offense involving the sale of a controlled substance specified in Health and Safety Code Sections 11054, 11055, 11056, 11057 or 11058 or the possession for sale and/or possession of a controlled substance specified in Health and Safety Code Sections 11054, 11055, 11056, 11057 or 11058 either in an escort service or while employed by an escort service or has been convicted in any other state of any offense which would have been punishable as one or more of the above-mentioned offenses.

4.     Any person that will be directly engaged or employed in the escort service, has committed an act which if done by a permittee under the chapter, would be grounds for suspension or revocation of the permit.

5.     Any person that will be directly engaged or employed in the escort service has had a permit or license to operate an escort service business revoked by the granting authority.

6.     Any person that will be directly engaged or employed in the escort service has been convicted of any act involving dishonesty, fraud, or deceit with the intent to substantially benefit him or herself or another or substantially injure another or an act of violence, which act or acts are substantially related to the qualifications, functions or duties of the escort service.

7.     The operations of the escort service would, if allowed, constitute a public nuisance.

8.     The applicant has knowingly made a false, misleading or fraudulent statement of fact to the City in the permit application process.

9.     The application does not contain the information required by Section 5.71.040.

10.   The applicant has not satisfied the requirements of this chapter.

11.   The premises where the escort service business will be conducted does not comply with all applicable laws, including but not limited to, the building, planning, housing and fire codes of the City of Huntington Beach.

B.     All escort service permit holders shall comply with the following conditions and any other conditions specified by the Police Chief on issuance of the escort service permit:

1.     No person granted a permit as herein provided shall operate under any name or conduct business under any designation not specified in his or her permit.

2.     The escort service permit holder shall only employ persons who have obtained and then possess a valid employee permit issued pursuant to this chapter. Every escort service permit holder shall report to the Police Chief any change of employees, whether by new or renewed employment, discharge or termination, the report to contain the name of the employee and the date of change. The report shall be made within five days of the change. The escort service permittee shall take all reasonable steps to ensure the return to the Police Chief of the employee permit of all employees no longer employed at the escort service.

3.     The escort service permit holder shall conspicuously display the escort service permit in an easily accessible public place within the escort service.

4.     The escort service shall not refuse the service on the basis of a customer’s sex, race, color, religion, ancestry, national origin or other arbitrary factor prescribed by the Unruh Civil Rights Act, Civil Code Section 51, et seq.

5.     The escort service shall have a manager on the premises at all times during when the escort service is open. The operator of each escort service shall file a statement with the Police Chief designating the person or persons with power to act as a manager at the operator’s escort service. Whenever the escort service is open and the operator is absent, the designated manager(s) shall be responsible for ensuring compliance with subsection (B)(1) of this section. The manager of each escort service shall take necessary steps to ensure that copies of the employee permit for each on-duty employee shall be conspicuously displayed in an easily accessible public place within the escort service.

6.     The escort service shall comply with all provisions of this chapter and the applicable provisions of the Huntington Beach Municipal Code. (3565-7/02)

 

5.71.060 Escort Employee Permit Required
No person shall work in or about an escort service in the City of Huntington Beach or perform any services for a customer or an escort service wherever located, without first securing an escort permit. (3565-7/02)

 

5.71.070 Application for Escort Permit
A.    Any person desiring an employee permit shall personally appear at the City of Huntington Beach and file a written application on the required form with the Police Chief for investigation. The applicant shall accompany the application with the appropriate application fee as set by resolution of the City Council.

B.     The application shall contain or be accompanied by the following information:

1.     A statement of the exact locations of which the applicant will be working as an employee of an escort service, including the full street address and all telephone numbers associated with said locations, and the name and address of the escort services, including the managers and owners of the escort services.

2.     The following personal information concerning the applicant:

a.     The full, true name and any other names, including aliases, used by the applicant.

b.     The present residence address and telephone number of the applicant and previous addresses, if any, for a period of five years immediately prior to the present address.

c.     Acceptable written proof that the applicant is at least 18 years of age.

d.     Height, weight, color of hair, eyes and sex.

e.     The social security number and state driver’s license or identification card of the applicant.

f.      The applicant’s fingerprints on a form provided by the Police Department and two color photographs at least 2″ x 2″ clearly showing the applicant’s face taken within last six months. Any fees for the fingerprints or photograph shall be paid by the applicant.

g.     The escort service or similar business history experience of the applicant, including but not limited to, whether or not such person, in previously performing escort services or being employed by an escort service or similar business in this City or other city under license or permit, has had such license or permit denied, revoked or suspended and the reasons therefor.

3.     All criminal convictions, except minor traffic violations, including date and place of each such conviction and reasons therefor.

4.     Authorization for the City, its agents and employees to seek verification of the information contained in the application.

5.     A statement in writing signed and dated by the applicant that he or she certifies under penalty of perjury that all information contained in the application is true and correct.

6.     Such other information and identification as deemed necessary by the Police Chief and approved by the City Council. (3565-7/02)

 

5.71.080 Employee Permit Issuance and Denial
A.    Upon receipt of a written application for a permit, the Police Chief shall conduct an investigation in such manner as he or she deems appropriate in order to ascertain whether such permit should be issued as requested. The Police Chief shall approve, conditionally approve, or deny the application within 45 days of filing of the application. Said 45-day period may be continued for an additional 30 days if necessitated by the occurrence of events beyond the control of the Police Chief. The Police Chief shall issue such permit as requested unless the Police Chief makes any of the following findings:

1.     The applicant has been convicted of a violation of Health and Safety Code Section 11550 or a violation of Penal Code Sections 266i, 315, 316, 318 or 647(b), or has been convicted in any other state of any offense which, if committed or attempted in this state, would have been punished as one or more of the above-mentioned offenses or that the applicant is required to register under the provisions of Penal Code Section 290.

2.     If relevant Department of Justice state summary criminal history information is not received within the 60-day investigation period, the Police Chief is authorized to issue a temporary permit. A final decision granting or denying a permit shall be made after receipt of such summary criminal history information. If the permit is granted, its effective date shall be the date of issuance of the temporary permit. If the permit is denied, the temporary permit shall expire upon notice of denial.

3.     The applicant has been convicted of any offense involving the sale of a controlled substance specified in Health and Safety Code Sections 11054, 11055, 11056, 11057 or 11058 either in an escort service or while employed by an escort service has been convicted in any other state of any offense which, if committed or attempted in this state, would have been punishable as one or more of the above-mentioned offenses.

4.     The applicant has committed an act, which, if done by a permittee under this chapter, would be grounds for suspension or revocation.

5.     The applicant has had a permit license to operate an escort service or to work in or about an escort service revoked by the granting authority.

6.     The applicant has been convicted of an act involving dishonesty, fraud, or deceit with the intent to substantially benefit him or herself or another or substantially injure another or an act of violence, which act or acts are substantially related to the qualifications, functions, or duties of an employee of the escort service.

7.     The applicant has knowingly made a false, misleading, or fraudulent statement of fact to the City in the permit application process.

8.     The application does not contain the information required by Section 5.71.070.

9.     The applicant has not satisfied the requirements of this chapter.

B.     All employees of the escort services shall comply with the following conditions and any other conditions specified by the Police Chief and approved by City Council on issuance of the employee permit.

1.     No person granted a permit as herein provided shall operate under any name or conduct business under any designation not specified in his or her permit.

2.     The employee of the escort service shall carry a photo identification card prepared and issued by the Police Chief on the person when working pursuant to the permit. If an employee changes his or her business address, he or she shall, within seven days after such change occurs advise the Police Chief, in writing, of the new business address, and obtain from the Police Chief a new photo identification card.

3.     Every employee shall conspicuously display the employee permit in an easily accessible public place within the escort service. (3565-7/02)

 

5.71.090 Change of Business
Every escort service permit holder shall report immediately to the Police Chief any and all changes of ownership or management of the escort service including, but not limited to changes of manager or other persons principally in charge, stock holders holding more than 10% of the stock of the corporation, officers, directors, and partners, any and all changes of name, style or designation under which the business is to be conducted, and all changes of address or telephone numbers of the escort service business. A change of location of any premises may be approved by the Police Chief provided that there is compliance with all applicable regulations of the City of Huntington Beach. (3565-7/02)

 

5.71.100 Fees
The City Council shall establish by resolution and from time to time, amend fees for the administration of this chapter. Fees required by this chapter shall be in addition to any required under any other chapter of this Code. (3565-7/02)

 

5.71.110 Existing Escort Services
A.    Commencing on the date of adoption of this chapter, permits are to be issued in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. Existing escort services may continue in effect until 180 days after adoption of this chapter. Within 180 days, existing escort services shall apply for an escort service permit pursuant to this chapter.

B.     Persons currently employed by an escort service may remain in such employment until 180 days from the date of adoption of this chapter. Within 180 days, each such person shall apply for an employee permit pursuant to this chapter.

C.     Reasonable extensions of the time period specified above shall be granted by the Police Chief upon a proper showing and upon a timely request therefor. (3565-7/02)

 

5.71.120 Transfer and Duration and Renewal of Permits
A.    All escort service permits and escort permits shall be issued for a period of 12 months and shall expire 12 months from its issuance.

B.     Applications for the next ensuing permit shall be filed with the Police Chief before the expiration of the existing permit. Such renewal applications must be filed no later than 30 days prior to the expiration of the permit to permit a lapse of the permit.

C.     Each applicant for renewal shall file such information as may be required by the Police Chief to update the information required for his or her original permit application. The applicant shall accompany the application for renewal with the appropriate filing fee.

D.    No permit issued hereunder shall be transferable to any other person or establishment; provided, however, an additional location or change of location of an escort service will be allowed upon 30 days’ prior written notice to the Police Chief and the payment of the appropriate transfer fee. (3565-7/02)

 

5.71.125 Escort Service Change of Location or Name
A.    No escort service shall move from the location specified on its permit until a change of location fee in the sum set by resolution of the City Council has been paid to the City of Huntington Beach, and approval has been obtained from the Police Chief and the Planning Department. Such approval shall not be given unless all requirements and regulations, as contained in the City’s codes, have been met.

B.     No permittee shall operate, conduct, manage, engage in, or carry on the business of escort service under any name other than his or her name and the name of the escort service specified on his or her permit.

C.     Any application for an extension or expansion of a building or other place of business where an escort service is located shall require inspection and shall comply with the provisions and regulations of this chapter and all other City ordinances including zoning ordinances. (3565-7/02)

 

5.71.130 Employment of Persons Under the Age of 18 Prohibited
It shall be unlawful for any owner, proprietor, manager or other person in charge of any escort service to employ any person who is not at least 18 years of age. (3565-7/02)

 

5.71.140 Age of Customer
It shall be unlawful for any owner, proprietor, manager or other person in charge of any escort service to allow any person under the age of 18 years to patronize an escort service as a customer or patron. (3565-7/02)

 

5.71.150 Inspection
The Police Department may, from time to time, during hours of operation, inspect each escort service that operates within the City of Huntington Beach for the purposes of determining that there is compliance with the provisions of this chapter. (3565-7/02)

 

5.71.160 Daily Register
Every person who engages in, conducts, or carries on the operation of an escort service shall keep a daily register, approved as to form by the Police Department, containing the following information:

A.    The identification of all employees employed by such establishment together with a duplicate of each of the escort permits of each employee; and

B.     The hours of employment of each employee for each day. (3565-7/02)

 

5.71.170 Permit Suspension and Revocation
The Police Chief may suspend or revoke a permit if a permittee has:

A.    Knowingly made any false, misleading, or fraudulent statements in the applications; or

B.     Violated any provision of this chapter or of any statute relating to his or her permitted activity; or

C.     Been convicted of a felony or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude or been convicted of a felony or misdemeanor while engaged in the practice of giving massage or the operation of a massage establishment.

The permittee shall be provided with written notice by first-class mail, postage prepaid, of such suspension or revocation. The permittee may file an appeal with the City Clerk within 15 days of the date of mailing of the notice of denial, suspension or revocation. In the event an appeal is timely filed, the suspension or revocation shall not take effect until final decision has been rendered by the City Council, unless permittee has requested a continuance, as provided elsewhere in this chapter. If no appeal is filed, the suspension or revocation shall become effective upon expiration of the period for filing appeals. (3565-7/02)

 

5.71.180 Appeal Procedure
A.    The City Clerk shall schedule a hearing to be held within 15 days after the filing of the notice of appeal.

B.     Notice of the date, time and place of the hearing shall be mailed, postage prepaid, at least 10 days prior thereto to the permittee at the address given in the notice of appeal, or if none is provided, to the address set forth in the permit application.

C.     The City Council may grant or deny a continuance; may dissolve stays of pending orders of denial, suspension or revocation or of pending orders of denial, suspension or revocation; and may appoint outside hearing officers.

D.    The City Council shall determine, after consideration of all evidence presented, whether a permit should be issued, reinstated, suspended or revoked. The decision of the City Council shall be final. (3565-7/02)

 

5.71.190 Appeal Hearing
The following rules of evidence shall apply:

A.    Oral evidence shall be taken only under oath or affirmation. The City Council shall have authority to administer oaths, and to receive and rule on admissibility of evidence.

B.     Each party shall have the right to call and examine witnesses, to introduce exhibits, and to cross-examine opposing witnesses who have testified under direct examination. The City Council may call and examine any witness.

C.     Technical rules relating to evidence and witnesses shall not apply to hearings provided for herein. Any relevant evidence may be admitted if it is material and is evidence customarily relied upon by responsible persons in the conduct of their affairs regardless of the existence of any common law or statutory rule which might make admission of such evidence improper over objection in civil actions. Hearsay testimony may be used for the purpose of supplementing or explaining any evidence given in direct examination, but shall not be sufficient in itself to support a finding unless such testimony would be admissible over objection in civil actions. The rules of privilege shall be applicable to the extent that they now, or are hereafter, permitted in civil actions; and irrelevant, collateral, undue, and repetitious testimony shall be excluded. (3565-7/02)

 

5.71.200 Applications Barred for One Year
A.    Whenever any application is filed for a permit under this chapter and said application has been denied by the Police Chief, or a permit issued under this chapter has been revoked, and no appeal has been taken to the City Council or when any appeal from such denial or revocation has been taken to the City Council and said City Council has concurred in the judgment or order of denial or revocation, said application for said permit, or for a like permit for the same location or by the same applicant shall not be heard by the Police Chief until the expiration of one year from the date of the previous denial or revocation of said permit or application.

B.     There shall be no appeal to said City Council for failure or refusal to hear any such application or appeal within said one year.

C.     For the purposes of this section, “same applicant” shall mean a corporation having substantially the same shareholders as a prior corporate applicant, or a partnership having substantially the same membership as a prior partnership applicant. “Same applicant” shall also mean any officer, director, shareholder or partner of a prior corporate or partnership applicant.

D.    When any permit is denied solely by reason of Section 5.71.050(A)(8), 5.71.050(A)(10) or 5.71.080(A)(7), preventing the granting of said permit, and the requirements of said sections are subsequently satisfied, the one-year prohibition against reapplication will not apply. (3565-7/02)

 

5.71.210 Violation and Penalty
A.    Every person, whether acting as an individual, owner, employee of the owner, operator or employee of the operator, or whether acting as a mere helper for the owner, employee or operator or whether acting as a participant or worker in any way who operates an escort service within the City without first obtaining a permit and paying for a license to do so from the City or violating any provision in this chapter, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of $500.00 or by imprisonment in the county jail for a period not to exceed six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.

B.     Any owner, operator, manager or permittee in charge or in control of the escort service who knowingly employs a person who is not in possession of a valid employee permit as an employee of the escort service is guilty of a misdemeanor. (3565-7/02)

 

5.71.220 Unlawful Operation Declared Nuisance
Any escort service operated, conducted or maintained contrary to the provisions of this chapter shall be, and the same is hereby declared to be, unlawful and a public nuisance. The City Attorney may, in addition to, or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal action hereunder, commence an action or actions, proceeding or proceedings for abatement, removal or enjoinment thereof, in the manner provided by law. The City Attorney shall take such other steps and shall apply to such court or courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as shall abate or remove such escort service and restrain and enjoin any person from operating, conducting or maintaining an escort service contrary to the provisions of this chapter. (3565-7/02)

 

5.71.230 Severability
If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter, or application thereof to any person or circumstances, is for any reason held to be unconstitutional or invalid or ineffective by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of the remaining portions of this chapter or any part thereof. The City Council hereby declares that it would have passed such section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, subdivisions, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or phrases be declared unconstitutional or invalid or ineffective. (3565-7/02)

 

Chapter 5.72 FORTUNETELLING
5.72.010 Definition
“Fortunetelling,” as used in this chapter, shall include astrology, palmistry, phrenology, life reading, fortunetelling, cartomancy, clairvoyance, clairaudience, crystal gazing, mediumship, spirit photography, spirit writing, spirit voices, spirit materialization, etherealization, prophecy, writing analysis, or other similar business or act. (2703-6/84)

 

5.72.020 Permit Required
No person shall engage in, carry on, practice, or profess to practice the business or act of fortunetelling or other similar business or act, and demand or receive directly or indirectly any fee, gift, donation or reward therefor without a permit issued pursuant to this chapter. (2703-6/84)

 

5.72.030 Fees
The application, investigation, and permit fees shall be set by resolution of the City Council. (2703-6/84)

 

5.72.040 Application
A.    Any person, association, partnership, or corporation desiring to obtain a permit to operate, engage in, conduct or carry on any fortunetelling business shall make application to the Police Chief, or his or her designated representative. Prior to submitting such application, a nonrefundable fee shall be paid to the City Clerk to defray, in part, the cost of investigation and report required by this chapter. The City Clerk shall issue a receipt showing that such application fee has been paid. The receipt, or a copy thereof, shall be supplied to the Police Chief at the time such application is submitted.

B.     The application for permit does not authorize the engaging in, operation of, conduct of or carrying on of any fortunetelling business or act. (2703-6/84)

 

5.72.050 Application Contents
Each application for a fortunetelling business permit shall contain the following information:

A.    The full, true name and any other names used by the applicant.

B.     The present address and telephone number of the applicant.

C.     The previous addresses of applicant, if any, for a period of five years immediately prior to the date of the application and the dates of residence at each.

D.    The applicant’s height, weight, color of eyes and hair, and date and place of birth.

E.     Two photographs of the applicant at least 2″ x 2″ taken within the last six months.

F.     Business, occupation or employment history of the applicant for the five years immediately preceding the date of application.

G.    The business license history of the applicant and whether such applicant, in previous operations in this or any other city, state, or territory, under license, has had such license or permit for a fortunetelling business or similar type of business revoked or suspended, the reason therefor, and the business activity or occupation subsequent to such action of suspension or revocation.

H.    All convictions within the last five years of any crime involving dishonesty, fraud, deceit, or moral turpitude.

I.      If the applicant is a corporation, the name of the corporation shall be set forth exactly as shown in its articles of incorporation or charter, together with the place and date of incorporation, and the names and addresses of each of its current officers and directors, and each stockholder holding more than five percent of the stock in the corporation. If the applicant is a partnership, the applicant shall set forth the name, residence address and dates of birth of the partners, including limited partners. If the applicant is a limited partnership, it shall furnish a copy of its certificate of limited partnership filed with the County Clerk. If one or more of the partners is a corporation, the provisions of this subsection pertaining to corporations shall apply. The applicant corporation or partnership shall designate one of its officers or general partners to act as its responsible managing officer. Such designated persons shall complete and sign all application forms required of an individual applicant under this chapter, but only one application fee shall be charged.

J.      Such other identification and information as the Police Department may reasonably require in order to discover the truth of the matters hereinbefore specified as required to be set forth in the application.

K.    The Police Chief may require the applicant to furnish fingerprints. (2703-6/84)

 

5.72.060 Applicant to Appear
The applicant if an individual, or designated responsible managing officer if a partnership or corporation, shall personally appear at the Police Department of the City of Huntington Beach and produce proof that a nonrefundable application fee, established by resolution of the City Council, has been paid and shall present the application containing the aforementioned and described information. (2703-6/84)

 

5.72.070 Application—Investigation and Granting Permit
The Police Chief shall have 30 days to investigate the application and the background of the applicant. Upon completion of the investigation, the Police Chief shall grant the permit if he or she finds that:

A.    The required fee has been paid.

B.     The application conforms in all respects to the provisions of this chapter.

C.     The applicant has not knowingly made a material misrepresentation in the application.

D.    The applicant if an individual, or any of the stockholders of the corporation, any officers or directors if the applicant is a corporation, or any of the partners, including limited partners, if the applicant is a partnership, has not within the last five years been convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction of any crime involving dishonesty, fraud, deceit, or moral turpitude.

E.     The building, structure, equipment, and location of such business, as proposed by applicant, would comply with all applicable laws, including but not limited to health, zoning, fire and safety requirements and standards. (2703-6/84)

 

5.72.080 Permit—Refusal—Appeal
If the Police Chief, following investigation of the applicant, deems that the applicant does not fulfill the requirements as set forth in this chapter, he or she shall notify the City Manager of such opinion and, within 30 days of the date of application, provide copies of the investigation report to the City Manager. The City Manager shall within 10 days, grant the permit or deny the application and notify the applicant by certified mail of such denial. Any applicant who is denied a permit by the City Manager may appeal such denial to the City Council pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. (2703-6/84)

 

5.72.090 Exceptions
A.    The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any person solely by reason of the fact that he or she is engaged in the business of entertaining the public by demonstrations of mind reading, mental telepathy, thought conveyance, or the giving of horoscopic readings, at public places and in the presence of and within the hearing of other persons and at which no questions are answered, as part of such entertainment, except in a manner to permit all persons present at such public place to hear such answers, when not conducted in connection with the business of telling fortunes. Nothing in this section, however, shall be construed as exempting any person from the payment of the applicable license fee, if any, required to be paid by the licensing provisions of this title.

B.     No person shall be required to pay any fee or take out any license for conducting or participating in any religious ceremony or service when such person holds a certificate of ordination as a minister, missionary, medium, healer, or clairvoyant from any bona fide church or religious association maintaining a church and holding regular services and having a creed or set of religious principles that is recognized by all churches of like faith; provided further, that the fees, gratuities, emoluments, and profits thereof shall be regularly accounted for and paid solely to or for the benefit of the church or religious association; provided further, that the person holding a certificate of ordination from such bona fide church or religious association, as set forth in this section, shall, before practicing the profession specified in this chapter, file with the tax collector a certified copy of his or her certificate of ordination with his or her name, age, and street address in this City where he or she intends to carry on the business. Such bona fide church or religious association, as defined in this section, may, however, pay to its ministers, missionaries, mediums, or workers a salary or compensation based on a percentage basis; provided that the agreement between the church and the minister, missionary, medium or worker is embodied in a resolution and transcribed in the minutes of such church or religious association.

C.     No person shall be required to pay any fee or take out any license for carrying on the art of reading tea leaves in any bona fide, regularly established restaurant for the purpose of amusement of the patrons of the restaurant, where no charge for such readings is made. (2703-6/84)

 

5.72.100 Permit Suspension and Revocation
The City Manager may, based on evidence that any of the provisions of this chapter have been violated, suspend or revoke a permit; provided that written notice by certified mail of such suspension or revocation is furnished the permittee. The permittee, within 10 days after receipt of notice of suspension or revocation, may file an appeal with the City Clerk to be taken to the City Council. In the event an appeal is timely filed, the suspension or revocation shall not take effect until final decision has been rendered by the Council. If the permittee fails to take an appeal within the 10-day filing period provided herein, suspension or revocation shall take effect immediately upon expiration of such filing period. Procedures for appeals shall be those set forth in Sections 5.70.130 through 5.70.190 inclusive. (2703-6/84)

 

5.72.110 Fortunetelling Establishment—Change of Location or Name
A.    No permittee shall operate, conduct, engage in, or carry on the business of fortunetelling under any name other than his or her name and the name of the fortunetelling establishment specified on his or her permit, or at any location other than the location specified in the permit.

B.     Any application for an extension or expansion of a building or other place of business where a fortunetelling business is located shall require inspection and shall comply with the provisions and regulations of this chapter.

C.     No permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall be transferable.

D.    In the event any individual holding a fortunetelling permit issued by the City desires to operate, engage in, conduct, or carry on the business of fortunetelling at any location other than that specified in the permit, such person shall submit an additional application, pay the fee set by resolution of the City Council, and obtain a permit prior thereto. (2746-2/85)

 

Chapter 5.74 HARMFUL MATTER
5.74.010 Harmful Matter
No person shall display or cause to be displayed, matter which is harmful to minors in a place open to the public other than a public place from which minors are excluded, unless there is placed a blinder rack in front of the material so that at least the lower two-thirds of the material is not exposed to view. (3049-8/90)

 

5.74.020 Definitions
Blinder Rack. An opaque device which serves to obscure harmful matter completely from view.

Display. The term “display,” for purposes of this section, shall be construed liberally and shall include, but not be limited to, any of the following: exhibiting, selling, offering for sale, advertising, promoting, showing, or storing, matter in an area visible to the general public.

Harmful Matter. For the purposes of this chapter, the terms “harmful matter” and “matter” shall have the definitions contained within California Penal Code Section 313 et seq. (Chapter 7.6 “Harmful Matter”) or any successor statute. (3049-8/90)

 

5.74.030 Penalty
Any person violating the provisions of this chapter by displaying or causing to be displayed such harmful matter or by permitting such harmful matter to be displayed on property owned, leased or under the control of that person, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or by imprisonment in the county jail for not more than six months or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each person so violating this chapter shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violations of this chapter is committed. (3049-8/90)

 

Chapter 5.80 SHOPPING CART CONTAINMENT AND RETRIEVAL BY OWNERS
5.80.010 Purpose
Declaration of nuisance: Many retail establishments provide shopping carts for the convenience of customers while shopping on the premises of such businesses. However, shopping carts removed from the premises of such businesses and left abandoned on public or private property throughout the City constitute a public nuisance and a potential hazard to the health and safety of the public. The proliferation of lost, stolen or abandoned shopping carts on public and private property causes blighting conditions in the community, results in the obstruction of free access to public and private sidewalks, streets, parking lots and other ways, interferes with pedestrian and vehicular traffic on public and private streets, and impedes emergency services. For the aforesaid reasons, such lost, stolen or abandoned shopping carts are declared to be a public nuisance which shall be subject to abatement in the manner set forth in this chapter or in any other manner provided by law. The purpose of this chapter is to set forth regulations to ensure that reasonable measures are taken by the owners and operators of businesses which provide shopping carts for the convenience of customers to either prevent the removal of shopping carts from business premises and parking lots, or provide for the prompt retrieval of lost, stolen or abandoned shopping carts, to complement and supplement provisions of state law, and to adopt local regulations to the extent not otherwise preempted by state statute. (3759-1/07)

 

5.80.020 Definitions
Except as otherwise expressly set forth herein, the following words and terms as used in this chapter shall have the following meanings:

“City” means the City of Huntington Beach, California.

“Director of Planning” means the Planning Director of the City and his or her designee(s).

“Enforcement personnel” means any police officer or code enforcement officer employed by the City.

“Laundry cart” means a basket which is mounted on wheels and used in a coin-operated laundry or dry-cleaning retail establishment by a customer or an attendant for the purpose of transporting fabrics and the supplies necessary to process them.

“Lost, stolen or abandoned shopping cart” means:

1.     A shopping cart which is either:

a.     Removed from the premises of a retail establishment by any person without the written permission or consent of the owner of the shopping cart or the retailer otherwise entitled to possession of such cart; or

b.     Left unattended, discarded or abandoned upon any public or private property other than the premises of the retail establishment from which the shopping cart was removed, regardless of whether such shopping cart was removed from the premises with the permission of the owner.

2.     For purposes of this chapter, any shopping cart located on any public or private property other than the premises of the retail establishment from which such shopping cart was removed shall be presumed lost, stolen or abandoned, even if in the possession of any person, unless such person in possession thereof either is:

a.     The owner, or an employee or authorized agent of the owner, entitled to possession of the shopping cart;

b.     An officer, employee or agent of a cart retrieval service hired by the owner to retrieve such carts;

c.     An enforcement officer retrieving, storing or disposing of the cart pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.

“Owner” means any owner, manager, or operator of any retail establishment.

“Parking area” means a parking lot or other property provided by a retail establishment for the use of customers of such retail establishment for parking of customer vehicles. The parking area of a retail establishment located in a multistore complex or shopping center shall include the entire parking area used by the multistore complex or shopping center.

“Planning Commission” means the Planning Commission of the City.

“Premises” means any building, property or other area upon which any retail establishment business is conducted or operated in the City, including the parking area provided for customers of such retail establishment.

“Retail establishment” means any business located in the City which offers or provides shopping carts for the use of the customers of such business regardless of whether such business is advertised or operated as a retail or wholesale business, and regardless of whether such business is open to the general public, or is a private club or business, or is a membership store.

“Shopping cart” or “cart” means a basket which is mounted on wheels or a similar device generally used in a retail establishment by a customer for the purpose of transporting goods of any kind. The term shopping cart or cart includes a laundry cart. (3759-1/07)

 

5.80.030 Cart Containment Plan
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, every owner who provides shopping carts to customers for use on the premises of any retail establishment shall develop, implement and comply with the provisions of a written plan approved by the City to prevent customers from removing shopping carts from the premises of such business without authorization of the owner (the “cart containment plan”). The cart containment plan, at a minimum, shall include the following elements:

A.    Signs Affixed to Carts. Every shopping cart made available for use by customers shall have a sign permanently affixed to it that identifies the owner of the cart or the retailer or both; notifies the public of the procedure to be utilized for authorized removal of the cart from the premises; notifies the public that the unauthorized removal of the cart from the premises of the business, or the unauthorized possession of the cart, is a violation of state law, and lists a valid telephone number or address for returning the cart removed from the premises to the owner or retailer.

B.     Notice to Customers. Written notice shall be provided to customers, both in English and Spanish, that removal of shopping carts from the premises is prohibited by state law. Such notice may be provided in the form of flyers distributed on the premises, warnings printed on shopping bags, direct mail, website notices or any other means demonstrated to be effective. The cart containment plan shall identify the specific measures to be implemented to comply with this notice requirement. In addition, conspicuous signs shall be placed and maintained on the premises near all customer entrances and exits and throughout the premises, including the parking area, warning customers that removal of shopping carts from the premises is prohibited by state law.

C.     Physical Measures. Specific physical measures shall be implemented and maintained by the owner to prevent, deter or impede the removal of shopping carts from the premises. Such physical measures shall be specifically identified in the cart containment plan and may include, but are not limited to, the following: disabling devices installed and maintained on carts, maintaining one or more security guards assigned the responsibility to deter or stop customers from removing shopping carts from the premises, preventing any shopping carts to be taken outside the confines of building exits unless accompanied by an employee of the business, bollards and chains in locations between the business exits and the parking area which effectively prevent transporting shopping carts into the parking area or off the premises, requiring security deposits by customers for cart use, or rental or sale of carts to customers.

D.    Daily Cart Confinement. All shopping carts located on the premises of the retail establishment (other than an establishment open for business 24 hours per day) shall be collected at the end of each business day by employees of the retail establishment and shall be collectively confined in a secure manner at the cart containment area on the premises as designated in the cart containment plan until the commencement of the next business day. All shopping carts located on the premises of any retail establishment open for business 24 hours per day, other than carts then currently in use by a customer or patron, shall be collected by employees of the retail establishment and returned to the cart confinement area on the premises as designated in the cart containment plan at least once per calendar day between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 12:00 midnight on each day the retail establishment is open for business. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to any shopping carts located within an enclosed building.

E.     Employee Training. The owner of the retail establishment shall implement and maintain a periodic training program for its new and existing employees designed to educate such employees concerning the requirements of the cart containment plan and the provisions of state law prohibiting the unauthorized removal of shopping carts from the premises of the retail establishment. The cart containment program shall expressly describe the employee training program.

F.     Collaboration With Other Businesses. Two or more retail establishments located within the same shopping or retail center or sharing a common parking area may collaborate and submit a single cart containment plan.

G.    Exemptions. The requirements of this section shall not apply to any retail establishment which provides a total of less than 10 shopping carts for use by customers of such business, or which retail establishment complies with the requirements of Section 5.80.040 of this chapter. (3759-1/07)

 

5.80.040 Cart Retrieval Plan
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, every owner who provides shopping carts to customers to use on the premises of any retail establishment shall develop, implement and comply with the provisions of a written plan approved by the City to provide for the retrieval of lost, stolen or abandoned shopping carts which have been removed from the premises of the retail establishment (the “cart retrieval plan”). The cart retrieval plan, at a minimum shall include the following elements:

A.    Signs Affixed to Carts. Every shopping cart made available for use by customers shall have a sign permanently affixed to it that identifies the owner of the cart or the retailer or both; notifies the public of the procedure to be utilized for authorized removal of the cart from the premises; notifies the public that the unauthorized removal of the cart from the premises of the business, or the unauthorized possession of the cart, is a violation of state law, and lists a valid telephone number or address for returning the cart removed from the premises to the owner or retailer.

B.     Retrieval Personnel. The owner shall provide personnel for purposes of the retrieval of lost, stolen or abandoned shopping carts. Such personnel may be either employees of the business or one or more independent contractors hired by the owner to provide shopping cart retrieval services, or a combination of both. The cart retrieval plan shall either:

1.     Identify the number of employees who will be assigned such cart retrieval duties, the number of total hours per week that each assigned employee will perform such services (in addition to any on-premises retrieval duties to which such employee may be assigned) and the training each of such personnel has received or will receive concerning the retrieval of lost, stolen or abandoned shopping carts; or

2.     Include a copy of each contract with a cart retrieval service (other than confidential financial information which may be redacted from the contract).

For purposes of this section, those persons identified in the cart retrieval plan as providing cart retrieval services, whether employees of the business or independent contract services, shall be referred to in this section as “retrieval personnel.” The owner shall provide written authorization to all retrieval personnel which authorization shall be carried by each such person while performing cart retrieval services on behalf of the owner and shall be provided to any enforcement personnel upon request. Each vehicle used by retrieval personnel shall bear conspicuous signs on the vehicle identifying either the name of the retail establishment for which such retrieval service is being performed or, if applicable, the name of the cart retrieval service with which the retail establishment has contracted for such services.

C.     Prompt Retrieval of Carts. The owner shall provide retrieval personnel in sufficient number to ensure that all public streets within a minimum one mile radius of the premises of the retail establishment are patrolled not less often than every 48 hours, and all bus stops within a minimum one mile radius of the retail establishment are patrolled not less often than every 24 hours, and each lost, stolen or abandoned shopping cart owned or provided by the retail establishment that is found as a result of such patrols is immediately retrieved and removed from any public or private property upon which the cart is found. The cart retrieval plan shall identify the streets and bus stops which will be patrolled as required by this subsection; the manner, frequency and times of such patrols; and the procedures to be employed by the retail establishment to identify and retrieve any lost, stolen or abandoned shopping carts. The cart retrieval plan shall identify the number of trucks, hours of operation of the retrieval personnel, and such other information as reasonably required by the City to ensure that the owner is devoting sufficient resources to cart retrieval operations to comply with the provisions of this section and the approved cart retrieval plan.

D.    Exemptions. The requirements of this section shall not apply to any retail establishment which provides a total of less than 10 shopping carts for use by customers of such business, or which retail establishment complies with the requirements of Section 5.80.030 of this chapter. (3759-1/07)

 

5.80.050 Plan Submission and Approval
A.    New or Relocated Retail Establishments. Unless otherwise expressly exempt hereunder, each new retail establishment, and any existing retail establishment relocating to a different location within the City, shall submit a proposed plan complying with the requirements of either Section 5.80.030 or Section 5.80.040 of this chapter to the Director of Planning, and obtain approval thereof by the City, prior to providing any shopping carts to customers of the retail establishment. Each proposed plan shall be accompanied by a processing fee in an amount as set by resolution of the City Council. No proposed plan shall be accepted for filing and processing by the Director of Planning unless accompanied by the processing fee established by the City Council.

B.     Existing Retail Establishments. Unless otherwise expressly exempt hereunder, each existing retail establishment shall submit a proposed plan complying with the requirements of Section 5.80.030 or Section 5.80.040 of this chapter to the Director of Planning within 120 calendar days following the date of adoption of this chapter. No such retail establishment existing on the date this chapter is adopted shall provide or continue to provide shopping carts for the use of its customers after the 180th calendar day following the date of adoption of this chapter without a plan approved by the City as conforming to the requirements of either Section 5.80.030 or Section 5.80.040 of this chapter; provided, however, such date shall be extended for the period, if any, during which an appeal of the denial of such plan is pending pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. Each proposed plan shall be accompanied by a processing fee in an amount as set by resolution of the City Council. No proposed plan shall be accepted for filing and processing by the Director of Planning unless accompanied by the processing fee as established by the City Council.

C.     Plan Review and Approval. Upon the filing of any proposed plan pursuant to either Section 5.80.030 or Section 5.80.040 of this chapter (collectively referred to herein as the “plan”), and receipt of the required processing fee, the Director of Planning or his or her designee shall review said proposed plan and either approve or deny approval of said proposed plan within 30 calendar days following the receipt thereof by the Director of Planning. If the proposed plan complies with each of the applicable requirements of this chapter, the Director of Planning shall approve the plan, otherwise the proposed plan shall be denied. The decision of the Director of Planning shall be made in writing and notice thereof shall be transmitted to the owner of the retail establishment by the United States Postal Service, first-class mail, postage prepaid, or by personal delivery or fax transmission. The notice of decision of the Director of Planning shall be deemed given to the owner on the date of personal delivery or on the date of the fax transmission to the owner; notices given by the United States Postal Service, first-class mail, postage prepaid, shall be deemed given to the owner on the third day following the date of deposit in the course of transmission with the United States Postal Service, first-class mail, postage prepaid. If the proposed plan is denied, the notice of decision given to the owner shall state the grounds upon which the proposed plan was denied. A decision of the Director of Planning may be appealed by the owner in the time and manner provided in Section 5.80.060.

D.    Amendments by Owner. The owner of any retail establishment which has an approved plan conforming to the requirements of this chapter may, at any time, submit a proposed amendment to the approved plan which amendment shall be processed in accordance with the procedure provided for a proposed plan as set forth in subsection C of this section. Each proposed amendment shall be accompanied by a processing fee in an amount as set by resolution of the City Council. No proposed amendment shall be accepted for filing and processing by the Director of Planning unless accompanied by the processing fee as established by the City Council.

E.     Revocation or Amendment by City.

1.     Grounds. An approved plan may be revoked by the City upon any of the following grounds:

a.     The owner of any retail establishment is operating, or is permitting operation of, the retail establishment in violation of one or more of the provisions of said approved plan and has failed to correct said violation(s) for a period of at least 15 calendar days following the date of receipt of written notice of such violation(s) from the City; or

b.     The owner of any retail establishment with an approved plan is operating, or is permitting the operation of, the retail establishment in violation of one or more of the requirements of this chapter and has failed to correct said violation(s) for a period of at least 15 calendar days following the date of receipt of written notice of such violation(s) from the City; or

c.     The cart containment plan, as approved, is inadequate to reasonably prevent the removal of shopping carts from the premises of the retail establishment; or

d.     The cart retrieval plan, as approved, is inadequate to ensure the prompt retrieval of lost, stolen or abandoned shopping carts removed from the retail establishment.

2.     Order to Show Cause. If at any time following the approval of a plan, the Director of Planning obtains information or evidence that any of the grounds set forth in subsection (E)(1) of this section may exist, the Director of Planning shall issue a written order to show cause as to why the approved plan should not be revoked and schedule a hearing thereon which hearing shall not be less than 15 calendar days nor more than 30 calendar days following the date such order to show cause is given to the owner of the retail establishment. The order shall state the grounds upon which it is proposed to revoke the approved plan and shall include the information and evidence, or a summary thereof, upon which such order was issued.

3.     Notice of Hearing. Notice of the hearing on any order to show cause issued pursuant to this section shall be given in the time and manner provided in subsection C of this section.

4.     Conduct of Hearing. The hearing shall be conducted informally and the legal rules of evidence shall not be applicable. The owner and the City shall each have the opportunity to present evidence and witnesses. The parties may each be represented by legal counsel or other representatives of their choice. The City shall bear the burden of proof to establish, by a preponderance of the evidence, that grounds exist to revoke the plan. The Director of Planning, at his or her discretion, and as an alternative to revocation, may consider amendment of the plan if the grounds for the order to show cause are solely the inadequacy of the approved plan.

5.     Decision of Director of Planning. Within 15 calendar days following conclusion of the hearing, the Director of Planning shall render his or her decision in writing either dismissing the proceedings or revoking or amending the plan. If the plan is revoked or amended, the decision shall specify the findings of fact and the reasons for such action. If the plan is amended, the decision shall also specify the amendment(s) to the plan.

6.     Notice of Decision. Notice of the decision of the Director of Planning shall be given in the time and manner specified in subsection C of this section.

7.     Appeal of Decision. The decision of the Director of Planning shall be subject to appeal by the owner within the time and manner specified in Section 5.80.060. In the absence of a timely appeal, the decision of the Director of Planning shall be final and conclusive.

8.     Use of Shopping Carts Following Revocation Prohibited. No owner of any retail establishment which is subject to the requirements of this chapter shall provide or make available shopping carts for the use of customers following the date any decision revoking a plan required and approved pursuant to this chapter becomes final unless and until a new proposed plan is approved by the City for such retail establishment. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, an owner of a retail establishment shall not be eligible to submit a new proposed plan to the City for processing for a minimum of 180 days following the date any decision revoking the prior plan for such retail establishment becomes final. Any proposed plan submitted to the City for such retail establishment during said 180-day period shall be returned to the owner of the retail establishment as untimely. (3759-1/07)

 

5.80.060 Appeals
A.    Appeal of Decision. Any owner aggrieved by any adverse decision of the Director of Planning pursuant to this chapter may appeal such decision to the City Planning Commission within 10 calendar days following the date of giving of notice of such decision. The notice of appeal shall be in the form provided by Huntington Beach Subdivision and Zoning Ordinance Section 248.20(A) and (B), as the same now reads or may be hereafter amended, and shall be accompanied by the fee fixed by resolution of the City Council. The director shall schedule the appeal for consideration by the Planning Commission within 30 calendar days and shall give the appellant 10 calendar days notice of the time and place of the hearing. The hearing shall be conducted in the manner provided by Huntington Beach Subdivision and Zoning Ordinance Section 248.20(D), as the same now reads or may be hereafter amended.

B.     Decision by Planning Commission. The Planning Commission shall render a decision on the appeal in conformance with Huntington Beach Subdivision and Zoning Ordinance Section 248.20(E) within 30 calendar days following the conclusion of said hearing. The Planning Commission’s decision shall be final and conclusive on the date said decision is deemed given to the appellant as provided in subsection C of this section.

C.     Notice of Decision. The notice of decision of the Planning Commission shall be deemed given on the date of personal delivery or on the date of the fax transmission to the appellant; notices given by the United States Postal Service, first-class mail, postage prepaid, shall be deemed given to the appellant on the third day following the date of deposit in the course of transmission with the United States Postal Service. (3759-1/07)

 

5.80.070 Unauthorized Removal or Possession of a Shopping Cart
It is unlawful for any person to do any of the following, if a shopping cart has a permanently affixed sign pursuant to Sections 5.80.030(A) and 5.80.040(A):

A.    Remove a shopping cart from the premises or parking area of a business establishment.

B.     Leave or abandon a shopping cart at a location other than the premises or parking area of the retail establishment.

C.     Alter, convert, or tamper with a shopping cart, or to remove any part or portion thereof or to remove, obliterate or alter serial numbers on a cart.

D.    Be in possession of any shopping cart while that cart is not located on the premises or parking lot of a business establishment. (3759-1/07)

 

5.80.080 Unlawful Acts
A.    Except as otherwise expressly provided in this chapter, it shall be unlawful for the owner of any retail establishment to provide or offer, or permit to be provided or offered, any shopping carts to customers of said retail establishment without an approved cart containment plan or cart retrieval plan as required by either Section 5.80.030 or Section 5.80.040 of this chapter; provided, however, this prohibition shall not apply to any retail establishment, or the owner thereof, which provides a total of less than 10 shopping carts for the use of customers of said retail establishment.

B.     It shall be unlawful for the owner of any retail establishment to provide or offer, or permit to be provided or offered, to customers of said retail establishment any shopping cart which does not have a sign permanently affixed thereto containing all of the information specified in Section 22435.1 of the Business and Professions Code of the State of California. (3759-1/07)

 

Chapter 5.90 FIREWORKS
5.90.010 Definitions
The following words and phrases, as used in this Chapter, are defined as follows:

“City Clerk” means the City Clerk or his or her designee.

“City Manager” means the City Manager or his or her designee.

“Dangerous Fireworks” means “Dangerous Fireworks” as defined in Health and Safety Code Sections 12505 and 12561 and the relevant Sections of Title 19, Code of Regulations, Division 1, Chapter 6 as may be amended.

“Fireworks Stand” means any building, counter, or other structure of a temporary nature used in the sale, offering for sale or display for sale of Safe and Sane Fireworks.

“Fireworks Wholesaler” means any person, other than an importer, exporter or manufacturer selling directly to wholesalers, who sells fireworks to a retailer or any other person for resale.

“Permit” means a certificate issued by the City Manager that allows a Qualified Organization chosen by way of a lottery to sell Safe and Sane Fireworks for the dates and times listed on the Permit. Issuance of a Permit does not confer to Permittee ANY PROPERTY RIGHT and the City may at its sole discretion, without notice or opportunity for hearing, revoke the Permit.

“Permit Application” means a form provided by the City used to determine eligibility to participate in the Safe and Sane Fireworks lottery.

“Permittee” means a Qualified Organization that has received a Permit to sell Safe and Sane Fireworks.

“Public Display of Fireworks” means any event where the public is admitted or allowed to view the display or discharge of Safe and Sane Fireworks including private, theatrical or civic performances.

“Qualified Organization” means any nonprofit including but not limited to 501(c) (3) or other charity as defined by Federal or State law, or a group which is an integral part of or recognized by a nonprofit or charity and in existence for at least one year prior to submitting a Permit Application or an elementary, junior high and/or high school and/or school district and recognized affiliates that serves, in whole or in part, the residents of the City or public and/or private community college, college and/or university which is located within the boundaries of the City.

An organization either administratively or criminally guilty of violating any local, State or Federal law or that had a Permit revoked within 24 calendar months prior to the organization’s submittal of a Permit Application shall not be a Qualified Organization.

“Safe and Sane Fireworks” means Safe and Sane Fireworks as defined in Health and Safety Code Sections 12529 and 12562 and Title 19, Code of Regulations, Division 1, Chapter 6 as may be amended. (4045-3/15)

 

5.90.020 Administrative Regulations
Unless specifically provided for in the Huntington Beach Charter or Municipal Code, the City Manager may adopt reasonable administrative regulations to further define processes and administration of this Chapter. (4045-3/15)

 

5.90.030 General Prohibition of Possession, Sale or Use of Fireworks
Except as provided in this Chapter, no person shall possess, sell, use, display, or discharge any fireworks, including, but not limited to, any Dangerous Fireworks, altered Safe and Sane Fireworks, or other combustible device or explosive substance or any kind of fireworks by another name. (4045-3/15)

 

5.90.040 Safe and Sane Fireworks
It shall be unlawful to possess, sell, display or discharge within the City those fireworks that are defined and classified as Safe and Sane Fireworks except as provided in this Chapter. (4045-3/15)

 

5.90.050 Exception—Public Displays and Theatrical Performances
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Chapter, the Fire Chief or his or her designee may at his or her sole discretion grant permits for public displays or theatrical performances of fireworks. (4045-3/15)

 

5.90.060 Safe and Sane Fireworks Sales—Permits Required
It shall be unlawful to sell Safe and Sane Fireworks within the City without having first applied for and received a Permit. (4045-3/15)

 

5.90.070 Sale of Safe and Sane Fireworks—Application Process
Each year, the City Manager may issue Permits for the sale of Safe and Sane Fireworks to Qualified Organizations by means of a lottery system. The number of Permits considered for the lottery shall be determined by City Council by Resolution. If a question arises as to whether a nonprofit, charity or group is a Qualified Organization as defined in this Chapter, the City Council Liaisons to the 4th of July Board will make the determination at their sole discretion.

Prior to the lottery, any Qualified Organization that wishes to participate in selling Safe and Sane Fireworks must complete a Permit Application and return it to the City Clerk prior to the dates and times described by Resolution. No Qualified Organization shall be permitted more than one location to sell Safe and Sane Fireworks. If more than one Permit Application is submitted, the City may disregard one, or all, of the Permit Applications at its sole discretion.

Each of the four Huntington Beach public high schools shall, upon submittal of an application, be awarded one Permit. Private Huntington Beach high schools may each enter one application and a lottery drawing will be held among the private high school Applicants for a fifth high school Permit. Each high school which receives a Permit will hold its own lottery between its student clubs and organizations and dedicate the stand to not more than two groups. If no private high school submits an application, then the four public high schools will be entered into a lottery for the fifth high school Permit.

In addition to information required in the Permit Application, the Qualified Organization shall provide the following:

A.    A written and signed statement, that the Qualified Organization, prior to receipt of a Permit, will provide the City a certificate evidencing policies of insurance as required by the City pursuant to its administrative regulations.

B.     Proof that the Qualified Organization meets the requirements of this Chapter.

C.     The Permit Application shall be signed by an authorized officer or director of the Qualified Organization who shall attest to the veracity of all statements in the Permit Application.

D.    At least one or more representatives of a Permittee shall attend a Fireworks Stand safety seminar approved by the City. The failure of a Permittee to attend the safety seminar may result in the revocation of its Permit to sell Safe and Sane Fireworks.

The final Permit Applications with supporting documentation shall be filed with the City Clerk as set forth by Resolution. In the event the Qualified Organization is unable to provide the information required on the Permit Application and any supplemental information required by the City Clerk, prior to submittal deadline, the Qualified Organization will not be permitted to participate in the lottery. The City Clerk may request information clarifying or explaining the Qualified Organization’s Permit Application. (4045-3/15, 4077-3/16)

 

5.90.080 Safe and Sane Fireworks—Operation of Fireworks Stand
A.    No person shall knowingly sell fireworks to any person under the age of 18 years old.

B.     It shall be illegal to sell fireworks except between noon and 10:00 p.m. on July 1st, 2nd and 3rd and between 10:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. on July 4th.

C.     No person under the age of 18 years old shall sell or participate in the sale of Safe and Sane Fireworks.

D.    No person shall be paid any consideration by the Permittee or any Fireworks Wholesaler of Safe and Sane Fireworks for selling or otherwise participating in the sale of Safe and Sane Fireworks. This shall not apply to licensed security personnel during sale or non-sale hours and to the party authorizing the location of the Fireworks Stand on its property. The Fire Chief or his or her designee may revoke the fireworks storage permit and/or local business permit of any Fireworks Wholesaler violating the terms of this section.

 

E.     Safe and Sane Fireworks must remain at the location listed on the Permit unless written approval to relocate is obtained from the Fire Chief or designee.

Unsold Safe and Sane Fireworks may be transported back to the Fireworks Wholesaler, outside of the City, in compliance with Department of Transportation regulations for transporting fireworks after 9:00 p.m. on July 4th. (4045-3/15, 4077-3/16)

 

5.90.090 Safe and Sane Fireworks—Permits
Permittees shall apply for and obtain all City permits including but not limited to temporary event, electrical, and fire permits. (4045-3/15)

 

5.90.100 Safe and Sane Fireworks—Temporary Fireworks Stand
A.    Retail sales of Safe and Sane Fireworks are only permitted in Fireworks Stands; retail sales from any other building or structure is prohibited. Fireworks Stands must comply with NFPA 1124 Code for the Manufacture, Transportation, Storage, and Retail Sales of Fireworks and Pyrotechnic Articles, current edition of the California Fire Code, the California Code of Regulations, Title 19, Division 1, Chapter 10.

B.     The Fire Chief or his or her designee may create additional rules and regulations for the operation of Fireworks Stands. A copy of any such rules and regulations shall be posted in a prominent place in each Fireworks Stand. Failure to comply with the rules and regulations shall be grounds for the immediate revocation of any Permit granted under this Chapter. (4045-3/15)

 

5.90.110 Safe and Sane Fireworks—Revocation of Permit
The Fire Chief or his or her designee may revoke, immediately and without notice or hearing, the Permit of any Permittee who violates Federal, State or City laws. Any Permittee whose Permit has been revoked shall be ineligible to participate in the lottery for two years from the date of revocation. (4045-3/15)

 

5.90.120 Safe and Sane Fireworks—Limitation on Places and Hours of Discharge
A.    It shall be unlawful for any person to ignite, discharge, project or otherwise use any Safe and Sane Fireworks, or allow the ignition, discharge or projection thereof on any beach, wetland, public park or any area on the ocean side of Pacific Coast Highway.

B.     Subject to the exception noted above, it shall be unlawful for any person to ignite, discharge, project or otherwise use any Safe and Sane Fireworks, or allow the ignition, discharge or projection thereof, except on July 4th of each year between the hours of noon and 10:00 p.m.

C.     It shall be unlawful for any person to ignite, discharge, project or otherwise use any Safe and Sane Fireworks, or allow the ignition, discharge or projection thereof, upon or over or onto the property of another without his or her consent or to ignite, discharge, project or otherwise use any Safe and Sane Fireworks within 10 feet of any residence, dwelling or other structure, or oil well.

D.    It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to ignite, discharge, permit or otherwise use any fireworks, including Safe and Sane Fireworks, within the following areas of the City:

1.     Any public property, including, but not limited to public streets, highways, sidewalks, alleys, parks or other publicly owned property, buildings or facilities; except for residential sidewalks, alleys and streets;

 

2.     Any property within a commercial district of the City as defined by the Huntington Beach Zoning and Subdivision Code, except for any nonconforming residential use within such district used for residential purposes as of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this Chapter;

3.     Any property within an industrial/manufacturing district of the City as defined by the Huntington Beach Zoning and Subdivision Code, except for any nonconforming residential use within such district used for residential purposes as of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section.

E.     Fireworks shall not be ignited, discharged, projected or otherwise used within 300 feet of a Fireworks Stand.

F.     It is unlawful for any person to store, sell or discharge any type of fireworks in or within 100 feet of a location where gasoline or any other flammable liquid is stored or dispensed. (4045-3/15)

 

5.90.130 Seizure of Fireworks
The Fire Chief or his or her designee may seize, take, remove or cause to be removed, at the expense of the Permittee, Fireworks Wholesaler, or any person, whichever is applicable, all stock of fireworks offered or exposed for sale, stored or held in violation of this Chapter. (4045-3/15)

 

5.90.140 Fireworks Wholesaler Public Education Plan
Each Fireworks Wholesaler who is supplying a Permittee Safe and Sane Fireworks shall annually submit a public education plan to the Fire Department no later than 5:00 p.m. on June 1st of each year. The components of the public education plan shall be determined by the Fire Chief or his or her designee each year. (4045-3/15)

 

5.90.150 Miscellaneous
A.    This Chapter is not the exclusive regulation for fireworks within the City of Huntington Beach and does not supersede existing Federal, State or City statutes, regulations and ordinances.

B.     If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this Chapter is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by the decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this Chapter. The City Council hereby declares that it would have passed this Chapter and each section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases be declared invalid or unconstitutional. (4045-3/15)

 

Chapter 5.100 SIDEWALK VENDING
5.100.010 Purpose
The purpose of this Chapter is to establish a Sidewalk Vendor Permitting and Regulatory Program. The provisions of this Chapter allow the City to encourage small business activities by removing total prohibitions on Sidewalk Vending and providing regulation and enforcement of unpermitted Sidewalk Vending Activities to protect the public’s health, safety and welfare.

A.    The City Council hereby finds that, to promote the health, safety and welfare, restrictions on sidewalk vending are necessary in part to:

1.     Ensure no interference with the performance of public safety officers including, police, firefighter, lifeguard, security and emergency medical personnel services.

2.     Ensure no interference with pedestrian or vehicular traffic including ingress into, or egress from, any residence, public building, or place of business, or from the street to the sidewalk, by persons exiting or entering parked or standing vehicles.

3.     Ensure no interference with barriers (bollards, vehicles, cement or water) designed to stop vehicles and prevent injury to people.

4.     Provide reasonable access for Sidewalk Vending Activities in portions of the City while preserving the use and maintenance of sidewalks, Pathways, poles, posts, traffic signs or signals, hydrants, restrooms, trash receptacles, firefighting apparatus, mailboxes, public benches and/or planters, as well as access to locations used for public transportation services.

5.     Reduce exposure to the City for personal injury or property damage claims and litigation.

6.     Ensure the safe sale of Food and Merchandise in the public right-of-way, by providing the public a simple way to ensure Sidewalk Vendors prepare Food safely and according to Orange County Department of Public Health requirements.

7.     Prevent unsanitary conditions and ensure trash and debris in the areas vending is taking place are removed by Sidewalk Vendors.

8.     Ensure that visibility, sight lines, and accessibility for vehicular and pedestrian traffic on sidewalks and other rights of way are protected while accommodating Sidewalk Vendor equipment.

9.     Protect the flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic including ingress into, or egress from, any residence, public building, or place of business, or from the street to the sidewalk, by persons exiting or entering parked or standing vehicles.

10.   Ensure reasonable access for the use and maintenance of sidewalks, Pathways, poles, posts, traffic signs or signals, hydrants, restrooms, trash receptacles, firefighting apparatus, mailboxes, public benches and/or planters, as well as access to locations used for public transportation services.

11.   Mitigate the impacts of Sidewalk Vending Activity and protect the unique characteristics of the City including to maximize public access to and along the coast.

12.   Prevent people from “camping,” thus creating unsanitary conditions.

B.     The City Council hereby finds that the unique characteristics of the City require certain restrictions on Sidewalk Vending Activities as follows:

1.     The City Council finds that the existence in the City of Sidewalk Vendors seek and do draw patrons to their Food and Merchandise. This can create serious safety problems by impacting the ability of pedestrians to move safely on sidewalks and through cross walks and impeding the response time of safety personnel, particularly in Downtown Huntington Beach, at the Beach, at City Parks and in residential areas. Sidewalk Vendors can also impact access to and egress from businesses. This Chapter imposes reasonable time, place, and manner restrictions on Sidewalk Vendors to the extent necessary to ensure the safety of Sidewalk Vendors, their patrons, the general public and to prevent unreasonable interference with residents’ enjoyment of peace and quiet in the City.

2.     The Civic Center contains the City’s emergency operation center, the headquarters for the Fire Department, and other critical infrastructure. Restrictions on Sidewalk Vending Activity are necessary to ensure that fire equipment is easily accessible and critical infrastructure is maintained and accessible at all times.

3.     City parks provide passive and active recreational opportunities, and restrictions on Sidewalk Vending Activity are necessary to protect the natural resources, recreational and sport opportunities, as well as scenic and natural character of these parks.

4.     The City seeks to preserve the peace and quiet of the Residential Zones of the City, by prohibiting commercial activities such as Sidewalk Vendors.

5.     Many of the Sidewalks and Pathways in the City are under eight feet wide or less, and Sidewalk Vending Activity in these areas would unreasonably interfere with the flow of pedestrians and disrupt access for persons with disabilities. (4179-6/19)

 

5.100.020 Definitions
A.    Whenever any words or phrases used herein are not defined, but are defined in the California Vehicle Code, such definitions shall apply, including for the definitions of Business District, Highway, Road, Sidewalk, and Street. If a term or phrase is not defined in this part, or elsewhere in this Code, the most common dictionary definition is presumed to be correct.

B.     “Beach” means that strip of land owned and/or operated by the City of Huntington Beach, south of Warner Avenue, lying between Pacific Coast Highway and the mean high tide line of the Pacific Ocean. “Beach” also includes the Adjacent Beach Area as defined at Section 13.08.005.

C.     “Beach Parking Lot” means the roads, driveways or parking area to service the Beach, the Pier and Pier Plaza, excluding those areas located on a street or highway.

D.    “Beach Service Road” means the paved roadway on the Beach that extends from Beach Boulevard to Seapoint Avenue running parallel to Pacific Coast Highway nearest to the shoreline of the Pacific Ocean.

E.     “Cart” means a push cart, stand, display, pedal-driven cart, wagon, showcase, rack, or other non-motorized conveyance used for Sidewalk Vendor Activity.

F.     “Certified Farmers’ Market” means a location operated in accordance with Chapter 10.5 (commencing with Section 47000) of Division 17 of the Food and Agricultural Code and any regulations adopted pursuant to that Chapter, or any successor Chapter.

G.    “City Building” means any building and the abutting parking lot(s) which is owned or occupied by the City of Huntington Beach or any of its Departments and which is used for public purposes.

H.    “City Property” means all property owned or controlled by the City, including, but not limited to, buildings, libraries, alleys, beaches, boardwalks, parks, pathways, streets, parking lots, sidewalks, and walking trails.

I.      “Civic Center” means the area in the City of Huntington Beach, County of Orange bounded by Lake Street on the east, Yorktown Avenue to the north, Main Street on the west, Utica Avenue on the south, and Park Street on the east and south between Utica Avenue and Lake Street.

J.      “Downtown Huntington Beach” means Districts 1, 2, and 3 of the Huntington Beach Downtown Specific Plan, which are depicted below:





 



 

K.    “Fire Station” means any facility where fire engines and other equipment of the City Fire Department are housed.

L.     “Food” means any item provided in Health and Safety Code Section 113781, or any successor section.

M.    “Lifeguard Facilities” means any and all lifeguard facilities located at the Beach.

N.    “Marijuana” means both medical marijuana and non-medical marijuana.

O.    “Merchandise” means any tangible personal property that can be sold and immediately obtained from a Sidewalk Vendor, excluding Food. Items for rent shall not be considered Merchandise. Merchandise excludes any Service.

P.     “Off-Street City Pay Parking Lots” means any leased parking lot, structure, facility or area located outside of the public right-of-way that the City owns or operates pursuant to Chapter 10.50 for paid parking of vehicles, regardless of the method of payment, including but not limited to parking attendants, meters, or otherwise.

Q.    “Park” means each and every park recreation center, lake, pond or other body of water, riding and hiking trail, parking lot and every other recreation facility owned, managed and/or controlled by the City and under the jurisdiction of the Director of Community Services. There are two types of Parks:

1.     “Active Parks” contain one or more sporting fields or actively encourage physical activity.

2.     “Passive Parks” are typically less developed than an active park, but may contain features such as walking tracks, gardens, seating, barbecues, and picnic areas. They do not usually contain sports infrastructure or encourage strenuous physical activity, although they may contain playground equipment.

R.     “Parkway(s)” means that portion of a public street which is not improved for actual street, curb, gutter, or sidewalk use, and which is available for planting, landscaping, and maintaining street trees.

S.     “Pathway” means a paved path or walkway owned by the City or other public entity that is specifically designed for pedestrian travel, other than a sidewalk.

T.     “Person” means and includes all domestic and foreign corporations, associations, syndicates, joint stock corporations, partnerships of every kind, clubs, Massachusetts Trust, business or common law trusts, societies, and individuals transacting and carrying on any business in the City.

U.    “Pier” means the appurtenance beginning at the intersection of Pacific Coast Highway and Main Street on the Beach, which is a platform extending into the Pacific Ocean and supported by piles or pillars.

V.    “Pier Plaza” means the developed area immediately north and south to the Pier, and bounded by Pacific Coast Highway and the Beach Parking Lots.

W.    “Police Station” means any facility where police vehicles and other equipment of the City Police Department are housed.

X.    “Residential Zone” means any area zoned or used exclusively as residential in Huntington Beach.

Y.    “Roaming Sidewalk Vendor” means a Sidewalk Vendor who moves from place-to-place and stops only to complete a transaction.

Z.     “Service” is any form of labor that does not require the transfer of tangible personal property.

AA.  “Sidewalk” means that portion of a highway, other than the roadway, set apart by curbs, barriers, markings or other delineation specifically designed for pedestrian travel and that is owned by the City or other public entity, excluding any Parkway.

BB.  “Sidewalk Vendor” or “Vendor” means a person(s) who sells Food or Merchandise from a Cart or from one’s person, upon a Sidewalk, Pathway or Park.

CC.  “Sidewalk Vendor Activities” or “Sidewalk Vending Activity” means actions that qualify a person as a Sidewalk Vendor or actions done in anticipation of becoming a Sidewalk Vendor such as, but not limited to, placement, or maintenance of any Cart.

DD.  “Special Event” means any event permitted pursuant to Section 13.10.050 of the Municipal Code.

EE.   “Specific Event” means any event permitted pursuant to Chapter 13.54 of the Municipal Code.

FF.   “Swap Meet” means a location operated in accordance with Article 6 (commencing with Section 21660) of Chapter 9 of Division 8 of the Business and Professions Code, and any regulations adopted pursuant to that Chapter, or any successor Chapter. (4179-6/19)

 

5.100.030 Sidewalk Vendor Permit Required
A.    No Person, either for themselves or any other Person, shall engage in any Sidewalk Vendor Activities within the City without first applying for and receiving a Sidewalk Vendor Permit from the Chief Financial Officer.

B.     A written application for a Sidewalk Vendor Permit shall be filed with the Chief Financial Officer on a form provided by the City. Such application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee in such amount as established by Resolution of the City Council. Any such permit shall be required to be renewed annually in conjunction with the Business License and a separate nonrefundable application fee paid yearly for such renewal application. Sidewalk Vendor Permit(s) are non-transferable and any change in ownership or operation of Cart requires a new permit.

C.     The written application shall provide an address where the applicant consents to receive service of process. An acceptable address for this purpose shall include a post office box or private mailbox that complies with paragraph (2) of subdivision (b) of Business & Professions Code Section 17538.5. (4179-6/19)

 

5.100.040 Issuance of Permit
A.    The Chief Financial Officer may issue the Sidewalk Vendor Permit if he or she finds based on all of the relevant information that:

1.     The conduct of the Sidewalk Vendor will not unduly interfere with traffic or pedestrian movement, or interfere with or endanger the public health, safety or general welfare or encourage loitering.

2.     The conduct of the Sidewalk Vendor will not unduly interfere with normal governmental or City operations, threaten to result in damage or detriment to public property, or result in the City incurring costs or expenditures in either money or personnel not reimbursed in advance by the Sidewalk Vendor.

3.     The conduct of such Sidewalk Vending Activity will not constitute a fire hazard.

4.     The Sidewalk Vendor has paid all previous administrative fines, completed all community service, and completed any other alternative disposition associated in any way with a previous violation of this Chapter.

5.     The Sidewalk Vendor has not had a permit revoked within the past 12 months.

 

6.     The Sidewalk Vendor application contains all required information and the Sidewalk Vendor has not made a materially false, misleading or fraudulent statement of fact to the City in the application process.

7.     The Sidewalk Vendor has paid the Business License Tax.

8.     The Sidewalk Vendor’s Cart and proposed Activities conform to the requirements of this Chapter.

9.     The Sidewalk Vendor has provided adequate insurance to protect the City from liability associated with Sidewalk Vendor Activities, as determined by the City Risk Manager, and the City has been named as an additional insured on the Vendor’s insurance policy.

10.   The Sidewalk Vendor has not been convicted of any felony, or conspiracy to commit, or attempt to commit, the same, as defined by Federal or State law.

11.   The Sidewalk Vendor has not been convicted of any misdemeanor, or conspiracy to commit, or attempt to commit, the same, which is sexual in nature or moral turpitude, as defined by State and/or local law.

12.   The Sidewalk Vendor has not had an individual or business permit or license with any agency, board, city, county, territory, or state denied, revoked, restricted, or suspended within the last five years.

13.   The Sidewalk Vendor has not been subject to an injunction for nuisance, as defined by State or local laws, within the last five years. (4179-6/19)

 

5.100.050 Denial of Sidewalk Vendor Permit
A.    If the Chief Financial Officer finds that the requirements set forth in Section 5.100.040 as applicable have not been met, he or she shall deny the application for the Sidewalk Vendor Permit. The Chief Financial Officer, shall provide written notice of such denial specifying the ground or grounds of such denial. Notice of denial of the application for the Permit shall be deemed to have been served upon the date it is personally served on the Sidewalk Vendor or when deposited in the United States mail with postage prepaid and addressed to the Sidewalk Vendor at his or her residence address as set forth in the application for the Permit.

B.     Any Sidewalk Vendor whose application for a Sidewalk Vendor Permit has been denied by the Chief Financial Officer may appeal such denial to the City Manager by filing a written notice of appeal with the Chief Financial Officer within 10 days following the date of service of the decision and payment of the appeal fee prescribed by resolution of the City Council. The date of filing of said notice of appeal shall be the date the Chief Financial Officer receives the notice and appeal fee.

C.     No Person whose permit is finally denied shall be eligible to apply for a new Sidewalk Vendor Permit for a period of one year following such final denial. (4179-6/19)

 

5.100.060 Revocation of Permit
Any Sidewalk Vendor Permit may be revoked by the Chief Financial Officer for good cause shown including but not necessarily limited to any of the following reasons:

A.    Falsification of any information supplied by the Sidewalk Vendor upon which issuance of the Permit was based.

B.     Failure of the permittee, or any employees or subcontractors of the permittee, to comply with the regulations set forth in this Chapter.

C.     Conviction of a violation, or plea of guilty or nolo contendere, by the Sidewalk Vendor or any employee, subcontractor or independent contractor of the permittee, of any Federal or State law, or municipal ordinance while in the course of conducting Sidewalk Vending Activity from a Cart pursuant to the Permit.

D.    Conviction of a violation, or a plea of guilty or nolo contendere, by the Sidewalk Vendor of any applicable provision or requirement of this section.

E.     No Sidewalk Vendor whose permit is revoked shall be eligible to apply for a new permit for a period of one year following such revocation. (4179-6/19)

 

5.100.070 Appeal Process for Revocation of a Permit
Upon receipt of a timely appeal, the City Manager or his or her designated representative, shall hear such appeal within 20 days following the date of such appeal and shall give the Sidewalk Vendor not less than five days advance notice of the date of such hearing. The decision of the City Manager shall be based upon the criteria applicable to the issuance or revocation of such permit. The Sidewalk Vendor shall be notified of the decision of the City Manager by mailed, written notice. The decision of the City Manager shall be final. No revocation of a permit pursuant to this section shall be deemed effective during the pendency of a timely filed appeal until the date of mailing of the City Manager’s decision; provided, however, no permit holder shall operate during any period of time in which the insurance coverage required by this chapter is not in full force and effect. (4179-6/19)

 

5.100.080 Operating Conditions
Every Sidewalk Vendor is subject to the following operating conditions when conducting Sidewalk Vending Activities:

A.    All Food and Merchandise shall be stored either inside or affixed to the Cart or carried by the Sidewalk Vendor. Food and Merchandise shall not be stored, placed, or kept on any public property. If affixed to the Cart, the overall space taken up by the Cart shall not exceed the size requirements provided in this Section.

B.     Sidewalk Vendors may only sell Food and/or Merchandise. Sidewalk Vendors shall not sell or provide Services.

C.     The Business License and Vendor Permit shall be displayed conspicuously at all times on the Cart or the Sidewalk Vendor. If multiple Sidewalk Vendors are staffing a Cart each Person shall obtain and wear his or her Vendor Permit on their Person in a conspicuous manner.

D.    Sidewalk Vendors shall not leave their Cart unattended.

E.     All signage and advertising related in any way to the Sidewalk Vendor shall comply with the City’s sign laws. Sidewalk Vendors shall not use any electrical, flashing, wind powered, or animated sign.

F.     All Sidewalk Vendors shall allow a police officer, firefighter, lifeguard, code enforcement officer, health inspector, or other government official charged with enforcing laws related to Sidewalk Vendor Activities, at any time, to inspect their Carts for compliance with this Chapter.

G.    Carts and any attachments thereto shall not exceed a total height of four feet, a total width of four feet, and a total length of four feet.

H.    No Cart shall contain or use propane, natural gas, batteries, or other explosive or hazardous materials.

I.      Sidewalk Vendors selling Food shall have in their possession at all times they are conducting Sidewalk Vending Activities, all applicable State Food vending licenses.

J.      Sidewalk Vendors that sell Food shall maintain a trash container in or on their Cart and shall not empty their trash into public trashcans. The size of the Sidewalk Vendor’s trash container counts as part of the size limit of a Cart.

K.    Sidewalk Vendors shall not leave any location without first picking up, removing, and disposing of all trash or refuse from their operation. Sidewalk Vendors shall immediately clean up any Food, grease or other fluid or item related to Sidewalk Vending Activities that falls on public property.

L.     Sidewalk Vendors shall maintain a minimum four-foot clear accessible path for pedestrian ingress and egress free from obstructions, including Cart and customer queuing area.

M.    Sidewalk Vendors shall ensure that all required insurance is in effect prior to conducting any Sidewalk Vendor Activities and maintained for the duration of the Permit. (4179-6/19)

 

5.100.090 Prohibited Activities and Locations
A.    Sidewalk Vendors shall comply with all Federal, State and City laws and regulations.

B.     Cart(s) shall not touch, lean against or be affixed at any time to any building or structure including, but not limited to lampposts, parking meters, mailboxes, traffic signals, fire hydrants, benches, bus shelters, newsstands, trashcans or traffic barriers.

C.     Sidewalk Vendors shall not engage in any of the following activities:

1.     Renting Merchandise to customers.

2.     Displaying Merchandise or Food not available for immediate sale.

3.     Selling of alcohol, Marijuana, adult oriented material, tobacco products, products that contain nicotine or any product used to smoke/vape nicotine or Marijuana.

4.     Selling Food or Merchandise to any person fifteen years of age or younger without one or both of their parents or legal guardians present.

5.     Using an open flame on or within any Cart.

6.     Using an electrical outlet or power source that is owned by the City or another person other than the Sidewalk Vendor.

7.     Conducting Sidewalk Vending Activities anywhere in the City between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. daily.

8.     Providing or selling any Service to any Person.

9.     Continuing to offer Food or Merchandise for sale, following, or accompanying any person who has been offered Food or Merchandise after the person has declined the offer to purchase Food or Merchandise.

10.   Knowingly making false statements or misrepresentations during the course of offering Food or Merchandise for sale.

11.   Blocking or impeding the path of the person(s) being offered Food or Merchandise to purchase.

12.   Making any statements, gesture, or other communication which a reasonable person in the situation of the person(s) being offered Food or Merchandise to purchase would perceive to be a threat and which has a reasonable likelihood to produce in the person(s) a fear that the threat will be carried out.

13.   Touching the person(s) being offered Food or Merchandise without that person(s)’ consent.

14.   Advertising any product or service that is not related to the Food or Merchandise being offered for immediate sale.

15.   Placing their Cart outside of any Pathway or sidewalk when engaging in Sidewalk Vending Activities.

D.    Sidewalk Vendors shall not engage in Sidewalk Vending Activities at the following locations:

1.     Any Residential Zone in the City.

2.     The Beach, Beach Parking Lot, Beach Service Road, Lifeguard Facilities, Pier, and Pier Plaza. The City Council finds that the City has permitted restaurant and Merchandise concessions on the Beach. The area adjacent to the Pier and Pier Plaza is highly commercial and crowded with pedestrians. Permitting any additional Sidewalk Vending Activity would result in an undue concentration of commercial activity at this portion of the Beach that would unreasonably interfere with existing business, public use of the Beach, and access to the Coast.

The remainder of the Beach, north-westerly from Pier Plaza to a point which is 6,100 feet north-westerly of Goldenwest Street, and which includes “Dog Beach,” has virtually no commercial activity, except Specific Events and Special Events. Routine commercial activity, including Sidewalk Vendors is prohibited in order to preserve the unusual beauty and view provided on this portion of the Beach.

3.     All Parks in the City, including both Active and Passive parks. The City Council finds that in some cases, it has permitted restaurant concessions, such as at Huntington Beach Central Park – West Side and East Side. Permitting any additional Sidewalk Vending Activity would result in an undue concentration of commercial activity at Central Park that unreasonably interferes with existing business and the use of the Park. City Parks have unique beauty, and provide a reserve for migratory birds and monarch butterflies. In order to preserve the unusual beauty and view provided in these Parks, Sidewalk Vending Activity is prohibited.

Further, neighborhood, Passive and Active Parks allow for child, youth and adult sports, family gathering, picnics and walks. These Parks are a refuge from the commercial activities of ordinary life, and accordingly, Sidewalk Vending Activity is prohibited.

4.     Pacific Coast Highway with the City boundaries.

5.     Downtown Huntington Beach. The City Council finds that the City has permitted restaurant concessions and stationary sidewalk kiosks in Downtown Huntington Beach. Downtown Huntington Beach is a heavily pedestrian-crowded area. Permitting any additional Sidewalk Vending Activity would result in an undue concentration of commercial activity at Downtown Huntington Beach that unreasonably interferes with existing business, pedestrian ingress and egress, the use of the Beach, and access to the Coast. Accordingly, Sidewalk Vending Activity is prohibited in Downtown Huntington Beach.

6.     The Civic Center, City Building, Fire Station, Police Station, Off-Street City Pay Parking Lot, or public property.

7.     Any City Property that does not meet the definition of a sidewalk or pathway including, but not limited to, any alley, beach, pier, square, street, street end, or parking lot.

8.     A permitted Certified Farmers’ Market or Swap Meet during the limited operating hours of that Certified Farmers’ Market or Swap Meet.

9.     An area designated for a Specific Event pursuant to a City issued permit, during the limited duration of the Specific Event.

10.   An area designated for a Special Event pursuant to a City issued permit, during the limited duration of the Special Event.

11.   An area designated for barriers for protection of the public.

12.   A public or private school, a place of worship, or a large or general child day-care facility, or within 200 feet of any of the aforementioned property.

13.   Within 100 feet of:

a.     Another Sidewalk Vendor.

b.     The intersection of a street and a Sidewalk.

c.     Any marina.

d.     The portion of any City facility that is renting Merchandise or selling Food to the public or where the rental Merchandise is stored.

e.     Any police officer, firefighter, lifeguard or emergency medical personnel who are actively performing their duties or providing services to the public.

14.   Within 25 feet of a:

a.     Fire hydrant.

b.     Curb which has been designated as white, yellow, green, blue, or red zone, or a bus zone.

c.     Automated teller machine.

d.     Driveway, alley, or entrance to a parking lot or parking garage.

e.     Entrance or exit to a building, structure or facility.

f.      Trash receptacle, bike rack, bench, bus stop, restroom, or similar public use items. (4179-6/19)

 

5.100.100 Penalties
A.    Violations of this Chapter shall not be prosecuted as infractions or misdemeanors and shall only be subject to Administrative Citation pursuant to Chapter 1.18, except that notwithstanding Section 1.18.070, any violation of this Chapter shall be assessed administrative fines in the following amounts:

1.     An administrative fine not exceeding $100.00 for a first violation.

2.     An administrative fine not exceeding $200.00 for a second violation within one year of the first violation.

3.     An administrative fine not exceeding $500.00 for each additional violation within one year of the first violation.

B.     If a Sidewalk Vendor violates any portion of this Chapter and cannot present the citing officer with proof of a valid permit, the Sidewalk Vendor shall be assessed administrative fines in the following amounts:

1.     An administrative fine not exceeding $250.00 for a first violation.

2.     An administrative fine not exceeding $500.00 for a second violation within one year of the first violation.

3.     An administrative fine not exceeding $1,000.00 for each additional violation within one year of the first violation.

C.     Upon proof of a valid permit issued by the City, the administrative fines set forth in Subsection 5.100.100(B) shall be reduced to the administrative fines set forth in Subsection 5.100.100(A), or any successor sections.

D.    The Chief Financial Officer, or the Chief Financial Officer’s designee, may revoke a permit issued to a Sidewalk Vendor for the term of that permit upon the fourth violation or subsequent violations within one year of the first violation. (4179-6/19)

 

5.100.110 Citation Appeals
A.    Administrative citations may be appealed pursuant to Section 1.18.120, except where the hearing officer is considering an administrative fine, he or she has the power to:

1.     Reduce the fine based upon the person’s ability to pay the fine.

2.     If the Hearing Officer finds the person meets the criteria described in subdivision (a) or (b) of Government Code Section 68632, or any successor section, the Hearing Officer, shall order the City to accept, in full satisfaction, 20% of the administrative fine imposed pursuant to this Chapter.

3.     The Hearing Officer may allow the person to complete community service in lieu of paying the total administrative fine, may waive the administrative fine, or may offer an alternative disposition.

B.     All appeals of administrative citations shall be conducted in accordance with Chapter 1.18 of this Code. (4179-6/19)

 

Chapter 5.110 GROUP HOMES
5.110.010 Definitions
The definitions set forth in Title 20 Chapter 203 of the ZSO Code shall apply to the provisions of this chapter unless otherwise provided for herein. (4213-8/20)

 

5.110.020 Zoning Regulations
In addition to the requirements of this chapter, all group homes subject to this chapter shall comply with the requirements set forth in Title 23 Section 230.28 of the ZSO Code. (4213-8/20)

 

5.110.030 Operator’s Permit Required
It is unlawful for any person to operate, or to permit any person to operate, a group home on any property located within the RL, RM, RMH, RH, RMP, Specific Plan Residential or Specific Plan Mixed Use zone, without a valid permit issued for that group home pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. (4213-8/20)

 

5.110.040 Exceptions
The requirements of this chapter shall not apply to:

A.    A group home that has six or fewer occupants, not counting a house manager, and that is in compliance with the applicable provisions of Title 23 Section 230.28 of this Code;

B.     A State licensed alcoholism or drug abuse recovery or treatment facility; or

C.     A State licensed residential care facility. (4213-8/20)

 

5.110.050 Requirements for Issuance of Operator’s Permit
A.    The owner/operator shall submit an application to the Finance Director that provides the following information:

1.     The name, address, phone number and driver’s license number of the owner/operator;

2.     A LiveScan of the operator and/or house manager;

3.     If the applicant and/or operator is a partnership, corporation, firm or association, then the applicant/operator shall provide the additional names and addresses as follows and such persons shall also sign the application:

a.     Every general partner of the partnership,

b.     Every owner with a controlling interest in the corporation, and

c.     The person designated by the officers of a corporation as set forth in a resolution of the corporation that is to be designated as the permit holder;

4.     The license and permit history of the applicant(s), including whether such applicant(s), in previously operating a similar use in this or another city, county or state under license and/or permit, has had such license and/or permit revoked or suspended, and the reason therefor;

5      The name, address, phone number and driver’s license number of the house manager;

6.     A copy of the group home rules and regulations;

7.     Written intake procedures;

8.     The relapse policy;

9.     An affirmation by the owner/operator that only residents (other than the house manager) who are disabled as defined by State and Federal law shall reside at the group home;

10.   Blank copies of all forms that all residents and potential residents are required to complete; and

11.   A fee for the cost of processing of the application as set by resolution of the City Council.

B.     Requirements for Operation of group Homes.

1.     The group home has a house manager who resides at the group home or any multiple of persons acting as a house manager who are present at the group home on a 24-hour basis and who are responsible for the day-to-day operation of the group home.

2.     All garage and driveway spaces associated with the dwelling unit shall, at all times, be available for the parking of vehicles. Residents and the house manager may each only store or park a single vehicle at the dwelling unit or on any street within 500 feet of the dwelling unit. The vehicle must be operable and currently used as a primary form of transportation for a resident of the group home.

3.     Occupants must not require and operators must not provide “care and supervision” as those terms are defined by Health and Safety Code Section 1503.5 and Section 80001(c)(3) of Title 22, California Code of Regulations.

4.     Integral group home facilities are not permitted. Applicants shall declare, under penalty of perjury, that the group home does not operate as an integral use/facility.

5.     If the group home operator is not the property owner, written approval from the property owner to operate a group home at the property.

6.     At least 48 hours prior to eviction from or involuntary termination of residency in a group home, the operator thereof shall:

a.     Notify the person designated as the occupant’s emergency contact or contact of record that the occupant will no longer be a resident at the home;

b.     Contact the Orange County Health Care Agency OC Links Referral Line or other entity designated by the City to determine the services available to the occupant, including, but not limited to, alcohol and drug inpatient and outpatient treatment;

c.     Notify the City’s Homeless Task Force or its successor panel that an occupant is no longer a resident at the home, determine the services available therefrom; and

d.     Provide the information obtained from paragraphs b and c of this subsection (B)(6) and any other treatment provider or service to the occupant prior to his or her release on a form provided by the City and obtain the occupant’s signed acknowledgement thereon;

e.     Provided, however, that if the occupant’s behavior results in immediate termination of residency pursuant to rules approved by the City as part of the special use permit for that facility, the operator shall comply with paragraphs a though e of this subsection (B)(6) as soon as possible.

7.     Prior to an occupant’s eviction from or involuntary termination of residency in a group home, the operator thereof shall also:

a.     Make available to the occupant transportation to the address listed on the occupant’s driver license, state issued identification card, or the permanent address identified in the occupant’s application or referral to the group home;

b.     Provided, however, that should the occupant decline transportation to his or her permanent address or otherwise has no permanent address, then the operator shall make available to the occupant transportation to another group home or residential care facility that has agreed to accept the occupant.

8.     The group home operator shall maintain records for a period of one year following eviction from or involuntary termination of residency of an occupant that document compliance with subsections (A)(7) and (A)(8) of this section; provided, however, that nothing herein shall require an operator of a group home to violate any provision of State or Federal law regarding confidentiality of health care information. The group home operator may not satisfy the obligations set forth in subsection (A)(8) by providing remuneration to the occupant for the cost of transportation.

9.     All drivers of vehicles picking up or dropping off persons at a group home shall comply with all applicable provisions of this Code and the Vehicle Code, including, but not limited to, those provisions regulating licensure and parking, standing and stopping.

10.   The property must be fully in compliance with all building codes, municipal code and zoning.

11.   In addition to the regulations outlined above, the following shall also apply to sober living homes:

a.     All occupants, other than the house manager, must be actively participating in legitimate recovery programs, including, but not limited to, Alcoholics Anonymous or Narcotics Anonymous and the sober living home must maintain current records of meeting attendance. Under the sober living home’s rules and regulations, refusal to actively participate in such a program shall be cause for eviction.

b.     The sober living home’s rules and regulations must prohibit the use of any alcohol or any non-prescription drugs at the sober living home or by any recovering addict either on or off site. The sober living home must also have a written policy regarding the possession, use and storage of prescription medications. The facility cannot dispense medications but must make them available to the residents. The possession or use of prescription medications is prohibited except for the person to whom they are prescribed, and in the amounts/dosages prescribed. These rules and regulations shall be posted on site in a common area inside the dwelling unit. Any violation of this rule must be cause for eviction under the sober living home’s rules for residency and the violator cannot be re-admitted for at least 90 days. Any second violation of this rule shall result in permanent eviction. Alternatively, the sober living home must have provisions in place to remove the violator from contact with the other residents until the violation is resolved.

c.     The number of occupants subject to the sex offender registration requirements of Penal Code Section 290 does not exceed the limit set forth in Penal Code Section 3003.5 and does not violate the distance provisions set forth in Penal Code Section 3003.

d.     The sober living home shall have a written visitation policy that shall preclude any visitors who are under the influence of any drug or alcohol.

e.     The sober living home shall have a good neighbor policy that shall direct occupants to be considerate of neighbors, including refraining from engaging in excessively loud, profane or obnoxious behavior that would unduly interfere with a neighbor’s use and enjoyment of their dwelling unit. The good neighbor policy shall establish a written protocol for the house manager/operator to follow when a neighbor complaint is received.

f.      The sober living home shall not provide any of the following services as they are defined by Section 10501(a)(6) of Title 9, California Code of Regulations: detoxification; educational counseling; individual or group counseling sessions; and treatment or recovery planning.

C.     An applicant may seek relief from the strict application of this section by submitting an application to the Community Development Director setting forth specific reasons as to why accommodation over and above this section is necessary under State and Federal laws, pursuant to Chapter 17.77 of this Code.

D.    The operator’s permit shall be issued by the Director if the applicant is in compliance, or, where applicable, has agreed to comply, with the requirements of subsections A and B above.

E.     In addition to denying an application for failing to comply, or failing to agree to comply, with subsections A and/or B of this section, an operator’s permit shall also be denied, and if already issued shall be revoked upon a hearing by the Director, under any of the following circumstances:

1.     Any owner/operator or staff person has provided materially false or misleading information on the application or omitted any pertinent information.

2.     Any owner/operator or staff person has an employment history in which he or she was terminated during the past two years because of physical assault, sexual harassment, embezzlement or theft; falsifying a drug test; and selling or furnishing illegal drugs or alcohol.

3.     Any owner/operator or staff person has been convicted of or pleaded nolo contendere, within the last seven to 10 years, to any of the following offenses:

a.     Any sex offense for which the person is required to register as a sex offender under California Penal Code Section 290 (last 10 years);

b.     Arson offenses—Violations of Penal Code Sections 451—455 (last seven years);

c.     Violent felonies, as defined in Penal Code Section 667.5, which involve doing bodily harm to another person (last 10 years); or

d.     The unlawful sale or furnishing of any controlled substances (last seven years).

4.     Any owner/operator or staff person is on parole or formal probation supervision on the date of the submittal of the application or at any time thereafter.

5.     The owner/operator accepts residents, other than a house manager, who are not disabled or disabled as defined by the FHAA and FEHA.

6.     An operator’s permit for a sober living home shall also be denied, and if already issued shall be revoked upon a hearing by the Director, under any of the following additional circumstances:

a.     The owner/operator of a sober living home fails to immediately take measures to remove any resident who uses alcohol or illegally uses prescription or non-prescription drugs, or who is not actively participating in a legitimate recovery program from contact with all other sober residents.

b.     For any other significant and/or repeated violations of this section and/or any other applicable laws and/or regulations. (4213-8/20)

 

5.110.060 Transfer of Operator’s Permit
A.    An operator’s permit shall not be valid for a location other than the property for which it is issued, unless and until the transfer of the permit is approved by the Finance Director pursuant to the requirements of Section 5.110.060.

B.     An operator’s permit may not be transferred to any other person or entity. No operator’s permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall be transferred or assigned or authorize any person or entity other than the person or entity named in the permit to operate the group home named therein. (4213-8/20)

 

5.110.070 Revocation of Operator’s Permit
An operator’s permit may be revoked upon a hearing by the Finance Director pursuant to Section 5.08.300 for failing to comply with the terms of the permit and/or for failing to comply with the applicable provisions of Section 5.110.050. (4213-8/20)

 

5.110.080 Reapplication After Denial or Revocation
A.    An applicant for an operator’s permit whose application for such an operator’s permit has been denied may not apply for such an operator’s permit for a period of six months from the date such notice of denial was issued.

B.     A holder of an operator’s permit that has been cancelled, revoked, or otherwise invalidated may not reapply for an operator’s or a user’s permit for a period of six months from the date that such revocation, cancellation, or invalidation became final. (4213-8/20)

 

5.110.090 Compliance.
A group home that is subject to the provisions of this chapter that is in existence as of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall have 120 days to comply with the provisions of this chapter. (4213-8/20)

 

Chapter 5.120 SHORT-TERM RENTALS
5.120.010 Purpose
The purpose of this chapter is to establish regulations, standards, and a permitting process governing the renting or leasing of privately owned visitor serving residential dwelling units on a short-term basis in order to maintain the long-term rental housing stock in the City; ensure the collection and payment of Transient Occupancy Taxes (“TOT”); safeguard the residents of the City of Huntington Beach by ensuring that short-term rental activities do not threaten the character of residential neighborhoods; and ensuring that such short-term rental activities do not become a nuisance, or threaten the public health, safety, or welfare of neighboring properties. This chapter will establish two zones in the City where short-term rentals are permitted. Zone 1 will consist of all areas of the City excluding Sunset Beach. Zone 2 will consist of Sunset Beach. In Zone 1 and Zone 2, short-term rentals are permitted in owner occupied residential dwelling units as set forth herein. In Zone 2 short-term rentals are permitted for existing owner “unoccupied” residential dwelling units who obtain a permit within six months of the effective date of the resolution establishing the permit fee(s). After six months, no new permits for owner unoccupied residential dwelling units will be issued. (4224, 2/21)

 

5.120.020 Definitions
A.    “Booking Transaction” means any reservation and/or payment service provided by a person or entity who facilitates a short-term rental transaction between a prospective guest and a short-term rental host or operator.

B.     “City” means City of Huntington Beach.

C.     “Director” means the Director of Community Development or a designee.

D     “Guest” means any person or persons renting a short-term rental as a transient occupant.

E.     “Host” means a property owner who is an occupier of the property at the time of, and for the duration of, the short-term rental.

F.     “Hosted Stay” means a short-term rental at a primary residence whereby the host occupies the short-term rental property and remains on-site and resides in a habitable dwelling unit or portion thereof throughout the guest’s stay (except during daytime and/or work hours).

G.    “Hosting Platform” means a person or entity that participates in the short-term rental business in exchange for a fee or other compensation, directly or indirectly through an agent or intermediary, by conducting a booking transaction for a hosted or unhosted short-term rental using any medium of facilitation.

H.    “Local Contact Person” means the operator or host or person designated thereof to respond to and take remedial action regarding short-term rental issues or complaints.

I.      “Platform Agreement” means a signed agreement between a hosting platform and the City, which, among other things, provides that the hosting platform will collect and submit transient occupancy tax and any improvement district assessment established pursuant to California Streets and Highways Code Sections 36500 and 36600 to the City on behalf of short-term rental hosts or operators.

J.      “Primary Residence” means a person’s permanent residence or usual place of return for housing as documented by at least two of the following: driver’s license; voter registration; tax documents showing the residential unit as the person’s residence; or a utility bill.

K.    “Prohibited Buildings List” means a list identifying the address(es) of all buildings whose owner(s), including any applicable homeowners’ association or board of directors, have notified the City, pursuant to City procedures, that short-term rentals are not permitted to operate anywhere in such building, including deed restricted affordable housing units.

L.     “Short-Term Rental (“STR”)” means a residential dwelling unit, or portion thereof, that is offered or provided to a paying guest(s) by a short-term rental host or operator for 30 or fewer consecutive nights. The term “short-term rental” shall not include hotels, motels, inns, or bed and breakfast inns.

M.    “Short-Term Rental Advertisement” means any method of soliciting use of a dwelling unit for short-term rental purposes.

N.    “Short-Term Rental Operator” or “Operator” means property owner of a dwelling unit in Sunset Beach, or portion thereof, who offers or provides that dwelling unit, or portion thereof, for an unhosted short-term rental.

O.    “Short-Term Rental Permit” or “Permit” means a permit, with a permit number, issued by the City to allow hosted or unhosted short-term rentals.

P.     “Short-Term Rental Tenant” means a person who has entered into a short-term rental agreement for a dwelling unit in exchange for short-term occupancy of the dwelling unit.

Q.    “Transient Occupancy Tax” (“TOT”) means local transient occupancy tax as set forth in Chapter 3.28 of the Huntington Beach Municipal Code.

R.     “Unhosted Short-Term Rental” means a short-term rental in Sunset Beach, where there is no host and the operator resides off-site during the guest’s stay.

S.     “Zone 1” means the City of Huntington Beach excluding the property located within the Sunset Beach Specific Plan.

T.     “Zone 2” means property located within the Sunset Beach Specific Plan. (4224, 2/21)

 

5.120.030 Permit Required
A.    No person or entity shall advertise, rent, or operate a short-term rental (STR) in the City unless a permit has been issued by the City pursuant to this chapter. An operator or host of the STR shall apply with the City to obtain a permit and shall be responsible for complying with all requirements of this chapter. Application for a STR permit shall be in a form prescribed by the director and include all information determined by the director to be necessary to evaluate the eligibility of the host or operator, consistent with this chapter.

B.     An application for a STR permit shall be accompanied by a fee established by resolution of the City Council, provided, however, the fee shall be no greater than necessary to defer the cost incurred by the City in administering the provisions of this chapter.

C.     STR hosts or operators shall apply for STR permit pursuant to this chapter. Existing unpermitted STR hosts or operators shall apply for a STR permit within six months after the effective date of resolution adopting the STR permit fee. The host or operator shall provide proof of property ownership and shall be the person that signs the application.

D.    A STR permit is valid for one year from the date of issuance. The STR permit is personal and may not be transferred or assigned and does not run with the land. A STR permit may be renewed annually if STR operator or host: (1) pays the renewal fee; (2) provides information concerning any changes to the previous application for, or renewal of, the STR permit; (3) submits records to demonstrate compliance with this chapter as required by the director. Failure to submit a renewal application to the City at least 30 days prior to the expiration of the STR permit shall render the STR permit and permission to operate an STR null and void.

E.     STR permits issued pursuant to this chapter are subject to the following standard STR permit conditions:

1.     The host or operator shall, by written agreement with the tenant, limit overnight occupancy of the STR to a specific number of occupants, with the number of occupants not to exceed that permitted by the provisions of this section.

2.     The host or operator shall insure that the occupants and/or guests of the STR do not create unreasonable noise or disturbances, engage in disorderly conduct, or violate provisions any Federal, State, or local (including the Huntington Beach Municipal Code) law pertaining to noise, disorderly conduct, the consumption of alcohol, or the use of illegal drugs.

3.     The host or operator shall, upon notification that occupants and/or guests of his or her STR have created unreasonable noise or disturbances, engaged in disorderly conduct or committed violations of any law, including those pertaining to noise, disorderly conduct, the consumption of alcohol or the use of illegal drugs, promptly prevent a recurrence of such conduct by those occupants or guests.

4.     The host or operator of the STR unit shall post a copy of the STR permit and the STR permit conditions in a conspicuous place within the STR.

5.     The host or operator shall provide a guest parking plan to the City for approval prior to issuance of a STR permit.

6.     The maximum number of, guests who may occupy the STR at one time is two persons per bedroom, plus two additional guests (including children). Lofts that meet California Building Code egress requirements are considered a bedroom for the purposes of the occupancy calculation. In no event may the maximum occupancy exceed 10 persons in any STR. Large-scale events (i.e., exceeding maximum allowed occupancy) such as commercial parties, weddings, fundraisers, and conferences, are prohibited.

F.     Eligibility Requirements. In addition to any specific STR permit requirements set forth the by the director, the following requirements must be met at the time of submitting a STR permit application:

1.     The dwelling unit shall not be a deed restricted affordable housing unit, in a special group residence, a single room occupancy (as defined by the City Zoning Code), or included on the prohibited buildings list.

2.     The operator or host shall not be granted a permit for more than one STR within the City of Huntington Beach (including Sunset Beach).

3.     There will only be one STR permit issued per property except in multi-family single lot subdivisions (i.e. condominiums or townhomes) the number of STR permits allowed shall be as follows:

 

 

Number of units per property

Number of STR permits

Up to 3

1

4 or more

3

 

4.     The STR operator shall identify, to the satisfaction of the City, a local contact person, who shall be available 24 hours per day, seven days a week for: (a) responding within one hour to complaints regarding the condition, operation, or conduct of the STR or its occupants; and (b) taking any remedial action necessary to resolve such complaints. In the event the STR is “hosted,” the host shall be the local contact person.

5.     The dwelling unit or property used as a STR shall not be the subject of any active or pending code enforcement actions or violations pursuant to the City’s Municipal Code.

6.     If the dwelling unit or property used as a STR is subject to the rules of a homeowners’ or condominium association, short-term rental activity must comply with those rules and this chapter shall not be inferred to grant any permission that invalidates or supersedes any provisions of those homeowners’ or condominium associations.

7.     The host or operator shall sign an indemnification and hold harmless agreement in a form approved by the City Attorney, agreeing to indemnify, save, protect, hold harmless, and defend the City of Huntington Beach, the City Council of the City of Huntington Beach, individually and collectively, and the City of Huntington Beach representatives, officers, officials, employees, agents, and volunteers from any and all claims, demands, damages, fines, obligations, suits, judgments, penalties, causes of action, losses, liabilities, or costs at any time received, incurred, or accrued as a result of, or arising out of the STR host or operator’s actions or inaction in the operation, occupancy, use, and/or maintenance of the short-term rental.

8.     The STR shall be a legally permitted dwelling unit. Accessory dwelling units or junior accessory dwelling units may be permitted as a STR only if the unit was legally established prior to the effective date of this ordinance and otherwise meets the requirements of this chapter.

G.    The host/operator shall provide proof that the STR is not prohibited by the Homeowners’ Association Conditions Covenants and Restrictions or any other community standards/guidelines, applicable to the proposed STR. (4224, 2/21)

 

5.120.040 STR Regulations
A.    All marketing and advertising of a STR, including any listing on a hosting platform, shall clearly list the City-issued STR permit number.

B.     STR is prohibited in any part of the property not approved and permitted for residential use including, but not limited to, vehicle(s) parked on the property, storage sheds, trailer(s), garage(s), boat(s) or similar watercraft, tree house(s), or any temporary structure(s), including, but not limited to, tent(s).

C.     Unhosted STRs are prohibited in the City of Huntington Beach except in Zone 2. Existing Unhosted STRs in Sunset Beach have six months from effective date of the adoption of a resolution establishing a STR permit fee to obtain a STR permit.

D.    Each STR shall have a notice posted within the unit in a location clearly marked and accessible to the guest (e.g., posted on the refrigerator, included within a binder with additional information on the unit, etc.), containing the following information:

1.     The maximum number of occupants permitted in the unit;

2.     Location of parking spaces;

3.     Trash and recycling pickup information;

4.     Emergency contact information for police, fire, or emergency medical services; and

5.     Evacuation plan for the unit showing emergency exit routes, exits, and fire extinguisher locations.

E.     The name of the local contact and a telephone number at which that person may be reached on a 24-hour basis posted in a place that can be read by a member of the public without entering the STR.

F.     No sign shall be posted on the exterior of the STR to advertise the availability of the unit.

G.    It is unlawful for any STR operator, host, occupant, renter, lessee, person present upon, or person having charge or possession of the STR premises, to make or continue to cause to be made or continued any loud, unnecessary or unusual noise which disturbs the peace and quiet of any neighborhood, or which causes discomfort or annoyance to any reasonable person of normal sensitivities residing in the area, or which violates any provision of Chapter 8.40 (“Noise Control”) of the Huntington Beach Municipal Code.

H.    The minimum age of STR tenants shall be 25 years old.

I.      Following compliance with California Streets and Highways Code Section 36600 et seq., STRs will become part of the Huntington Beach Tourism Business Improvement District (BID) and comply with all requirements including payment of legally established BID assessments.

J.      The City will post STR contact information on the City website for the public to access.

K.    An STR may not be operated as any other commercial home-based business. (4224, 2/21)

 

5.120.050 STR Host or Operator Requirements
A.    The host or operator shall provide information on the maximum allowed number of occupants, parking capacity and location of parking spaces, noise regulations and quiet hours, and trash and recycling disposal requirements to prospective guests, prior to their occupancy.

B.     The host or operator shall provide and maintain working fire extinguishers, smoke detectors, and carbon monoxide detectors, in compliance with life, fire, and safety codes; and information related to emergency exit routes on the property, local contact, and emergency contact information.

C.     The host or operator shall maintain and provide proof of liability insurance appropriate to cover the STR as required by the City.

D.    Transient occupancy taxes shall be collected on all STRs pursuant to Huntington Beach Municipal Code Chapter 3.28. If a hosting platform does not collect payment for the rental, hosts or operators are solely responsible for the collection of all applicable TOT and remittance of the collected tax to the City in accordance with Chapter 3.28 (Uniform Transient Occupancy Tax). Upon compliance with California Streets and Highways Code Section 36600 et seq., the host or operator shall also be responsible for collection and remittance of all BID assessments. If a hosting platform does collect payment for the STRs, then the hosting platform and the operator and host shall both have legal responsibility for the collection and remittance of the TOT and BID assessment.

E.     The operator, host and/or property owner shall be jointly responsible and liable for any licit or illicit activity which may create a nuisance or other tortious violations arising at a STR.

F.     The host or operator shall authorize any hosting platform on which his or her STR(s) is listed to provide to the City the operator listing and other information to demonstrate compliance with all provisions of this chapter. (4224, 2/21)

 

5.120.060 Hosting Platform Responsibilities
A.    Hosting platforms shall not process or complete any booking transaction for any STR, unless the STR has a valid current STR permit issued by the City. Hosting platforms are required to list the STR permit number and expiration date.

B.     Within 45 days of the effective date of this ordinance, hosting platforms with listings located in the City shall provide to the City contact information of the hosting platform.

C.     A hosting platform with listings located in the City shall provide to the City on a monthly basis, in a format specified by the City, the STR permit number of each listing, the name of the person responsible for each listing, the address of each such listing, and, for each booking transaction that occurs within the reporting period, the number of days booked, and the total price paid for each rental.

D.    Hosting platforms shall remove any listings for STRs, including those on the City’s Prohibited Buildings List, from the platform upon notification by the City.

E.     Hosting platforms shall be responsible for collecting all applicable TOT and TBID assessments and remitting the same to the City. Should a hosting platform fail to fulfill its responsibilities under this section, or the hosting platform and the owner enter into an agreement regarding the fulfillment of this subsection, the owner shall remain responsible for collection and remittance of the TOT and TBID assessments the hosting platform failed to collect and/or remit to the City.

F.     All hosting platforms operating in the City must comply with all Federal, State, or local (including the Huntington Beach Municipal Code) laws. (4224, 2/21)

 

5.120.070 Enforcement
A.    Violations of this chapter include, but are not limited to:

1.     Failure of the local contact person to take action to respond to a complaint within one hour after the complaint is received or a contact is attempted, and the local contact person cannot be reached;

2.     Failure to notify the City when the local contact person’s information changes;

3.     Violation of the STR maximum occupancy, noise, or other requirements as set forth in this chapter;

4.     Providing false or misleading information on a STR permit application, or other documentation required by this chapter;

5.     Any attempt to rent an unregistered STR by advertising the property for short-term rental purposes;

6.     Completing a booking transaction in the City without a valid City-issued STR permit number;

7.     Completing a booking transaction where the STR permit has been revoked or suspended by the City;

8.     Violations of State, County, or City health, building, or fire regulations;

9.     Conduct or activities at the STR that constitute a public nuisance or which otherwise constitute a hazard to public peace, health, or safety;

10.   Authorizing, permitting, facilitating or otherwise allowing any unhosted STR occupancy or activity in any dwelling unit in the City, except as legally permitted in Sunset Beach.

B.     The fine for violations of any provision of this chapter shall be one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each violation. Each separate day in which a violation exists may be considered a separate violation. However, a 30-day warning period shall be provided prior to issuing fines for advertising a STR without a valid STR permit number.

C.     If three fines have been issued against a STR host or operator within a 12-month period, the STR permit shall be revoked, or suspended, or additional conditions may be imposed by the director by providing written notice to the STR host or operator setting forth the basis of the intended action and giving the STR host or operator an opportunity, within 14 calendar days, to present responding information to the director. After the 14 day period, the director may determine whether to revoke the STR permit, suspend the STR permit, or impose additional conditions upon the STR permit and thereafter give written notice of the decision to the STR host or operator. If a STR permit is revoked, the STR may not be re-registered with the City for a period of 12 months from the date of revocation.

D.    The City hereby finds and declares that repeated violations of this chapter constitute a public nuisance which may be enjoined under all applicable laws including Code of Civil Procedure Section 731.

E.     Any person, hosting platform, or STR host or operator convicted of violating any provision of this chapter in a criminal case or found to be in violation of this chapter in a civil or administrative action brought by the City shall be ordered to reimburse the City its full investigative and enforcement costs, pay back all unpaid TOT if applicable, and remit all illegally obtained rental related revenue to the City.

F.     Pursuant to the Huntington Beach Charter, the City may issue and serve administrative subpoenas as necessary to obtain specific information regarding STR listings located in the City, including, but not limited to, the names of the persons responsible for each such listing, the address of each such listing, the length of stay for each such listing, and the price paid for each stay, to determine whether the STR listings comply with this chapter. Any subpoena issued pursuant to this section shall not require the production of information sooner than 30 days from the date of service. A person, hosting platform, or STR operator that has been served with an administrative subpoena may seek judicial review during that 30-day period.

G.    The remedies provided in this section are cumulative and not exclusive, and nothing in this section shall preclude the use or application of any other remedies, penalties, or procedures established by law.

H.    The City Manager, or designee, shall have the authority to establish administrative rules and regulations consistent with the provisions of this chapter for interpreting, clarifying, carrying out, furthering, and enforcing the requirements and the provisions of this chapter.

I.      If any provision of this chapter conflicts with any provision of Title 20-25 (Zoning), the terms of this chapter shall control. (4224, 2/21)

 

5.120.080 Severability Clause
If any provision or clause of this chapter or the application thereof to any person or circumstances is held to be unconstitutional or to be otherwise invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity shall not affect other section provisions, or clauses, or applications, and to this end the provisions, sections, and clauses of this ordinance are declared to be severable. (4224, 2/21)

Title 6 RESERVED

Title 7 ANIMALS
Note
*       Note: Chs. 7.20—7.28 repealed by Ord. 2016-11/75.

 

Chapter 7.04 ADOPTION OF COUNTY ORDINANCES
7.04.010 Adoption of Animal Control Ordinances of the County of Orange
A.    Adoption of County of Orange Ordinance. Subject to the particular additions, deletions and amendments hereinafter set forth in this Chapter, the rules, regulations and conditions of the Codified Ordinances of the County of Orange as contained in:

1.     Division 1 of Title 4;

2.     Article 1 of Divisions 1 of Title 5;

3.     Sections 5-1-29 and 5-1-30 of Article 2 of Division 1 of Title 5;

4.     Article 3 of Division 1 of Title 5;

5.     Division 2 of Title 5; and

6.     Article 17 of Division 3 of Title 5;

as may be amended from time to time by the Board of Supervisors of the County of Orange, California, as well as such other regulations adopted by the Board of Supervisors concerning animal control, including those which relate to fees, are adopted by reference under the authority of Sections 50022.1 through 50022.9 of the Government Code of the State of California and made a part hereof as though fully set forth herein as part of the Huntington Beach Municipal Code and the same are hereby established and adopted as the rules, regulations, provisions and conditions to be observed and followed to govern animal control, welfare and license requirements in the City of Huntington Beach. One full copy of the above-specified provisions of the Codified Ordinances of the County of Orange, certified to be a true copy by the City Clerk of the City of Huntington Beach, is to be kept on file at the office of the City Clerk of the City of Huntington Beach for public inspection.

B.     Penalties.

1.     Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be guilty of an infraction, except as otherwise provided in this subsection B.

2.     Any person who violates any provision of Section 4-1-48, 4-1-51, or 4-1-95 of Division 1 of Title 4 or any provision of Title 5 of the Codified Ordinances of Orange County adopted hereby is guilty of a misdemeanor. Moreover, any person who violates any other provisions of Division 1 of Title 4 the Codified Ordinances of Orange County and the violation occurs within one year of the occurrence of two other separate violations of this division by that person is guilty of a misdemeanor. Each day on which a violation occurs or continues shall constitute a separate offense.

3.     Any license required by Article 4, Division 1 of Title 4 of the Codified Ordinances of the County of Orange not purchased or renewed within 15 days after expiration, or the date on which they come due, shall be considered delinquent and a late fee as determined by resolution of the Board of Supervisors shall be added to the cost of the new license. The Director may waive the above late fee if the Director determines the applicant made a reasonable effort to comply with the above deadline.

4.     Any person convicted of a misdemeanor for a violation of any of the provisions of this section shall, unless otherwise specifically provided in this section or by statute, be punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000.00 or by imprisonment in the County Jail for a period of not more than six months or by both such fine and imprisonment.

5.     Any person convicted of an infraction for a violation of any of the provisions of this section shall, unless otherwise specifically provided in this section or by statute, be punishable by: (a) A fine not exceeding $100.00 for a first violation; (b) A fine not exceeding $200.00 for a second violation of the same Code provision within a period of one year; (c) A fine not exceeding $500.00 for each additional violation of the same ordinance within one year.

6.     An infraction is not punishable by imprisonment. A person charged with an infraction shall not be entitled to a trial by jury. A person charged with an infraction shall not be entitled to have the public defender or other counsel appointed at public expense to represent him or her unless he or she is arrested and not released on his or her written promise to appear, his or her own recognizance or a deposit of bail.

7.     Except as otherwise provided by law, all provisions of law relating to misdemeanors shall apply to infractions including, but not limited to, powers of peace officers, jurisdiction of courts, periods for commencing action and for bringing a case to trial and burden of proof.

8.     Barking dog and animal nuisance civil fines. Fines for violating the provisions of Subarticle 2 of Article 2 of Division 1 of Title 4 of the Codified Ordinances of Orange County shall be as follows:

a.     Fine for first offense (per citation)……$250.00

b.     Fine for second offense within same 12-month period (per citation)..... $275.00

c.     Fine for third offense within same 12-month period (per citation)..... $303.00

d.     Fine for fourth offense within same 12-month period (per citation)..... $333.00

e.     Fine for fifth offense within same 12-month period (per citation)..... $366.00

f.      Fine for sixth and subsequent offense within same 12-month period (per citation)..... $403.00

In the event that a fine imposed under the authority granted by said Subarticle 2 of Article 2 of Division 1 of Title 4 remains unpaid for 30 days after it is due and payable pursuant to Section 4-1-59.7 of the Codified Ordinances of Orange County, an amount equal to the fine shall be added as a late penalty and the late penalty and fine shall become due immediately. If a Hearing Officer upholds the issuance of a citation in an administrative hearing, the late penalty will be assessed if the fine is not paid within 30 days from the conclusion of the hearing. Failure to timely remit payment of a citation fine and/or late penalty authorized pursuant to said Section 4-1-59.7 will result in criminal liability and a warrant may be issued for a violator’s arrest. Nonpayment of such fine and/or late penalty shall be a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000.00 or by imprisonment in the County Jail for a period of not more than six months or by both such fine and imprisonment. The City at its discretion may pursue any and all legal and equitable remedies for the collection of unpaid fines and late penalties. Pursuit of one remedy does not preclude the pursuit of any other remedies until the total fines and late penalties owed by a violator under this subarticle have been collected.

 

C.     Amendment. The ordinances adopted hereby are intended to apply to animal control and regulation within the jurisdiction of the City of Huntington Beach in the same manner as they apply to animal control and regulation within the unincorporated area of the County of Orange. Therefore, the ordinances adopted hereby shall be amended as necessary to achieve that goal, including amending references to the County or the unincorporated area of the County to references to the City of Huntington Beach, as necessary to achieve that goal. Only those provisions of Title 5 of the Orange County Ordinances relevant to animal-related facilities including animal exhibitions, animal rental establishments, animal rescuers, commercial stables, grooming parlors, kennels and pet shops are adopted hereby. (27-11/1909, 66-9/20, 324-5/29, 641-2/56, 885-2/62, 1905-4/74, 2034-1/76, 2067-5/76, 2084-6/76, 2095-9/76, 4147-3/18)

 

Chapter 7.12 MISCELLANEOUS ANIMAL CARE AND CONTROL
Note
*       Note: § 7.12.050 repealed by Ord. 3846-12/09.

 

7.12.010 Bees
No person shall keep or maintain, or suffer or permit to be kept or maintained, upon premises owned or controlled by him or her in the City, any hive bees within 200 feet of any dwelling house of the owner or person in control of such bees. This section shall not apply to the keeping of bees within an educational institution for study or observation, or within a physician’s office or laboratory for medical research, treatment, or other scientific purposes, provided they are not permitted to fly at large. (885-2/62, 1279-2/67, 1905-4/74, 2067-5/76, 2095-9/76)

 

7.12.020 Running at Large Prohibited
A.    No person owning or having control of any ox, steer, bull, cow, horse, colt, calf, sheep, goat, cat or any animal of a species commonly referred to as wild shall:

1.     Permit such animal to run at large in the City;

2.     Cause or permit any such animal to be pastured, herded, staked or tied in any street, lane, alley, park, or other public place;

3.     Tie, stake, pasture or permit the tying, staking or pasturing of any such animal upon any private property within the limits of the City, without the consent of the owner or occupant of such property, or in such a way as to permit any animal to trespass upon any street or public place or upon any such private property;

4.     Permit any of said animals to be or remain during the nighttime secured by a stake, or secured in any manner other than by enclosing such animal in a pen, corral or barn sufficient and adequate to restrain such animal, or by securely fastening such animal by means of a rope, or chain of sufficient size, strength, and weight to effectively restrain such animal; or

5.     Fail to provide the necessary sustenance, drink, shelter or protection from the weather, or otherwise.

B.     No person owning or having charge, custody, control or possession of any animal or reptile known by such person to be vicious or dangerous, or commonly so known, or owning or having charge, custody, or possession of any elephant, bear, hippopotamus, rhinoceros, lion, tiger, leopard, wolf, monkey, ape, chimpanzee, bobcat, lynx, wildcat, puma, cheetah or any animal of a species commonly referred to as wild or any poisonous reptile, shall permit or allow the same to be at large upon any highway, street, lane, alley, court or other public place or upon any private property other than within the enclosed premises of such person. (1279-2/67, 1352-11/67, 1835-5/73, 1905-4/74, 1910-6/74, 2084-6/76)

 

7.12.030 Animal Premises Kept Clean
Every person owning or occupying premises where any animal, fowl or bird is kept shall keep the stable, barn, stall, pen, coop, building or place in which the animal is kept in a clean and sanitary condition. (885-2/62, 1279-2/67, 2084-6/76)

 

7.12.035 Killing or Maiming of Birds
No person shall intentionally kill or maim a bird within the City of Huntington Beach. This section shall not apply to the following:

A.    A veterinarian while engaged in practicing veterinary medicine.

B.     Any person acting to prevent immediate death or injury to a person or domestic animal.

C.     An official of a state, federal or local agency who, by virtue of this office, has authority to destroy birds.

D.    Any person acting pursuant to the California Fish and Game Code or regulations adopted by the Fish and Game Commission, and persons issued licenses or permits authorizing the taking of birds by the state or federal government. This section shall not be construed to allow the discharge of weapons in areas where their use is prohibited. (3696-3/05)

 

7.12.040 Keeping Animals Near Inhabited Structures
No person shall keep any animal, fowl or bird, wild or domestic, other than dogs, cats, canaries, or birds of the psittacinae family, within 25 feet of any dwelling house or structure used as a dwelling, church, school, or hospital, unless such house or structure be occupied by him, her or it. (885-2/62, 1279-2/67, 1905-4/74, 2084-6/76, 3737-7/06)

 

7.12.060 Dead—Carcass Disposal
It is declared to be a nuisance and no person shall cause, suffer or permit the carcass of any animal to remain upon any lot, premises or place owned, controlled or occupied by him, her or it for a period of more than 24 hours, or to bury the carcass of any animal upon the premises owned, controlled or occupied by him, her or it in the City. (885-2/62, 1279-2/67, 2084-6/76)

 

7.12.070 Noisy Animals
It is a nuisance, and no person shall keep, maintain or permit upon any lot or parcel of land within the City under his or her control, any animal or animals, including any fowl, which by any sound or cry, shall interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property by an entire community or neighborhood, or by any considerable number of persons. (1279-2/67, 1905-4/74, 2084-6/76)

 

7.12.080 Goats
A.    It is a nuisance and no person shall keep or maintain any goat within 50 feet of any dwelling house other than that occupied by him, her or it, or more than two goats within 100 feet of any dwelling house other than that occupied by him, her or it, or more than four goats within 300 feet of any dwelling house other than that occupied by him, her or it, or more than five goats within 1,000 feet of any dwelling house other than that occupied by him, her or it.

B.     No person shall keep or maintain any male goat exceeding the age of six months within the limits of the City. (885-2/62, 1279-2/67, 1905-4/74, 2084-6/76)

 

7.12.090 Horses
A.    It is declared to be a nuisance and no person shall stable or corral any horse or horses within 50 feet of any street line.

B.     It is declared to be a nuisance and no person shall stable or corral any horse or mule within 50 feet of any dwelling house other than occupied by him or her, or to stable more than two horses or mules within 100 feet of any dwelling house other than that occupied by him or her.

C.     No person, firm or corporation shall keep or stable any burro or burros, or donkey or donkeys, within 100 feet of any dwelling house other than that occupied by him, her or it.

D.    Street Line. For the purposes of this chapter, “street line” means the nearest edge of any sidewalk and, if there is no sidewalk, the nearest edge of any curb, and if there is no sidewalk or curb, the nearest edge of the improved portion of the public right-of-way. (885-2/62, 1279-2/67, 1352-11/67, 1905-4/74, 2084-6/76)

 

7.12.100 Cattle and Hogs
It is a nuisance and no person shall keep or maintain in the City cattle or hogs at or upon premises owned, occupied or controlled by him or her within 300 feet of any dwelling other than occupied by him or her; or to keep or maintain any cattle within 300 feet of any school or hospital, or within 100 feet of any street line, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. (66-9/1910, 885-2/62, 1279-2/67, 1835-5/73, 1905-4/74, 2084-6/76, 3169-9/92)

 

7.12.110 Fowl and Rabbits—At Large
It is a nuisance and no person shall suffer or permit any chickens, geese, ducks, turkeys, pheasants, doves, pigeons, squabs or similar fowl or rabbits, owned or controlled by him, her or it, to run or fly at large or go upon the premises of any other person in the City. (27-11/1909, 885-2/62, 1279-2/67, 1905-4/74, 1835-5/73, 2084-6/76)

 

7.12.120 Fowl and Rabbits—Keeping Restrictions
It is a nuisance and no person shall keep chickens, geese, ducks, turkeys, pheasants, doves, pigeons, squabs or similar domestic fowl or rabbits, owned or controlled by him, her or it, within 25 feet from any dwelling house or structure used as a dwelling, church, school, hospital, or place where food products are kept, stored, manufactured, or served to the public, unless such house or structure be occupied by him, her or it, or keep any rooster over four months old in the City limits. (27-11/09, 66-9/10, 885-2/62, 1279-2/67, 1835-5/73, 1905-4/74, 2084-6/76, 3737-7/06)

 

7.12.130 Fowl—Number Permitted
No person or household shall maintain in or upon any public or private property in the City more than one goose, duck, or turkey; and no more than six in all of chickens, geese, ducks, turkeys, pheasants, doves, pigeons, squabs or similar domestic fowl; except newborn chicks under eight weeks of age. However, not more than 24 newborn chicks may be maintained. (66-9/10, 885-2/62, 1279-2/67, 1905-4/74, 2084-6/76, 3737-7/06)

 

7.12.140 Monkeys and Chimpanzees to Be Secured
A.    No person owning or having control of any monkey, ape, chimpanzee or other animal of the monkey type, shall permit, allow or suffer such animal to run at large within the City or permit, allow or suffer such animal to be or go upon any street or public place within the City without having such animal securely fastened by an adequate chain or rope, firmly held by or attached to a competent person.

B.     Such animal shall be deemed and considered as running at large, within the meaning of the expression as herein used, when not confined in an enclosure or when not securely tied or chained. (885-2/62, 1279-2/67, 1352-11/67, 1835-5/73, 1857-8/73, 1905-4/74, 2084-6/76)

 

7.12.150 Kennels
A.    “Kennel” means any property where four or more dogs, or four or more cats, over the age of four months, are kept or maintained for any purpose, except veterinary clinics and hospitals. For purposes of this section, a detached single-family residence with a maximum of four dogs shall not be considered a kennel when at least one of the dogs is a specially-trained guide dog, signal dog or service dog, as defined in Penal Code Section 365.5, and complies with Section 7.12.160 of this chapter.

B.     No person shall keep or maintain, or suffer or permit to be kept or maintained, upon premises owned or controlled by him or her in the City, any kennel within 200 feet of any dwelling house except the dwelling house of the person in control of such kennel.

C.     Any person, firm or corporation which conducts a kennel operated or carried on primarily for financial gain shall obtain a business license pursuant to Title 5 of this Code. (1279-2/67, 1905-4/74, 2095-9/76, 3910-4/11)

 

7.12.160 Residential Animal Permit
A residential animal permit shall be required for the keeping of one goose, rabbit, miniature pot-bellied pig, turkey, or duck, a fourth dog, and all chickens, subject to the review and approval of the Director of Planning and Building. The number and type of animals kept pursuant to a residential animal permit shall be permitted in accordance with the applicable sections of this chapter. In addition:

A.    A miniature pot-bellied pig kept pursuant to a residential animal permit shall comply with the following provisions:

1.     A “miniature pot-bellied pig” shall mean any pig weighing not more than 125 pounds that is continuously registered with a nationally-recognized miniature pig association.

2.     All miniature pot-bellied pigs shall be spayed or neutered.

3.     Proof of sterilization shall be presented to the Director of Planning and Building prior to the issuance of a residential animal permit.

B.     A fourth dog kept pursuant to a residential animal permit shall comply with the following provisions:

1.     The residence for which the permit is granted shall be a detached single-family residence.

2.     At least one of the four dogs shall be a specially-trained guide dog, signal dog or service dog, as defined in Penal Code Section 365.5.

3.     Proof that one of the four dogs is a specially-trained guide dog, signal dog or service dog shall be presented to the Director of Planning and Building prior to the issuance of a residential animal permit.

C.     All residential animal permits shall comply with the following conditions:

1.     At the time the application is made for a residential animal permit, the applicant shall pay a fee established by resolution of the City Council.

2.     Premises shall be kept clean and free of all matter that may create odors or attract rodents.

3.     The animal shall comply with all applicable sections of Chapter 8.40, Noise Control, of this Code.

4.     Any authorized City employee may inspect the premises for which an application has been granted for a residential animal permit.

5.     Prior to issuance of a residential animal permit, notices shall be sent to all abutting property owners and tenants notifying them of the pending application for said permit.

6.     The Director of Planning and Building may impose conditions of approval in addition to the above.

7.     The applicant shall be required to sign an affidavit that he or she understands all of the conditions of approval for the residential animal permit at the time the permit is issued.

8.     A violation of any of the above conditions of approval shall be cause for revocation of the residential animal permit. (2936-4/88, 3169-9/92, 3737-7/06, 3910-4/11)

 

7.12.170 Dogs—Number Permitted—Dog Park
No person having control of more than three dogs simultaneously shall permit or allow such to be or go upon the area dedicated exclusively by the Huntington Beach Central Park Master Plan for use by dog owners with pets, commonly known as a dog park. (3508-10/01)

 

7.12.180 Prohibition on Retail Sale of Dogs and Cats
A.    No commercial establishment shall display, sell, deliver, offer for sale, barter, or auction dogs or cats, except dogs and/or cats obtained from a shelter, or humane society or rescue organization. Cats obtained by donation from a local resident for no charge may also be displayed, sold, and offered for sale or adoption. The pet shop owner shall notify in writing the Orange County Animal Services Office of any sale of a local donated cat.

B.     A pet shop that displayed, sold, delivered, offered for sale, offered for adoption, bartered, auctioned, gave away, or otherwise transferred or disposed of dogs or cats in the City of Huntington Beach as of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section, and whose operations complied with all applicable provisions of the Huntington Beach Municipal Code, may continue to display, offer for sale, offer for adoption, barter, or auction of dogs and cats until the two-year anniversary of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section (effective July 18, 2012 – July 18, 2014). (3941-7/12)

 

7.12.290 Enforcement
The Director of Planning and his or her designees are hereby authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of this chapter. (2547-5/82, 3737-7/06)

 

7.12.300 Penalty
A violation of any of the sections in this chapter is an infraction and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $100.00. (2095-9/76)

 

Chapter 7.14 PERFORMANCE OF WILD OR EXOTIC ANIMALS FOR PUBLIC ENTERTAINMENT OR AMUSEMENT
7.14.010 Purpose and Intent
It is the purpose and intent of the City of Huntington Beach City Council to protect the public against hazards that wild and exotic animals used in performances for entertainment pose to society and to protect wild and exotic animals from cruel and inhumane treatment. (3586-12/02)

 

7.14.020 Performance of Wild or Exotic Animals—Prohibited
It shall be unlawful for any person to permit the performance of any wild and exotic animal for public entertainment, amusement or benefit on any public or private property within the City of Huntington Beach. (3586-12/02)

 

7.14.030 Definitions
For the purposes of this chapter only, the following words and terms shall be deemed to mean and be construed as follows:

“Community Development Director” shall mean the Community Development Director of the City of Huntington Beach or his or her designee.

“Director of Community Services” means the Director of Community Services of the City of Huntington Beach or his or her designee.

“Display” means the use or exhibition of animals for educational purposes or to groups of 20 or fewer persons.

“Domestic animal” means any animal that is livestock, a companion animal, or both. Livestock includes but is not limited to poultry, cattle, swine, sheep, goats and horses. Companion animal means any animal that is commonly kept by a person as a pet or for companionship and includes but is not limited to domesticated dogs, domesticated cats, ferrets, gerbils, guinea pigs, hamsters, horses, mice, rabbits and rats.

“Performance” means any act, circus, ride, trade show, carnival, parade, race, or similar undertaking in which wild or exotic animals are required to perform tricks, fight, used for photographs with members of the public, or participate as accompaniments in performances for the entertainment, amusement or benefit of an audience. Performance shall not include the display of wild and exotic animals.

“Person” means any individual, establishment, firm, association, organization, partnership, trust, corporation or company.

“Wild and exotic animal” means any non-domestic animal and includes any or all of the following orders and families, or similar orders and families whether bred in the wild or in captivity, and any hybrid with domestic animals. The animals listed in parentheses are intended as examples and are not to be construed as an exhaustive list or limit the generality of each group of animals listed, unless otherwise specified:

1.     Non-human primates and prosimians (chimpanzees, monkeys).

2.     Felidae (except domesticated cats).

3.     Canidae (except domesticated dogs).

4.     Ursidae (bears).

5.     Proboscidae (elephants).

6.     Crocodilia (alligators, crocodiles).

7.     Marsupialia (kangaroos, opossums).

8.     Snakes and reptiles of any variety.

9.     Perissodactyla (rhinoceroses, tapirs, but not horses or donkeys or mules).

10.   Artiodactyla (hippopotamuses, giraffes, camels, but not cattle, swine, sheep or goats).

11.   Hyaenidae (hyenas).

12.   Mustelidae (skunks, weasels, otters, badgers).

13.   Procynonidae (raccoons, coatis).

14.   Edentata (anteaters, sloths, armadillos).

15.   Viverridae (mongooses, civets, and genets).

16.   Struthioniformes (ostriches).

17.   Casuariiformes (emus). (3586-12/02, 4085-6/16)

 

7.14.040 Enforcement
The Director of Community Services or the Planning Director shall have the power and authority to enforce the provisions of this chapter. (3586-12/02)

 

7.14.050 Exemptions
The following are exempt from the provisions of this chapter:

A.    Education activities endorsed or accredited by the American Zoo and Aquarium Association.

B.     Veterinarians in the ordinary course of a veterinarian’s practice of business.

C.     Educational activities endorsed or accredited by the Association of Sanctuaries and the American Sanctuary Association.

D.    Activities conducted pursuant to a film permit issued by the Community Services Department. (3586-12/02)

 

7.14.060 Severability
If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase in this chapter or any part thereof is for any reason held to be unconstitutional or invalid or ineffective by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of the remaining portions of this chapter or any part thereof. The City Council hereby declares that it would have passed each section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase thereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more subsections, subdivisions, paragraphs, sentences, clauses, or phrases be declared unconstitutional, or invalid, or ineffective. (3586-12/02)

Title 8 HEALTH AND SAFETY
Note
*       Note: Ch. 8.08 repealed by Ord. 3493-5/01; Ch. 8.20 repealed by Ord. 3560-7/02; Ch. 8.70 repealed by Ord. 3625-1/04; Ch. 8.43 repealed by Ord. 4010-4/14.

 

Chapter 8.04 FOOD HANDLING ESTABLISHMENTS
8.04.010 Definitions
The following terms used in this chapter shall have the meanings indicated below; provided, however, said definitions shall also include any amendments or changes made to referenced sections of the California Health and Safety Code after January 1, 1991:

“Certified farmers’ market” shall be as defined in Section 113742 of the California Health and Safety Code.

“Commissary” shall be as defined in Section 113751 of the California Health and Safety Code.

“Food facility” shall be as defined in Section 113789 of the California Health and Safety Code.

“Food processing establishment” shall be as defined in Section 111955 of the California Health and Safety Code.

“Health Department” or “Department” shall mean the Orange County Health Care Agency.

“Health officer” shall mean the Orange County Health Officer or his or her deputy.

“Inspector” shall mean a Registered Environmental Health Specialist, as defined in Health and Safety Code Section 106615, employed by the Health Department, or the Health Officer or any Deputy Health Officer authorized to inspect premises or equipment for the enforcement of this chapter.

“Mobile food facility” shall be as defined in Section 113831 of the California Health and Safety Code.

“Open air barbecue facility” shall be as defined in Section 113843 of the California Health and Safety Code.

“Person” shall be as defined in Section 113855 of the California Health and Safety Code.

“Premises” shall include land, buildings, vehicles and ships and other vessels wherein food is handled, stored, distributed, prepared, processed, served or sold, and also equipment installed or used in food establishments or food facilities or on such premises.

“Produce” shall be as defined in Section 113877 of the California Health and Safety Code.

“Receipt” shall mean a county public health services fee receipt.

“Satellite food distribution facility” shall be as defined in Section 113899 of the California Health and Safety Code.

“Temporary food facility” shall be as defined in Section 113930 of the California Health and Safety Code.

“Vending machine” shall be as defined in Section 113938 of the California Health and Safety Code.

“Vending machine business” shall mean the business of selling food or beverages by means of vending machines, regardless of the number of locations at which the vending machines are located. (3205-10/93, 3931-3/12)

 

8.04.020 Permit Required—Conditions and Terms
A.    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any food facility, vending machine business, food processing establishment, or any other food handling business governed by this chapter, without first applying for and receiving a food-vending permit issued by the Health Department under the provisions of this chapter.

B.     Every applicant for a food-vending permit shall file with the Health Department a written application which shall state the name and address of the applicant, the character and location of the activity for which a permit is required under this chapter and such other information as the Health Department may require. Applicants for a permit to operate a mobile food facility shall, in addition, provide a list of three service stops which shall include the address of exact location and time of each stop.

C.     A permit may be issued when investigation has determined that the proposed facility and its method of operation will conform to all applicable laws and regulations. A permit, once issued, is nontransferable. A permit shall be valid only for the person, location, type of food sales, or distribution activity approved and, unless suspended or revoked, for the time period indicated.

D.    Any permit may be suspended or revoked for a violation of any applicable provisions of law or regulation. Any food facility, vending machine business, food processing establishment, or any other food handling business governed by this chapter, for which the permit has been suspended or revoked shall close and remain closed until the permit has been reinstated or until a new permit has been issued.

E.     Permits may be granted at any time during the year. A permit shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises for which it is issued. (3205-10/93, 3931-3/12)

 

8.04.030 Construction, Conversion and Alteration
A person proposing to build or remodel a food facility, vending machine business, food processing establishment, or any other food handling business governed by this chapter, shall submit three copies of the complete plans and specifications to the Department for review and approval pursuant to the applicable requirements of the California Health and Safety Code. The health officer may thereafter issue a certificate stating what modifications, if any, are required for compliance with applicable laws and ordinances. (3205-10/93)

 

8.04.040 Suspension of Permits
A permit issued under this chapter or its predecessor may be suspended or revoked under the procedure set forth in this chapter for any of the following reasons:

A.    Violation of state law;

B.     Violation of this chapter;

C.     Violation of the rules and regulations adopted pursuant to this chapter; or

D.    Upon recommendation by the health officer. (3205-10/93)

 

8.04.050 Notice of Violation
When any laws, this chapter, or rules and regulations have been violated, an inspector may serve written notice thereof entitled “Notice of Violation,” specifying:

A.    The acts or omissions with which the permittee is charged.

B.     The provision or provisions violated thereby.

C.     The corrective steps required.

D.    The date by which all such corrections must be completed, allowing a reasonable period therefor.

E.     That the permittee has a right to a hearing, upon written request or that a mandatory hearing has been scheduled.

F.     That if no hearing is requested or the permittee fails to appear at the scheduled hearing and if the Health Department does not receive notice that all such corrections have been made before 9:00 a.m. on the date specified under subsection D of this section, the permit will be subject to suspension or revocation from that time until such violations are corrected. (3205-10/93)

 

8.04.060 Hearing
The hearing shall be held by the health officer or his or her duly authorized representative who is a qualified Environmental Health Specialist as defined in Section 106615 of the Health and Safety Code and registered as provided in Section 106710 thereof, but shall not be the inspector who reported the violations or who inspected any corrective measure taken.

A.    The permit holder shall have the right to a hearing, if requested, on all violations listed in the notice. A written request for a hearing shall be made by the permittee within 15 calendar days after receipt of the notice. A failure to request a hearing within 15 calendar days after receipt of the notice shall be deemed a waiver of the right to a hearing. When circumstances warrant, the hearing officer may order a hearing at any reasonable time within this 15-day period to expedite the permit suspension or revocation process.

The hearing shall be held within 15 calendar days of the receipt of a request for a hearing. Upon written request of the permittee, the hearing officer may postpone any hearing date, if circumstances warrant such action.

B.     At the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer shall issue a written notice of decision to the permittee within five working days following the hearing. In the event of a suspension or revocation, the notice shall specify the acts or omissions with which the permittee is charged, and shall state the terms of the suspension, or that the permit has been revoked.

The health officer may, after providing opportunity for a hearing, modify, suspend, or revoke a permit for serious or repeated violations of any of the requirements of the applicable laws, rules and regulations. (3205-10/93, 3931-3/12)

 

8.04.070 Mobile Food Facility—Generally
In addition to all other applicable provisions of the Health and Safety Code and of this chapter, mobile food facilities shall comply with the following safety requirements:

A.    Compressors, auxiliary engines, generators, batteries, battery chargers, gas-fueled water heaters, and similar equipment shall be installed so as to be accessible only from the outside of the facility.

B.     All equipment installed in any part of the facility shall be secured so as to prevent movement during transit and to prevent detachment in the event of a collision or overturn.

C.     All equipment installed within the interior of the facility, including the interiors of cabinets or compartment, shall be constructed so as to be free of sharp or jagged edges.

D.    All utensils shall be stored so as to prevent their being hurled about in the event of a sudden stop, collision or overturn. A safety knife holder shall be provided to avoid loose storage of knives in cabinets, boxes or slots along counter aisles. Knife holders shall be designed to be easily cleaned and be manufactured of materials approved by the health officer.

E.     Ceiling light fixtures shall be recessed or flush mounted and sealed and shall be equipped with safety covers approved by the health officer. The minimum clearance from the floor to the light fixture shall be at least 188 centimeters (76 inches) or the fixture shall be installed out of the traffic aisle or work area.

F.     High voltage (110 to 120v) electrical wiring shall be properly installed in electrical conduit with all splices or connections being made within junction, outlet or switch boxes to prevent the use of extension cords exceeding 183 centimeters (six feet). Outside electrical connection receptacles shall be of weatherproof design with cover.

G.    Attached, firmly anchored seats with backrests, equipped with seat belts, shall be provided for all occupants. If a jump seat in the aisleway is utilized, it shall fold in a manner that will clear the aisleway when not in use and be held with a self-latching mechanism. Seats and backrests shall be at least 35.5 centimeters (14 by 14 inches) in size. All occupants shall be seated, shall wear seat belts, and shall not cook or prepare food while the facility is in motion. Signs setting forth the latter three requirements shall be posted in both English and Spanish.

H.    A first-aid kit approved by the health officer shall be provided and located in a convenient area in an enclosed case.

I.      All pressure cylinders shall be securely fastened to a rigid structure of the facility. All liquefied petroleum gas (LPG) equipment shall be installed as follows:

1.     The LP gas tanks and relief valves shall be ASME approved for intended use.

2.     Tanks shall be securely fastened and located where they will normally not be subject to damage. They may be in a body compartment or underneath the body. The tank or fittings must not protrude beyond the body.

3.     Tanks and regulators shall be separated from any open flame by a vapor-tight partition.

4.     When tanks are installed in a body compartment, the partitions shall be sealed off from the rest of the body with no openings to the interior except for the tubing. The following additional requirements shall be met:

a.     All tank valves and fittings shall be readily accessible from outside the facility.

b.     The tank safety relief valve shall be vented to the outside and directed downward.

c.     The filling shall be done through an outside door to the compartment.

d.     The compartment shall be vented to the exterior of the facility so as to prevent accumulation of gas.

5.     Tubing that passes through partitions shall be protected by grommets made of rubber or other approved materials.

6.     Tubing exposed to friction shall be protected against chafing.

7.     Expansion and contraction bends shall be made in the tubing between the tank and the appliance.

8.     ASME-approved LP gas tubing or standard weight pipe shall be used throughout.

9.     Protective “thread” caps shall be installed on fill-line check valves.

10.   Every appliance fueled by LP gas shall be equipped with a pilot light attachment and provided with an ASME-approved device which will automatically shut off all gas to the appliance if the pilot light should be extinguished.

J.      A minimum five B.C.-rated portable fire extinguisher (UL or State Fire Marshal approved design) shall be installed in plain sight and within easy reach, immediately inside the front driver’s door. The extinguisher shall be replaced or recharged after each use. (3205-10/93, 3931-3/12)

 

8.04.080 Additional Requirements for Mobile Food Facilities Operating in Multi-Locations in Any Day
In addition to the requirements specified in Section 8.04.070, mobile food preparation facilities which operate at more than one location in any calendar day, shall comply with the following additional requirements:

A.    Coffee urns shall be installed in a compartment that will prevent excessive spillage of coffee in the interior of the facility in the event of a sudden stop, collision or overturn, or, as an alternative to this requirement, coffee urns shall be equipped with positive closing lids as well as perforated metal protective sleeves on the glass liquid level sight gauges.

B.     Deep fat fryers are prohibited, unless equipped with positive closing lids to contain the fat and to prevent splashing or excessive spillage in transit or in the event of a sudden stop, collision or overturn of the facility. Such lids shall be designed and constructed so as to prevent pressure buildup which could result in an explosion. All lids shall be kept positively closed while the facility is in motion. Signs setting forth the latter requirement shall be posted in both English and Spanish.

C.     Water bath or steam food insert tables shall be provided with baffles to prevent surging in transit. All such tables, as well as dry heat units, their insert food containers and similar equipment that contains hot liquids or hot foods shall have positive closing lids to contain all such liquids or foods and to prevent splashing or spillage in transit or in the event of a sudden stop, collision or overturn of the facility. Such lids shall be designed and constructed so as to prevent pressure buildup which could result in an explosion. All lids shall be positively closed while the facility is in motion. Signs setting forth the latter requirement shall be posted in both English and Spanish.

D.    An alternate means of exit in the side opposite the main exit door, or the roof, or the rear of the facility, with unobstructed passage of 61 by 92 centimeters (24 by 36 inches) minimum to the outside, shall be provided. The interior latching mechanism shall be operable by hand without special tools or key. The exit shall be labeled “Safety Exit” in contrasting colors with at least 2.54 centimeters (one inch) high letters. (3205-10/93, 3931-3/12)

 

8.04.090 Suspension for Refusal of Entry
It shall be a violation of this chapter for the purpose of inspecting any of the premises described in Section 8.04.020, or any portion thereof; and in such event the inspector may forthwith suspend the food-vending permit issued for the premises. (3205-10/93)

 

8.04.100 Summary Suspension
A.    If any immediate danger to the public health or safety is found, unless the danger is immediately corrected, an inspector may temporarily suspend the permit and order the premises immediately closed. “Immediate danger to the public health and safety” means any condition, based upon inspection findings or other evidence, that can cause food infection, food intoxication, disease transmission, or hazardous condition, including but not limited to unsafe food temperature, sewage contamination, nonpotable water supply, or an employee who is a carrier of a communicable disease.

B.     Whenever a permit is suspended as the result of an immediate danger to the public health or safety, the inspector shall issue to the permittee a notice setting forth the acts or omissions with which the permittee is charged, specifying the pertinent code section, and informing the permittee of the right to a hearing.

C.     At any time within 15 calendar days after service of a notice pursuant to subsection B of this section, the permittee may request in writing a hearing before a hearing officer to show cause why the permit suspension is not warranted. The hearing shall be held within 15 calendar days of the receipt of a request for a hearing. A failure to request a hearing within 15 calendar days shall be deemed a waiver of the right to such hearing. (3205-10/93)

 

8.04.110 Supervision of Closing Down Premises
When any permit is first suspended hereunder, or when any premises governed hereby shall have been closed for business and left in an unsanitary condition, the Health Department shall have the power to enter to ensure that the premises are closed down in a manner which will not endanger the public health. If the permittee or his/her employee in charge cannot be found, or is unwilling or unable to remedy the condition of the premises, the owner of the premises shall be notified of the unsanitary conditions and shall be required to take such remedial action as may be necessary to obviate such condition. (3205-10/93)

 

8.04.120 Rules and Regulations
The health officer may adopt and enforce rules and regulations necessary to administer this chapter including, but not limited to, regulations pertaining to:

A.    Forms for applications, permits and notices.

B.     Forms and procedures for hearing upon the granting, denying, suspending, revoking or reinstating of permits.

C.     Inspections of premises and reporting thereon. (3205-10/93)

 

8.04.130 Fees
The purpose of this section is to establish fees sufficient to meet the reasonable expenses of the health officer enforcing state statutes, orders, quarantines and rules and regulations of state offices and departments relating to public health, which expenses are hereby found not to be met by the fees prescribed by the state. The authority for this section is contained in Section 101325 of the Health and Safety Code.

The county shall, by annual board resolution, adopt health service fees to be paid by the proprietor or operator of the food facility. Such fees are to be paid directly to the county health office and retained by the county as reimbursement for said services related to this chapter.

A.    Area of Application. This section shall be enforceable within the territory in which the health officer enforces any state statute, order, quarantine or rule or regulation of any state office or department relating to public health, including incorporated as well as unincorporated territory.

B.     Violation. It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct any activity enumerated in this section without a valid receipt.

C.     Separate Activities. If a person shall conduct more than one of the activities for which a receipt is required, he or she must obtain a separate receipt for each activity, except as otherwise provided herein.

D.    Applications. Applications for a receipt shall be filed with the Health Department on a form to be provided by that department. The applications shall be accompanied by payment of the required fee. An application for or recipient of a receipt shall provide the health officer with any information requested by him or her. (3205-10/93, 3931-3/12)

 

8.04.140 Penalty
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (3205-10/93)

 

8.04.150 Preemption
This chapter shall not apply to any matter to the extent that the regulation of such matter is preempted by state law. (3205-10/93)

 

Chapter 8.12 FLY CONTROL
8.12.010 Definitions
The following words and phrases whenever used in this chapter, shall be construed as defined herein unless from the context a different meaning is intended and more particularly directed to the use of such words and phrases:

“Commercial dairy farm” means any place or premises on which milk is produced for sale, or other distribution, and where more than two cows or six goats are in location.

“Commercial poultry ranch” means any place or premises where poultry are maintained, raised or fed for the primary purpose of producing eggs or meat for sale, or other distribution.

“Fly Abatement Board” means the administrative board composed of five members appointed by the Board of Supervisors of Orange County, pursuant to Orange County Ordinance Section 4-2-2 which is designated as the Fly Abatement Board pursuant to this chapter.

“Fly breeding hazard” means the accumulation, existence or maintenance of any substance, matter, material or condition resulting in the breeding of flies in an amount or manner as may endanger public health or safety, or which may create unreasonable interference with the comfortable enjoyment of life and use of property by others.

“Horse stable” means any location where three or more horses are maintained for any purpose. (1619-1/71)

 

8.12.020 Public Nuisance
Any fly breeding hazard in the City is declared to constitute a public nuisance. (1619-1/71)

 

8.12.030 Premises Inspection—Enforcement
It is the duty of the Health Officer of Orange County, who is designated to enforce this chapter, upon routine inspection or whenever he or she is informed or has reasonable cause to believe that any land, building or collection of plant or animal waste, or any substance or existing condition on any lot, farm or other land or on any other premises is a fly breeding hazard, to enter, after demand, upon such premises and to determine whether or not there is an existing fly breeding hazard. The county health officer shall furnish each of his or her deputies and inspectors with identification in such form as he or she shall prescribe. (1619-1/71)

 

8.12.040 Inspection—Refusal of Entry
Except as to residences and living quarters, the health officer, or his or her authorized deputies or inspectors, for the purpose of routine inspection, or whenever he or she shall have reasonable cause to believe that any violation of this chapter exists upon any premises or in any place, after displaying identification may demand entry thereon in the daytime. Every person who owns, occupies or otherwise is then in possession of such premises and who, after such display and demand, refuses or willfully delays to open the same and admit an inspection thereof shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to punishment upon conviction thereof by a fine not exceeding $50.00 or by imprisonment in the county jail for over five days or by both such fine and imprisonment. (1619-1/71)

 

8.12.050 Abatement—Notice
A.    Whenever there exists in any place within the City a fly breeding hazard, the county health officer shall notify in writing, by personal service, the record owner, his or her agent or person having control or possession of such place or premises, to abate such nuisance and take corrective measures to prevent its recurrence, and to appear at a public hearing to be held by the Fly Abatement Board on a date set forth in the notice. A copy of such notice shall also be posted in a conspicuous place upon such place or premises. Such hearing shall be set by the county health officer at least 10 days after the date of such notice.

B.     The notice shall specify what is claimed to be causing the hazard and what must be done to abate it, and shall direct the owner, or person in control or possession of the place or premises, to abate the nuisance, and to perform any and all work necessary to prevent the recurrence thereof in the place or premises specified in the notice, prior to the time set for the public hearing by the Fly Abatement Board, and shall advise such owner or person that in lieu of such abatement, if the fly hazard still exists at the time of such public hearing, the county health officer will proceed to abate such nuisance without further notice, unless such nuisance is abated before a date specified by the board, and the owner of such place or premises, and the person having control or possession thereof, jointly and severally shall be liable to the county for the total cost of such work, including all administrative costs, and such costs shall constitute a charge and lien upon such place or premises.

C.     The notice shall be served upon the owner of record, or person having control or possession of the place or premises upon which the nuisance exists, or upon the agent of either. Notices may be served in the same manner as a summons in a civil action by any person authorized by the health officer of Orange County for such purposes. (1619-1/71)

 

8.12.060 Abatement—Hearing—Findings
At the time fixed for hearing by the Fly Abatement Board, such board shall hear and consider all relevant testimony and evidence offered by the owner of record, or person having control or possession of the place or premises upon which the fly breeding hazard is stated in such notice to exist by the county health officer or his or her agent, and by any other interested person. Upon the conclusion of the hearing, the board shall make the following findings:

A.    Whether a fly breeding hazard exists;

B.     What is causing the hazard specifically;

C.     What should be done by the owner or operator to abate the hazard;

D.    What work, if any, should be done by the owner or operator to prevent its recurrence;

E.     Whether the owner or operator shall comply with any specific regulations of the health officer; and

F.     Whether the health officer shall abate and specifically what he or she may do at his or her option, including but not limited to directing the owner or person having control of the premises to abate the nuisance, provided that anything not included in the board’s order shall not be done by the health officer. (1619-1/71)

 

8.12.070 Abatement—Hearing—Determination
If the board determines that such fly breeding hazard exists, it shall direct the county health officer to abate it, without further notice unless the condition is abated and such work performed by the owner or operator on or before a date to be specified by the board. (1619-1/71)

 

8.12.080 Fly Control Standards
The Fly Abatement Board, upon recommendation of the health officer, is authorized to adopt fly control standards for operation and design of commercial dairy farms, commercial poultry ranches and horse stables to serve as guidelines in the abatement proceedings described in Sections 8.12.060 and 8.12.070. All such standards shall be printed and made available to all dairy workers, poultry workers and horse stable owners or operators. (1619-1/71)

 

8.12.090 Abatement—Costs
All costs shall constitute a charge and special assessment upon such parcel of land incurred by the City and/or county. If such costs are not paid within a period specifically set by the City and/or county, they shall then be declared a special assessment against that parcel as provided in Government Code Sections 25845 and 38773.5. Such special assessment shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary county taxes are collected, and shall be subject to the same penalties and the same procedures and sale in case of delinquency as provided for ordinary county taxes. The City shall retain the additional and independent right to recover its costs by way of civil action against the owner and person in possession or control, jointly or severally. (1619-1/71)

 

8.12.100 Abatement—Other Remedies
The provisions of this chapter are to be construed as an added remedy to abate the nuisance declared, and not in conflict with or derogation of any other actions or proceedings or remedies otherwise provided by law. (1619-1/71)

 

8.12.110 Administration and Enforcement
Without limiting the power of the City so to do, the County of Orange and all its officers, employees and agents are authorized and empowered to enforce and administer the provisions of this chapter within the City. (1619-1/71)

 

8.12.120 Violation—Penalty
Any owner or person having control of any place or premises upon which there is existing a breeding place for flies, who refuses or neglects to abate same or to take corrective measures to prevent its recurrence, in accordance with the written notice, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to punishment upon conviction thereof by a fine not exceeding $500.00 or 100 days imprisonment in the county jail, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (1619-1/71)

 

Chapter 8.16 WEED ABATEMENT
8.16.010 Removal Required
All persons owning any real property in this City are required to keep said property free from weeds whose seeds are of a winged or downy nature, weeds which attain such large growth as to become, when dry, a fire menace, and dry grass, stubble, brush, litter, or other flammable material which endangers the public safety by creating a fire hazard. (84-11/11, 2677-2/84)

 

8.16.020 Nuisance Declared
Any such weeds on any such real property in this City are declared to be a nuisance. (84-11/11)

 

8.16.030 Removal—Notice to Owner
It shall be the duty of the Director of Public Works to notify, in the manner hereinafter provided, the occupants and owners of any premises in this City to eradicate and remove, within 10 days from the receipt of such notice, all such weeds from the property they own or occupy, and that upon failure to do so within the time specified, this City will cause the weeds to be removed at the expense of said owner. (84-11/11, 2677-2/84)

 

8.16.040 Notice—Form—Service
The notice to remove weeds shall be conspicuously posted on or in front of the property on which the nuisance exists. Notice shall be posted on each separately owned parcel of property of not over 50 feet frontage; not more than two notices to any such parcel of 100 feet frontage or less; notices at not more than 100 feet apart if the frontage of such a parcel is greater than 100 feet. (84-11/11, 2248-1/78)

 

8.16.050 Delinquency—Estimate Given to Council
The notice(s) shall be posted at least 10 days prior to the time for hearing objections by the City Council. The Director of Public Works shall transmit to the City Council an estimate of the probable cost of doing the work. (84-11/11, 2248-1/78)

 

8.16.060 Ordering of Work by City
The Council may order the Director of Public Works to do the work, at the expense of the owner of said property, and provide for temporary payment of the same with City funds. (84-11/11, 2248-1/78)

 

8.16.070 Extension of Time
The Council may, in its discretion, extend the time within which the work must be done. (84-11/11)

 

8.16.080 Abatement—Costs
All costs shall constitute a charge and special assessment upon such parcel of land incurred by the City and/or county. If such costs are not paid within a period specifically set by the City and/or county, there shall then be declared a special assessment against that parcel as provided in Government Code Sections 25845, 38773 and 38773.5. Such special assessment shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary county taxes are collected, and shall be subject to the same penalties and the same procedures and sale in case of delinquency as provided for ordinary county taxes. The City shall retain the additional and independent right to recover its costs by way of civil action against the owner and person in possession or control, jointly or severally. (2022-12/75, 2248-1/78)

 

Chapter 8.17 PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY
8.17.010 Sidewalks—Streets—Obstructions
A.    No person owning, leasing, occupying, having charge or control of any lot or premises shall allow, keep or maintain any tree, bush or vegetation growing upon any lot or premises abutting any street or sidewalk or upon any street or sidewalk in such manner that the limbs, twigs, leaves or parts of such tree, bush or vegetation interfere with or obstruct the free passage of pedestrians or vehicles along or upon said streets or sidewalk.

B.     Trees, bushes, vines or any other vegetation growing in, upon, or overhanging any public right-of-way shall be deemed to interfere with and obstruct the vision or free passage of pedestrians or vehicles upon said public right-of-way, within the meaning of this section, unless the lower limbs, twigs or leaves of such trees, bushes, vines or vegetation are kept removed at all times so as to provide an unobstructed clearance, including a minimum vertical clearance of:

1.     Thirteen feet six inches over that portion of state highways and arterials improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular traffic;

2.     Eleven feet over that portion of local streets improved, designed, or ordinarily used for vehicular traffic;

3.     Nine feet over the sidewalk and parkway area of all streets. (2241-1/78, 2677-2/84)

 

8.17.015 Flood Control/Drainage Channels—Obstructions
No person owning, leasing, occupying, having charge or control of any lot or premises shall allow, keep or maintain any tree, bush or vegetation growing upon any lot or premises abutting any flood control/drainage channel in such a manner that the limbs, twigs, leaves, vines, roots or parts of such tree, bush or vegetation interfere with, impede, redirect or obstruct the flow of water along, in or upon any flood control/drainage channel. (3812-10/08)

 

8.17.020 Nuisances Declared
Any obstruction of a public street, sidewalk, or flood control/drainage channel in violation of Section 8.17.010 or 8.17.015 is declared to be a nuisance. (2241-1/78, 3812-10/08)

 

8.17.030 Removal—Notice to Owner
It shall be the duty of the Director of Public Works to notify, in the manner hereinafter provided, the occupants and owners of any premises in this City to comply with Section 8.17.010 or 8.17.015 within 10 days from the receipt of such notice, and upon failure to do so within 10 days, the City may cause the obstruction referred to in Section 8.17.010 or 8.17.015 to be removed at the expense of said owner. (2677-2/84, 3812-10/08)

 

8.17.040 Notice—Form—Service
The notice to remove the tree or shrub obstruction shall be given in writing, by serving personally upon the owner and upon the occupant (if any) a copy of such notice, directed to the owner, or if the owner is a nonresident of the City, by serving the occupant personally, and by mailing by registered mail, a like copy in writing to the owner at his or her last known address as shown by the last assessment of the City. If there is no occupant, a copy of the notice shall be posted in a conspicuous place on each lot or legal subdivision of the premises, and a copy served upon the owner as hereinbefore provided. (2241-1/78)

 

8.17.050 Delinquency—Estimate Given to Council
At the expiration of 10 days from the sending or serving of the notice if the obstruction is not eliminated, the Director of Public Works may thereupon report the delinquency to the Council with an estimate of the probable cost of doing the work. (2241-1/78)

 

8.17.060 Ordering of Work by City
The Council may then order the Director of Public Works to do the work at the expense of the owner of said property, and provide for temporary payment of the same with City funds. (2241-1/78)

 

8.17.070 Extension of Time
The Council may, in its discretion, extend the time within which the work must be done. (2241-1/78)

 

8.17.080 Abatement—Costs
All costs incurred by the City shall constitute a charge and special assessment upon such parcel of land. If such costs are not paid within a period specifically set by the City, they shall then be declared a special assessment against that parcel as provided in Government Code Section 38773.5. Such special assessment shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary county taxes are collected, and shall be subject to the same penalties and the same procedures and sale in case of delinquency as provided for ordinary county taxes. The City shall retain the additional and independent right to recover its costs by way of civil action against the owner or person in possession or control, jointly or severally. (2241-1/78)

 

Chapter 8.21 REFUSE MANAGEMENT
8.21.010 Definitions
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of these regulations:

“Adequate service” means the combination of the number of collections, the number of containers, and the size of containers necessary so as not to cause the accumulation of refuse outside containers or in excess of level full.

“Automated residential collection service” means the residential collection service by the City refuse collector, whereby refuse, recyclable waste materials, and yard waste are generally sorted into separate residential carts by the person discarding such items.

“Basic level of service” means, with respect to residential collection service and automated residential collection service, one collection of each residential cart per week, or that level of collection and disposal service necessary to provide adequate service for the collection of refuse generated by each single-family residence, and each dwelling unit within a duplex, a triplex, or a fourplex, as specifically provided in any given contract between the City and any person for collection of such refuse, or as provided by resolution of the City Council. Basic level of service does not include refuse or substances excluded from collection by regulation of the director or by contract, as hereinafter provided, refuse capable thereof which has not been placed in residential carts within the weight and size limits hereinafter set forth for residential carts. Basic level of service, with respect to commercial collection service, means that level of collection and disposal service necessary to provide adequate service.

“Business” means any commercial or public entity, that generates four cubic yards or more of refuse per week, including, but not limited to, a firm, partnership, proprietorship, joint-stock company, corporation, or association that is organized as a for-profit or nonprofit entity, strip mall (e.g. property complex containing two or more commercial entities), industrial facility, school, school district, California State University, community colleges, University of California, special district or a federal, state, local, regional agency or facility. For purposes of the chapter, “business” also includes a multi-family residential dwelling of five units or more, regardless of the amount of refuse generated.

“City refuse collector” means any person either employed by or under contract with the City to provide removal, transportation, processing, and disposition of refuse from residents and users of premises within the City.

“Collection” means the pickup, removal, and transportation of refuse by any person authorized to do so by the City.

“Commercial collection service” means the collection of refuse from all property within the City excluded from residential collection service, or properties subject to residential collection service which choose to utilize commercial collection service.

“Commercial container” means any vessel, tank, receptacle, dumpster, box or bin used or intended to be used for the purpose of holding any refuse, recyclable material, and recyclable waste material. Commercial containers utilized in commercial collection service include all types of containers, including dumpsters or bins.

“Corporation” means corporations, partnerships, and all business enterprises, associations or organizations, however designed.

“Director” means the Huntington Beach Director of Public Works or his/her authorized representative.

“Hazardous waste” means a waste, or combination of wastes, which because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may: (1) cause, or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an increase in serious irreversible, or incapacitating reversible, illness; or (2) pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, or disposed of, or otherwise managed.

“Level full” means the amount of refuse deposited in a residential cart or commercial container so that it shall not exceed the lowest top edge thereof and still allow the lid thereof to be completely closed.

“Noncombustible refuse” means ashes, bottles, broken crockery, glass, tin cans and metallic substances or any other substances that will not incinerate through contact with flames of ordinary temperature.

“Organic waste” means food waste, green waste, landscaping and pruning waste, nonhazardous wood waste, and food-soiled paper waste that is mixed in with food waste.

“Person” means any individual, firm, governmental unit, organization, partnership, corporation, company or other entity.

“Processing” means reduction, separation, recovery, conversion or recycling of refuse.

“Recyclable material” means materials which are segregated at the source from other refuse for the purpose of recycling and includes, but is not limited to, paper, glass, metals, wood, plastics, wastes, bulky goods, waste oil, and construction and demolition materials and which is sold or donated by the owner thereof to a third party.

“Recyclable material collection” means the collection, transportation, storage, transfer, or processing of recyclable materials.

“Recyclable waste material” means discarded materials such as, but not limited to, newspapers, glass and metal cans, which are separated from other refuse for the purpose of recycling and which are not sold or donated to a third party.

“Recyclable waste material collecting” means the collection, transportation, storage, transfer, or processing of recyclable waste material.

“Recycling” means the process of collecting, sorting, cleansing, treating, and reconstituting materials that would otherwise be disposed of by landfilling or transformation, and returning materials to the economic mainstream in the form of raw material for new, reused, or reconstituted products.

“Refuse” means all putrescible and non-putrescible solid, and semisolid wastes, including garbage, trash, refuse, paper, rubbish, ashes, industrial wastes, organic waste, demolition and construction wastes, discarded home and industrial appliances, manure, vegetable or animal solid or semi-solid wastes, and other discarded solid or semisolid wastes, but not including hazardous waste, radioactive waste regulated pursuant to the State Radiation Control Law, untreated medical waste regulated pursuant to the State Medical Waste Management Act, and liquid waste. Recyclable waste material is considered refuse for purposes of this chapter. Materials that are sold or donated by the owner thereof to a third party, or thereafter recycled, are not considered refuse for purposes of this chapter. The term “refuse” shall be synonymous with the term “solid waste” as used in the Integrated Waste Management Act, Public Resources Code Section 40000, et seq.

“Refuse collection” means the collection, transportation, storage, transfer, disposal, or processing of refuse.

“Residential collection service” means the collection of refuse from each single-family residence, and each dwelling unit within a duplex, a triplex or a fourplex receiving noncommercial refuse collection service. It shall not include any hotel, motel, lodge, hall, club, tourist camp, trailer camp, mobile home park, church, guard shack, pool house, community room, business or industrial establishment, or any lot containing more than four dwelling units.

“Residential cart” means a container having a capacity not to exceed 95 gallons and furnished or supplied by the City refuse collector for use in the automated residential collection service. Residential carts shall be colored brown for refuse, blue for recyclable waste material, and green for yard waste.

“Yard waste” means those constituents of solid waste comprised of non-soil landscape or plant materials such as tree trimmings, grass cuttings, plants, weeds, leaves, branches, trees, or similar materials. (3560-7/02, 3581-11/02, 3801-4/08, 3952-7/12, 4079-4/16)

 

8.21.020 Collection of Refuse, Recyclable Waste Material and Yard Waste
A.    The collection of refuse, recyclable waste material and yard waste shall be performed exclusively by the City refuse collector. The City Council may regulate, by ordinance or resolution, all aspects of the residential refuse service and the commercial refuse service, including, but not limited to, frequency of collection, means of collection and transportation, level of services, charges, fees, and nature, location, and extent of providing such services.

B.     Any other provision of this Code to the contrary notwithstanding, the City may enter into contracts with responsible persons for the collection of refuse within the City utilizing such procurement procedures and upon such terms and conditions as are deemed appropriate by the City Council.

C.     In the event of an emergency or other unforeseen or unpreventable circumstances in which the City refuse collector is unable to maintain refuse collection services, the City Manager may issue limited or temporary permits for a period not to exceed 30 days to persons or corporations to perform any of the services covered by this chapter. Any service beyond 30 days shall be approved by the City Council. (3560-7/02, 3801-4/08)

 

8.21.030 Residential Collection Service Charge
A.    There shall be a charge for residential collection service which maximum rates shall be established from time to time by resolution of the City Council. Such charge shall be set by the City refuse collector and shall apply to persons occupying single-family dwellings, and each dwelling unit within a duplex, a triplex or a fourplex. A dwelling shall be deemed occupied if connected to an active water service. This charge shall not apply to persons occupying residential units such as apartments, mobile home parks, or other multi-family complexes, who are currently contracting directly with the City refuse collector.

B.     Any person receiving residential collection service who is 62 years of age or older shall pay 50% of the charge imposed by this section provided the combined adjusted gross income, as used for federal income tax reporting purposes of all members of the household in which such service user resides does not exceed the “HUD Income Guidelines—Very Low Income Category” currently on file in the City’s Department of Economic Development, for the calendar year prior to the fiscal year (July 1st through June 30th) for which the exemption provided by this chapter is applied. (3560-7/02, 3581-11/02, 3801-4/08)

 

8.21.040 Littering/Dumping of Refuse or Waste Prohibited
A.    It shall be unlawful for any person to cast, deposit, place, sweep, throw, discard or leave any refuse or cause such refuse to be cast, deposited, swept, placed, thrown, discarded or left in any place, public or private, within the City, without the express permission of the owner of the premises.

B.     No person shall throw, discard or deposit infectious or potentially infectious waste in any amount on any public street, sidewalk, beach, park or other public property within the City, or private property within the City not owned by the person, or in or upon any body of water within the jurisdiction of the City.

“Infectious waste” refers to all waste materials which are defined as being injurious to the public health or safety by federal, state, or county statutes, legislation, policies, or rules and regulations as they may be amended from time to time. Examples include, but are not limited to:

1.     hypodermic needles, pen needles, intravenous needles, syringes, lancets and other instruments used to administer medication or otherwise designed to cut or pierce the skin,

2.     disposable diapers, rags, or other materials used to clean areas infected by human or animal waste or fluids,

3.     other materials contaminated with or exposed to infected or contagious individuals, animals or materials,

4.     any material that contains human excrement, waste, blood or other fluid,

5.     unused, unwanted or expired prescription medications or other controlled dangerous substances that can be ingested by humans or animals, bottles that contain or previously contained such medications or substances, or other medical supplies used to facilitate the taking of such substances.

C.     Penalty. Subsections A and B apply to all persons within the City and are in addition to any other anti-littering and/or dumping and/or waste provisions as provided in federal, state, or county law or provided within this Code. Any person who purposely or knowingly violates subsection B shall, upon conviction thereof, be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or be imprisoned for a period not to exceed six months, or both. Subsection A is an infraction subject to the penalties outlined in Section 1.16.040 of this Code. (3560-7/02, 4129-5/17)

 

8.21.050 Occupant Responsible for Premises
Every person occupying, using or controlling any premises shall keep the premises in a clean and sanitary condition, and no person shall permit any refuse, sewer effluent, excrement, slop or stagnant water, butcher offal, market refuse, dead animal or any other noxious or offensive matter of any kind, or any other substance that may become offensive, to be deposited or to remain thereon except as otherwise provided by law. (3560-7/02)

 

8.21.060 Owner Liable for Premises
The owner of any premises shall be liable for the costs to the City for the enforcement of any provision of this chapter. (3560-7/02)

 

8.21.070 Accumulation Prohibited
No person occupying, using or controlling any premises shall permit any refuse to accumulate thereon, nor shall any such person maintain any accumulation of refuse thereon, unless in either event the same is stored in a manner approved by the director or by law. It shall be unlawful for any person to dump, deposit, place or bury refuse in or upon any lot, land, street, or alley, whether public or private, nor throw such refuse in any creek, stream, water or water way within the City. Any unauthorized accumulation of refuse on any premises is hereby prohibited and declared to be a nuisance. (3560-7/02)

 

8.21.080 Storage
A.    Refuse shall be stored in a container of a type approved by the director. Every such container shall be constructed of metal, plastic, or equally durable material, in such manner as to be strong, watertight, not easily corrodible, insect and rodent resistant, and shall be kept covered at all times, except when refuse is being deposited or removed from such container. Persons in charge of residential properties served by the City refuse collector’s automated residential collection service shall separate all refuse, recyclable waste material, and yard waste into the appropriate residential cart prior to collection by the City refuse collector. Residential carts shall be kept in a level full condition. The cover shall completely close the residential cart so that no refuse may be visible. Commercial containers shall be kept in a level full condition. The cover shall completely and tightly close the container so as to render it fly and rodent proof and so that no refuse may be visible. A sufficient number of containers shall be provided for the basic level of service, in order to ensure that all refuse is contained within completely covered containers until such time as the refuse is collected.

B.     Refuse shall be stored in such a manner that it will not provide harborage to rats, nor cause a fire hazard. (3560-7/02, 3652-6/04, 3801-4/08)

 

8.21.090 Containers and Transportation of Refuse
No person other than the City refuse collector shall transport refuse or recyclable waste material in the City of Huntington Beach on behalf of another person in exchange for compensation. All vehicles and containers used in collecting and transporting refuse or recyclable material shall be provided with metal or plastic bodies so constructed as to be leakproof and to prevent the escape of offensive odors and loss, spillage or blowing away of any contents collected or transported within the City. Such vehicles and containers shall be thoroughly cleaned to eliminate odors and decayed materials. (3560-7/02, 3652-6/04, 3801-4/08)

 

8.21.100 Containers—Location
Property owners and tenants are each responsible for the placement of residential carts and any accumulation of refuse which is for collection, and which shall be kept or placed in such a manner as not to be visible from any street or alley, whether public or private, except from noon on the day preceding collection to 10:00 p.m. on the day of collection. During the period of collection, residential carts and any accumulation of refuse shall be placed, outside of any enclosures, no later than 6:30 a.m., as follows, unless otherwise directed by the director:

A.    On Alley. On the premises, at the rear property line, where there is a through alley in the rear of the premises.

B.     Access From Side Entrance. On the premises at an accessible point adjacent to any side entrance thereto where no through alley exists.

C.     At Curb. At the curb in front of the premises, where no through alley or side entrance exists.

D.    Unless otherwise directed, each residential cart shall be placed for collection in the roadway portion of the street with such minimum clearance area as to provide clear and safe lifting for collection. (3560-7/02, 3801-4/08)

 

8.21.110 Container—Interference
No person except the owner thereof, his or her agent or employee, a duly authorized City employee, or any employee of the City refuse collector, shall interfere in any manner with any residential cart, or any accumulation of refuse which is placed for collection, nor shall any person remove such residential cart, or accumulation from the location where it shall have been placed by the owner, his or her agent or his/her employee. (3560-7/02, 3801-4/08)

 

8.21.120 Container—Improper Substances
No person shall place or cause or permit to be placed in any refuse container or residential cart any substance or material other than refuse as defined in this chapter. Furniture, appliances, construction and demolition wastes, or any other waste which is of sufficient size or weight that, when placed in a refuse container or residential cart, prevent the lid from closing completely or cause the weight of the refuse container or residential cart to exceed the posted weight capacity, shall not be placed in refuse containers or residential carts. Persons wishing to dispose of such items shall inform the City refuse collector and make special arrangements to have the items removed. The City refuse collector may levy a charge for removal of such items under a schedule and formula to be uniformly applied, which formula and schedule shall have been approved by the director. The City refuse collector shall not be required to collect hazardous waste. (3560-7/02, 3801-4/08)

 

8.21.130 Container—Removal
A.    The director may cause to be posted a notice on any container illegally placed on public or private property. The notice shall specify the nature of the violation and shall state that the container must be removed within 24 hours or it may be removed and stored by the City, and the contents disposed of, at the expense of the owner thereof. The posting of a notice to remove shall constitute constructive notice to the owner and user of the requirement to remove the container.

B.     If the container is not removed within 24 hours after the notice to remove is posted, the director may order the removal and storage of the container and the disposal of its contents. The owner of the container shall be responsible to the City for the actual cost of removal, storage, and disposal. All amounts due to the City for the cost of removal, storage and disposal shall be paid before the container is returned to the owner. Such amounts shall constitute a debt owed by the owner to the City, and the owner shall be liable to the City in an action brought by the City for the recovery of such amounts.

C.     If the identity of the owner of a container that has been removed by the City is known to the director, the director shall promptly cause notice to be mailed to the owner to claim the stored property. If the container is not claimed within 90 days after removal and notice to the owner, or 90 days after removal if the identity of the owner is unknown to the director, the container and its contents shall be deemed abandoned property and may be disposed of accordingly.

D.    After a container has once been removed by the City pursuant to this article, the owner thereof shall be deemed to have actual notice of the provisions of this article, including prohibition against the placement of unauthorized containers. In the event of a subsequent placement of a container by the same owner, or an affiliate of the owner, that is in violation of this chapter, the director may immediately, without the posting of a notice to remove pursuant to subsection A of this section, direct the removal and storage of the unauthorized container and shall, in such case, give notice to the owner to claim the container pursuant to subsections B and C of this section. (3560-7/02, 3652-6/04, 3801-4/08)

 

8.21.140 Collection—Manner
The owner, occupant, tenant or lessee of any premises shall provide or cause to be provided, basic level of service for the removal of refuse from said premises. Properties utilizing commercial collection service shall provide adequate service. The City refuse collector shall remove from the premises all refuse which has been properly placed for collection, whenever such refuse is of a type and in an amount provided by contract with the City. Any removal of refuse by the City refuse collector, or any person shall be performed in a neat, orderly and quiet fashion, without causing damage to the container or the lid. Any spilled matter shall be picked up by the person responsible for the spillage, and the premises shall be left in a clean and orderly condition. Overfilled containers of refuse creating accumulations of refuse in or at the pickup site, shall be the responsibility of the premises owner for clean up. The security and proper level full container shall be the responsibility of the premises owner. All additional collection of any type of refuse that does not fit into a container or causes an overfull container shall be the responsibility of the premises owner along with any additional costs for removal or extra collection services. Refuse lawfully placed for collection shall be the property of the City of Huntington Beach from the time of placement until the time of collection and shall become the property of the City refuse collector from the time of collection to the time of disposal. (3560-7/02, 3801-4/08)

 

8.21.150 Residential Refuse Collection
The City refuse collector shall operate and maintain residential refuse collection in the City by providing the basic level of service on a regularly scheduled basis, approved by resolution of the City Council, not less frequently than once each week. The director may by regulation exclude from such service any item or substance deemed hazardous, obnoxious or otherwise inappropriate for such service. (3560-7/02)

 

8.21.160 Commercial Collection Service
Persons owning or operating premises utilizing commercial collection service shall contract with the City refuse collector for the provision of the basic level of service. The director may, by written order, require the owner and/or manager of any premises subject to commercial collection service to provide adequate service to the premises in question. (3560-7/02)

 

8.21.170 Special Collections—Excluded Refuse
A.    Refuse exceeding the limitation set forth in this chapter may be scheduled for special collection either at regular special collection dates or by arrangement with the City refuse collector.

B.     The City refuse collector shall make available containers and drop-off bodies, provide additional collections not required by this chapter, pick up refuse at points other than as required in this chapter or provide for the collection of greater volumes of refuse per collection than required in this chapter, any or all of these additional services at the request of the person or business being served. The City refuse collector may make a direct charge in each instance for such additional service under a written agreement which shall be subject to the approval of the director and at such rates as are reasonable, just and uniform for all persons or businesses being served. All such direct charges shall be collected by the City refuse collector.

C.     The removal of wearing apparel, bedding or other refuse from homes, hospitals, or other places where highly infectious or contagious diseases have prevailed, shall be performed under the supervision and direction of the County Health Officer, and such refuse shall neither be placed in containers nor left for regular collection and disposal.

D.    Highly flammable or explosive or radioactive refuse shall not be placed in containers for regular collection and disposal, but shall be removed under the supervision of the Fire Chief at the expense of the owner or possessor of the material.

E.     The director may, by written permit, authorize provision of bins and drop-off bodies if the City refuse collector fails to provide such service within five calendar days after a customer order and such service is not thereafter provided within 48 hours after notice to the City refuse collector of such failure by the director. (3560-7/02, 3801-4/08)

 

8.21.175 Mandatory Recycling of Refuse by Businesses—Commercial Recycling Program
A.    On and after July 1, 2012, all businesses within the City shall reuse, recycle, compost, or otherwise divert refuse from disposal in the manner required by California Public Resources Code Sections 42649 through 42649.7, inclusive, (or any successor statutes) and in compliance with such implementing regulations as may currently exist or hereafter be adopted by state regulatory agencies. Each business shall be responsible for ensuring and demonstrating its compliance with the requirements of this section. The activities undertaken by each business pursuant to this section shall be consistent with all requirements of this chapter and all City ordinances, policies, and contracts or agreements applicable to the collection, handling or recycling of refuse.

B.     The director shall have the duty and the authority to implement a commercial recycling program appropriate for the City which is designed to divert refuse generated by businesses. The program shall consist of at least the following components:

1.     Education and Outreach to Businesses. The director shall determine the appropriate types of educational and outreach programs to ensure that the program targets the components of the City’s commercial waste stream.

2.     Identification and Monitoring of Businesses to Assess if They Are Complying with Section 8.21.175(A). If any business is not in compliance with these provisions, the director shall notify such business that it is out of compliance. Failure to comply within 60 days following such notification shall be unlawful and is hereby prohibited. (3952-7/12)

 

8.21.180 Collection of Recyclable Material
Persons collecting recyclable material within the City shall, in addition to obtaining a business license, obtain a recyclable material collection and disposal permit from the director prior to commencing such collection and annually thereafter. Persons operating under such a permit shall, on a quarterly basis or at such times as determined by the director, submit a report to the director specifying the amount of recyclable material collected within the City, the location(s) from which the recyclable material was collected, and the location(s) to which the recyclable material was brought. Such report shall be kept confidential unless otherwise provided by law. Failure to submit timely reports shall be a basis for revocation of the recyclable material collection and disposal permit. The director shall have the right to audit the records of persons who have received a permit pursuant to this section. (3560-7/02)

 

8.21.190 Disposal Methods
The City refuse collector shall dispose of refuse in a manner approved by the director and consistent with the provisions of this chapter. (3560-7/02)

 

8.21.200 Rules and Regulations
The director shall make such rules and regulations as may be necessary, reasonable, and proper to enforce the provisions of this chapter. A copy of any rule or regulation promulgated by the director shall be provided to the City Council. (3560-7/02)

 

8.21.210 Appeals
Any person adversely impacted by a ruling of the director may appeal such ruling to the City Manager. The appeal shall be in writing to the City Manager and shall set forth the basis of the appeal. The City Manager, or his/her designee, shall hold a hearing on the appeal within 30 days of receipt of the written appeal. The City Manager or designee shall render a written decision within 30 days after the close of the hearing on the appeal by providing it to the appellant by first class mail. The decision of the City Manager shall be final. (3560-7/02)

 

8.21.220 Unauthorized Collection Prohibited
A.    No person other than the City refuse collector shall scavenge or otherwise remove refuse, yard waste or recyclable waste material that has been lawfully placed for collection.

B.     It shall be unlawful for any person to provide refuse service within the City without the permission of the director.

C.     It shall be unlawful for any person to utilize refuse collection service by a person not permitted to provide such service by the director. (3560-7/02, 3801-4/08)

 

Chapter 8.24 DUST—INDUSTRIAL WASTE
8.24.010 Industrial Waste Defined
“Industrial waste” means any and all liquid or solid waste substance in sewage from any processing or manufacturing of whatever nature. (1091-7/64)

 

8.24.020 Prohibited When Nuisance
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to permit, maintain, or create a situation wherein the dust, smoke, soot, carbon or industrial waste on any property, under his, her or its control, creates a public nuisance. (1091-7/64, 1253-9/66)

 

8.24.030 Escape of Smoke, Carbon and Soot
No person shall cause, permit or allow smoke, carbon or soot from any fire being operated, used, maintained or fired by such person to escape from any smokestack, chimney, flue, vent, firebox, kiln or furnace. (1253-9/66)

 

8.24.040 Abatement—Owner Notification
Whenever there exists in any place within the City a public nuisance, as defined by Section 1.04.030(F) of this Code, created by industrial waste or dust, the City shall notify in writing the record owner or person having control or possession of such place or premises to abate such nuisance. (1091-7/64, 1253-9/66, 1935-11/74, 2106-9/76)

 

8.24.050 Abatement—Notice Direction
The notice shall direct the owner or person in control or possession of the place or premises, within the time specified in said notice, to abate the nuisance and to perform any and all work necessary to prevent the recurrence thereof in the places or premises specified in the notice. (1091-7/64)

 

8.24.060 Abatement—Notice—Service
A.    The notice shall be served upon the owner of record or person having control or possession of the place or premises upon which the nuisance exists, or upon the agent of either.

B.     Notices may be served by any person authorized by the health officer for such purpose in the same manner as a summons in a civil action. (1091-7/64)

 

8.24.070 Abatement—Failure
Upon the neglect or refusal of the owner, or person having control or possession of any place or premises to comply with the notice to abate, the City may abate such nuisance and the owner of such place or premises, or the person having control or possession thereof, shall be liable to the City for the costs of such abatement which may be recovered in a civil action. (1091-7/64, 2106-9/76)

 

8.24.080 Abatement—Notice of City Intention
In the event the City elects to abate the nuisance, it shall serve or cause to be served upon the record owner or the person in control or possession of the premises a “Notice of Intention to Abate” and if a hearing is not requested before the City Council, as hereinafter provided within 10 days after service of the “Notice of Intention to Abate,” the City may proceed to abate any such nuisance as hereinafter provided. (1091-7/64, 2106-9/76)

 

8.24.090 Abatement—Hearing Request
The request for hearing shall be in writing and be filed with the City Clerk. Notice of the time and place where the City Council will consider the matter shall be mailed by the City Clerk to the applicant. At the time fixed for the hearing, the City Council shall hear and consider all relevant testimony and evidence relating to the matter as offered by the applicant and by the City. Upon the conclusion of the hearing, the City Council shall determine whether a condition contrary to the provisions of this chapter exists and whether the City may abate. (1091-7/64, 2106-9/76)

 

8.24.100 Abatement—Refusal—Misdemeanor
Any owner or person having control of any place or premises upon which there is a public nuisance created by industrial waste or dust, who refuses or neglects to abate the same or to take corrective measures to prevent its recurrence with the written notice from the City within the time specified in said notice, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to punishment upon conviction thereof by a fine not exceeding $500.00 or 100 days imprisonment in the county jail or both such fine and imprisonment. (1091-7/64, 2106-9/76)

 

8.24.110 Provisions Nonexclusive
Provisions of this chapter in reference to abatement are to be construed as an added remedy of abatement of the nuisance declared and not in conflict or derogation of any other actions or proceedings or remedies otherwise provided by law. (1091-7/64)

 

Chapter 8.32 STANDING WATER
8.32.010 Nuisance—Abate or Fence in
Every person in possession of land within the City, either as owner, purchaser under a contract, lessee, tenant or licensee, upon which is other means, which standing water shall, in the opinion of the Director of Building and Safety, be an attractive nuisance to children by reason of the location, depth, condition, soil factor or accessibility to children, shall cause to be erected a five foot fence, or other approved enclosure completely around said body of water and if any gates are located in such enclosure, all such gates shall be of the same height as required for the enclosure and shall be self-closing and self-latching. (1233-7/66, 2017-12/75, 2106-9/76, 3549-5/02)

 

8.32.020 Notice—Compliance
The Building and Safety Director, or designee, shall give notice of the standing water to the person or persons in possession thereof and require them to comply within 30 days. (1233-7/66, 3549-5/02)

 

8.32.030 Violation
Violation of this chapter shall be punishable as a misdemeanor. (1233-7/66)

 

Chapter 8.36 RUBBISH
8.36.010 Accumulation—Prohibited
Every owner and occupant of real property shall keep said property free of any accumulation of trash, junk, debris, rubbish or refuse. (1668-9/71)

 

8.36.015 Standards for Vacant Real Property
A.    Order of the Planning Director. When deemed necessary by the Planning Director in order to maintain the safety of persons or property, the following standards may also be imposed upon vacant real property:

1.     Access Points. All windows, doors, and other open access features to the structures on the real property shall be boarded up and secured to prohibit entry; and/or

2.     Fencing. The property shall be fenced on all sides with a properly permitted chain link fence or other type of secure fencing at a minimum height of six feet from grade, or greater, in compliance with the Huntington Beach Zoning and Subdivision Ordinance. The fence shall be properly posted with no trespassing signs, and kept clear of all other signs, except lawfully installed real estate signs for the lease or sale of the property and signs identifying ownership of the property or fencing.

B.     Compliance and Maintenance Responsibility. Compliance and maintenance with the standards contained in this section shall be at the sole cost of the responsible party for the vacant real property and shall not limit the remedies or recovery of costs for the abatement of any vacant real property found to be in violation of this Code.

C.     Failure to Obey Order—Misdemeanor. Every occupant and owner of real property who fails to obey an order as generally outlined in this section is guilty of a misdemeanor with respect to each day the occupant fails to obey the order. (3509-10/01)

 

8.36.020 Accumulation—Nuisance
Any accumulation of trash, junk, debris, rubbish or refuse on any real property in this City, unless otherwise permitted by law, is declared to be a nuisance. (1668-9/71)

 

8.36.030 Removal—Notice—Compliance
It shall be the duty of the Director of Planning to notify in the manner hereinafter provided, the occupant and owner of any real property in this City to eradicate, remove and abate, within 10 days from the giving of such notice, any accumulation of trash, junk, debris, rubbish or refuse from such real property, and that upon failure to do so within such 10 days, this City will cause the trash, junk, debris, rubbish or refuse to be removed and abated, and that the cost of such removal and abatement will be made a special assessment against that property, to be collected at the same time and in the same manner and subject to the same penalties as municipal taxes. (1668-9/71, 2217-10/77, 3551-5/02)

 

8.36.040 Removal—Notice—Service
Such notice shall be given in writing, by serving personally upon any occupant and upon the owner of any real property, each a copy of such notice, directed to the owner, or if the owner be a nonresident of the City, by serving any occupant personally, and by mailing by registered mail, a like copy in writing to the owner at his or her last known address as shown by the last assessment of the tax assessor of Orange County. If said address appears thereon, or if no address appears thereon, the same shall be addressed to him or her at the City of Huntington Beach, and if there be no such address or occupant, by posting a copy of the notice in a conspicuous place, upon each lot or legal subdivision of the property, and serving a copy upon the owner as hereinafter provided. (1668-9/71)

 

8.36.050 Removal—Delinquency—Hearing
At the date and time so set by the notice, if the accumulation of trash, junk, debris, rubbish or refuse is not removed from the property, the Director of Planning shall thereupon report the delinquency to the City Council with an estimate of the probable cost of doing the work. Such matters shall be set for hearing before the City Council and not less than 10 days’ notice of such hearing shall be given to the occupant and owner of such real property in the manner provided by Section 8.36.040. (1668-9/71, 2217-10/77, 3551-5/02)

 

8.36.060 Abatement by City—Work Order
The City Council, after such public hearing, upon a finding of the existence of debris, rubbish or refuse, shall order the Director of Planning to do said work, at the expense of the owner of the property, and provide for temporary payment of the same with City funds. (1668-9/71, 2217-10/77, 3551-5/02)

 

8.36.070 Extension of Time
The City Council may, in its discretion, extend the time within which the work must be done. (1668-9/71)

 

8.36.080 Abatement by City—Records Kept
At the completion of the work, the Director of Planning must prepare a statement of the proceedings, reciting the existence of the nuisance, the description of the property, the names of the owners and occupants, if known, the giving of notices, the holding of the public hearing, the making of the order by the City Council, the doing of the work and the cost thereof. (1668-9/71, 2217-10/77, 3551-5/02)

 

8.36.090 Abatement by City—Records Filed
Such statement must be signed and verified by the Director of Planning and filed with the City Council. (1668-9/71, 2217-10/77, 3551-5/02)

 

8.36.100 Abatement by City—Costs Become Lien
The City Council shall then assess such costs against the parcel of land pursuant to Section 38773.5 of the Government Code and shall cause the amount of such costs and assessment to be transmitted to the tax collector for collection. (1668-9/71)

 

8.36.110 Criminal Prosecution
The collection of the cost of abatement shall not be a bar to criminal prosecution for nuisance. (1668-9/71)

 

8.36.120 Permitting Nuisance—Misdemeanor
Every occupant and owner of real property who maintains, allows or permits any nuisance defined in this chapter after notice to abate as provided in this chapter, is guilty of a separate misdemeanor with respect to each day that the nuisance continues, after said notice on each lot or parcel on which the nuisance shall exist. (1668-9/71)

 

8.36.130 Placing Commercial Handbills on Vehicles
No person shall affix to any vehicle, or cause to be affixed to any vehicle, any notice, paper, placard, bill, poster, card, sticker, banner, sign, advertisement, or other device designed to attract the attention of the public for the purpose of advertising any merchandise, commodity, property, business, service, act or skill offered, sold or rendered for hire, reward, price, trade or profit. (3084-12/90)

 

8.36.140 Distribution on Uninhabited or Vacant Private Premises
It is unlawful for any person to distribute, deposit, place, throw, scatter or cast any handbill in or upon any private premises which are temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant. (3084-12/90)

 

8.36.150 Manner of Distribution
No person shall distribute in or upon any private property any advertising matter except in the following manner:

A.    By placing the same in a receptacle, clip, or other device designed or intended to receive advertising matter, when such receptacle, clip, or other device has been erected in a conspicuous place near the front door or front entrance or near the mailbox of any private property; or

B.     If no such receptacle, clip, or other device has been erected as provided in this section, then by handing the advertising matter to an occupant of the property, or placing the same upon the porch or vestibule of a house or building on the private property, provided that, in the latter case, the advertising matter is wrapped, tied, folded, or otherwise so prepared or placed that it will not be blown loose by the winds and provided that a previous day’s distribution of advertising matter has been removed. (3084-12/90)

 

8.36.160 City Abatement—Handbills and Flyers
The City Manager, through his or her designee, may remove or cause the removal of and properly discard any handbill placed in a manner prohibited by this section. The person responsible for the distribution of any such handbill shall be liable to the City for the cost of removal thereof, in addition to any other penalty provided for by law. (3084-12/90)

 

8.36.170 Presumptions
In any civil or criminal action filed against any person for violation of this chapter, proof that the handbill in question contains the name of or otherwise identifies such person or such person’s principal, agents, representative or employer shall constitute a rebuttable presumption that the person so named or identified caused such handbill to be distributed in the location from which it was removed. (3084-12/90)

 

Chapter 8.40 NOISE CONTROL
Note
*       Note: §§ 8.40.140, 8.40.160 and 8.40.170 repealed by Ord. 3940-7/12.

 

8.40.010 Declaration of Policy
A.    In order to control unnecessary, excessive and annoying sounds emanating from incorporated areas of the City, it is hereby declared to be the policy of the City to prohibit such sounds generated from all sources as specified in this chapter.

B.     It is determined that certain noise levels are detrimental to the public health, welfare and safety and contrary to public interest; therefore, the City Council does ordain and declare that creating, maintaining, causing or allowing to create, maintain or cause any noise in a manner prohibited by, or not in conformity with the provisions of this chapter, is a public nuisance and shall be punishable as such. (2379-7/79)

 

8.40.020 Definitions
The following words, phrases and terms as used in this chapter shall have the meaning as indicated below:

“Ambient noise level” shall mean the all-encompassing noise level associated with a given environment, being a composite of sounds from all sources, excluding the alleged offensive noise, at the location and approximate time at which a comparison with the alleged offensive noise is to be made.

“Commercial property” shall mean a parcel of real property which is developed and used either in part or in whole for commercial purposes including, but not limited to, retail and wholesale businesses and professional offices.

“Cumulative period” shall mean an additive period or time composed of individual time segments which may be continuous or interrupted.

“Decibel (db)” shall mean a unit which denotes the ratio between two quantities which are proportional to power; the number of decibels corresponding to the ratio of two amounts of power is 10 times the logarithm to the base 10 of this ratio.

“Emergency machinery, vehicle or work” shall mean any machinery, vehicle or work used, employed or performed in an effort to protect, provide or restore safe conditions in the community or for the citizenry, or work by private or public utilities when restoring utility service.

“Fixed noise source” shall mean a stationary device which creates sounds while fixed or motionless, including but not limited to, industrial and commercial machinery and equipment, pumps, fans, compressors, generators, air conditioners and refrigeration equipment.

“Grading” shall mean any excavating or filling of earth material, or any combination thereof, conducted to prepare said site for construction or the placement of the improvements thereon.

“Impact noise” shall mean the noise produced by the collision of one mass in motion with a second mass which may be either in motion or at rest.

“Industrial property” shall mean a parcel of real property which is developed and used in part or in whole for manufacturing purposes including research and development uses.

“Mobile noise source” shall mean any noise source other than a fixed noise source.

“Noise level” shall mean the “A” weighted sound pressure level in decibels obtained by using a sound level meter at slow response with a reference pressure of 20 micropascals (micronewtons per square meter). The unit of measurement shall be designated as db(A).

“Person” shall mean a person, firm, association, co-partnership, joint venture, corporation or any entity, public or private in nature.

“Predominant tone noise” shall mean a noise characterized by a predominant frequency or frequencies so that other frequencies cannot be readily distinguished.

“Residential property” shall mean a parcel of real property which is developed and used either in part or in whole for residential purposes, other than transient uses such as hotels or motels.

“Sound pressure level” of a sound, in decibels, shall mean 20 times the logarithm to the base of 10 of the ratio of the pressure of the sound to a reference pressure, which reference pressure shall be explicitly stated. (2379-7/79)

 

8.40.030 Noise Level Measurement Criteria
Any noise level measurements made pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be performed using a sound level meter or similar device that accurately measures noise levels and produces data that may be used in administrative or judicial proceedings. The location for measuring noise levels may be at any legally accessible vantage point where a reasonable person would conclude the noise may exceed this chapter’s noise standards. All noise level measurements shall be performed in accordance with the procedures established by the City. (2379-7/79, 3940-7/12)

 

8.40.040 Designated Noise Zones
The properties hereinafter described, whether within or without the City, are hereby assigned to the following noise zones:

A.    Noise Zone 1. All residential properties.

B.     Noise Zone 2. All professional office and public institutional properties.

C.     Noise Zone 3. All commercial properties with the exception of professional office properties.

D.    Noise Zone 4. All industrial properties. (2379-7/79)

 

8.40.050 Exterior Noise Standards
A.    The following noise standards, unless otherwise specifically indicated, shall apply to all residential property within a designated noise zone:

Exterior Noise Standards

 

Noise Zone

Noise Level

Time Period

1

55 db(A)

7 a.m. - 10 p.m.

 

50 db(A)

10 p.m. - 7 a.m.

2

55 db(A)

Anytime

3

60 db(A)

Anytime

4

70 db(A)

Anytime

 

The above standard does not apply to the establishment of multifamily residence private balconies and patios. Multifamily developments with balconies or patios that do not meet CNEL standards are required to provide occupancy disclosure notices to all future tenants regarding potential noise impacts.

B.     In the event the alleged offensive noise consists entirely of impact noise, simple tone noise, speech, music, or any combination thereof, each of the above noise levels shall be reduced by five db(A). (2379-8/79, 2788-9/85, 3940-7/12)

 

8.40.060 Exterior Noise Levels Prohibited
A.    It shall be unlawful for any person at any location within the incorporated area of the City to create any noise, or to allow the creation of any noise on property owned, leased, occupied, or otherwise controlled by such person, which causes the noise level when measured on any residential, public institutional, professional, commercial or industrial property, either within or without the City, to exceed the applicable noise standards:

1.     For a cumulative period of more than 30 minutes in any hour;

2.     Plus five db(A) for a cumulative period of more than 15 minutes in any hour;

3.     Plus 10 db(A) for a cumulative period of more than five minutes in any hour;

4.     Plus 15 db(A) for a cumulative period of more than one minute in any hour; or

5.     Plus 20 db(A) for any period of time.

B.     In the event the ambient noise level exceeds any of the first four noise limit categories above, the cumulative period applicable to said category shall be increased to reflect said ambient noise level. In the event the ambient noise level exceeds the fifth noise limit category, the maximum allowable noise level under said category shall be increased to reflect the maximum ambient noise level. (2379-7/79)

 

8.40.070 Interior Noise Standards
A.    The following noise standards, unless otherwise specifically indicated, shall apply to all real property within a designated noise zone:

Interior Noise Standards

 

Noise Zone

Noise Level

Time Period

1

55 db(A)

7 a.m. -10 p.m.

 

45 db(A)

10 p.m. - 7 a.m.

2, 3, 4

55 db(A)

Anytime

 

B.     In the event the alleged offensive noise consists entirely of impact noise, simple tone noise, speech, music, or any combination thereof, each of the above noise levels shall be reduced by five db(A). (2379-7/79, 2788-9/85)

 

8.40.080 Interior Levels of Noise Prohibited
A.    It shall be unlawful for any person at any location within the incorporated area of the City to create any noise, or to allow the creation of any noise on property owned, leased, occupied, or otherwise controlled by such person, which causes the noise level when measured within any other structure on any residential, public institutional, commercial, or industrial property to exceed:

1.     The noise standard for a cumulative period of more than five minutes in any hour;

2.     The noise standards plus five db(A) for a cumulative period of more than one minute in any hour; or

3.     The noise standard plus 10 db(A) for any period of time.

B.     In the event the ambient noise level exceeds either of the first two noise limit categories above, the cumulative period applicable to said category shall be increased to reflect said ambient noise level. In the event the ambient noise level exceeds the third noise level, the maximum allowable noise level under said category shall be increased to reflect the maximum ambient noise level.

C.     Each of the noise limits specified above shall be reduced by five db(A) for impact or predominant tone noises, or for noises consisting of speech or music.

D.    In the event that the noise source and the affected property are within different noise zones, the noise standards of the affected property shall apply. (2379-7/79)

 

8.40.090 Special Provisions
The following activities shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter:

A.    School bands, school athletics and school entertainment events, provided such events are conducted on school property or authorized by special permit from the City.

B.     Activities otherwise lawfully conducted in public parks, public playgrounds and public or private school grounds.

C.     Any mechanical device, apparatus or equipment used, related to or connected with emergency machinery, vehicle or work.

D.    Noise sources associated with construction, repair, remodeling, or grading of any real property; provided a permit has been obtained from the City as provided herein; and provided said activities do not take place between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on weekdays, including Saturday, or at any time on Sunday or a federal holiday.

E.     All mechanical devices, apparatus or equipment which are utilized for the protection or harvest of agricultural crops during periods of potential or actual frost damage or other adverse weather conditions.

F.     Mobile noise sources associated with agricultural operations provided such operations do not take place between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on weekdays, including Saturday, or at any time on Sunday or a federal holiday.

G.    Mobile noise sources associated with agricultural pest control through pesticide application, provided that the application is made in accordance with restricted material permits issued by or regulations enforced by the Agricultural Commissioner.

H.    Noise sources associated with the maintenance of real property provided said activities take place between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. on any day except Sunday or between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on Sunday or a federal holiday.

I.      Leaf blower shall be governed by Section 8.40.095.

J.      Any activity or equipment to the extent that design regulation thereof has been pre-empted by state or federal laws.

K.    Noise sources associated with temporary public or private events located on private or public property provided a permit has been obtained from the City as provided herein. (2379-7/79, 3131-4/92, 3940-7/12)

 

8.40.095 Leaf Blowers
A.    Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have meanings as set forth below:

1.     “Leaf blower” means any machine, however powered, used to blow leaves, dirt and other debris off sidewalks, driveways, lawns and other surfaces.

2.     “Parcel” means an area of real property with a separate or distinct number or other designation shown on a plat recorded in the office of the County Recorder. Contiguous parcels owned by the same individual or entity shall be considered one parcel for purposes of this section.

B.     Unlawful to Propel Debris Beyond Parcel Boundary. It shall be unlawful for any person to use or operate any leaf blower in such a manner as to blow, dispel or make airborne, dust, leaves, grass cuttings, paper, trash or any other type of unattached debris or material, beyond the parcel boundaries of the parcel being cleaned, unless the consent of the adjoining owner or person in possession is obtained. It shall be unlawful for any person to use or operate any leaf blower within the City in such a way as to blow leaves, dirt and other debris onto the public rights-of-way or private property and to allow such debris to remain there in excess of 30 minutes.

C.     Special Prohibitions. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a leaf blower within a residential zone or within 100 feet of a residential zone of the City of Huntington Beach, except under the following conditions:

1.     Time Restriction. Noise sources associated with the maintenance of real property provided said activities take place between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. on any day except Sunday or between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on Sunday or a federal holiday.

2.     Distance Restriction. Leaf blowers shall not be operated within a horizontal distance of 10 feet of any operable window, door, or mechanical air intake opening or duct.

3.     Duration of Use Restriction. Leaf blowers shall not be operated for more than 15 minutes per hour, per day, on parcels less than one-half acre and no more than 30 minutes per hour on parcels greater than one-half acre up to one acre. Leaf blowers shall not be operated for more than two hours on parcels of one acre or more.

4.     Number Restriction. No person shall operate more than one leaf blower per parcel on one-half acre, no more than two leaf blowers on parcels greater than one-half acre and no more than three leaf blowers on parcels greater than one acre or more.

5.     The maximum decibel level of 70 db(A) as measured 10 feet from the leaf blower shall not be exceeded. (3131-4/92)

 

8.40.100 Schools, Hospitals and Churches—Special Provisions
It shall be unlawful for any person to create any noise which causes the noise level at any school, hospital or church while same is in use, to exceed the noise limits specified for exterior noise standards in this chapter, or which noise level unreasonably interferes with the use of such institutions or which unreasonably disturbs or annoys patients in the hospital, provided conspicuous signs are displayed in three separate locations within one-tenth of a mile of the institution indicating the presence of a school, hospital or church. (2379-7/79)

 

8.40.110 Air Conditioning, Refrigeration—Special Provisions
During a one-year period following the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, the noise level standards specified in this chapter shall be increased by five db(A) where the alleged noise source is an air-conditioning apparatus or refrigeration system, which was installed prior to the effective date of this chapter. (2379-7/79)

 

8.40.111 Prohibited Noises
A.    Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter and in addition thereto, it shall be unlawful for any person to willfully make or continue, or cause to be made or continued, any loud, unnecessary or unusual noise which disturbs the peace or quiet of any neighborhood or which causes discomfort or annoyance to any reasonable person of normal sensitiveness residing in the area.

B.     The standard which may be considered in determining whether a violation of the provisions of this section exists may include, but not be limited to, the following:

1.     The level of the noise;

2.     Whether the nature of the noise is usual or unusual;

3.     Whether the origin of the noise is natural or unnatural;

4.     The level and intensity of the background noise, if any;

5.     The proximity of the noise to residential sleeping facilities;

6.     The nature and zoning of the area within which the noise emanates;

7.     The density of the inhabitation of the area within which the noise emanates;

8.     The time of the day and night the noise occurs;

9.     The duration of the noise;

10.   Whether the noise is recurrent, intermittent or constant; and

11.   Whether the noise is produced by a commercial or noncommercial activity. (3216-12/93)

 

8.40.112 Loud Noises
It shall be unlawful for any person to:

A.    Use, operate, or permit to be operated any radio, receiving set or device, television set, musical instrument, phonograph, CD, DVD, tape player, juke box, or other machine or device for producing or reproducing sound in such a manner as to disturb the peace, quiet, and comfort of other persons.

B.     Make or allow to be made any noise which continues for more than a five-minute period between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. if such noise is audible for 50 feet or more from the source of the noise.

C.     Maintain, manage, or control any business or residential property in violation of subsections A or B of this section.

D.    Own, maintain, control, operate, take care or custody of, or otherwise provide any premises, and allow noise to continue after being informed, anytime within the preceding 30 days by the Police Department, that a violation of this chapter has been committed on said premises.

E.     Violations of this section are hereby declared a nuisance. (3514-12/01)

 

8.40.120 Manner of Enforcement
A.    The Director of Planning and Building (“director”) or Police Chief and his or her duly authorized representatives are directed to enforce the provisions of this chapter. The director or Police Chief and their duly authorized representatives are authorized pursuant to Penal Code Section 836.5 to arrest any person without a warrant when they have reasonable cause to believe that such person has committed a misdemeanor in their presence.

B.     If the director or Police Chief and their duly authorized representatives conduct db(A) tests or other noise measurement readings for purposes of enforcement, and the noise level is found to exceed those levels stipulated as permissible in this chapter, the owner or operator of the noise source shall be required to pay the cost of the db(A) tests or readings.

C.     No person shall interfere with, oppose or resist any authorized person charged with the enforcement of this chapter while such person is engaged in the performance of his or her duty. (2379-7/79, 2533-2/82, 3216-12/93, 3940-7/12)

 

8.40.130 Permit Process
A.    Applications for a permit to deviate from the provisions herein shall be initiated by submitting an application and data as proscribed by the director and paying the required fee. The application form will be as directed by the director and shall set forth all facts regarding the request for deviation including any actions the applicant took to comply with the provisions of this chapter, the reasons why compliance cannot be achieved and a proposed method of achieving compliance, if such method exists. The applicant must demonstrate, at a minimum, the need to deviate from the noise level produces a greater benefit to the community which outweighs the temporary increase in noise level above the requirements of this chapter.

B.     Within 10 days after receipt of a complete application, the director will notify affected property owners within 300 feet of the alleged/proposed noise source of the application for a permit to temporarily deviate from this Code.

C.     A separate application shall be filed for each noise source; provided, however, that several mobile sources under common ownership, or several fixed sources on a single property may be combined into one application.

D.    Upon receipt of said application and fee, the director may approve, conditionally approve or deny the permit upon finding that the above factors as well as factors included in Section 8.40.111 of this chapter are satisfied. The permit shall become effective five days after action by the director unless appealed as provided herein.

E.     The director will provide the applicant as well as the affected property owners notice of decision within 24 hours after the decision is made.

F.     An applicant for a permit shall remain subject to prosecution under the terms of this chapter until a permit is granted. (2379-7/79, 3940-7/12)

 

8.40.150 Appeals
A.    Notice of Appeal. A person desiring to appeal the director’s decision shall file a written notice of appeal with the director within five days after the director’s decision. Notice of appeal shall be accompanied by a fee as set forth in the City’s current fee resolution.

B.     Form of Notice on Appeal. The notice of appeal shall contain the name and address of the person appealing the action, the decision appealed from and the grounds for the appeal. The director may provide the form of the notice of appeal. A defect in the form of the notice does not affect the validity or right to an appeal.

C.     Action on Appeal. The director shall set the matter for hearing before a hearing officer and shall give notice of the hearing on the appeal in the time and manner set forth in California Government Code Section 65091.

D.    De Novo Hearing. The hearing officer shall hear the appeal as a new matter. The original applicant has the burden of proof. The hearing officer may act upon the application, either granting it, conditionally granting it or denying it, irrespective of the precise grounds or scope of the appeal. In addition to considering the testimony and evidence presented at the hearing on the appeal, the hearing officer shall consider all pertinent information from the file as a result of the previous hearings from which the appeal is taken.

E.     Decision on Appeal. The hearing officer may reverse or affirm in whole or in part, or may modify the hearing officer’s decision that is being appealed. The decision of the hearing officer is final on the date of its decision. (3940-7/12)

 

8.40.180 Violations—Misdemeanor
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such. The provisions of this chapter shall not be construed as permitting conduct not proscribed herein and shall not affect the enforceability of any other applicable provisions of law. (2379-7/79)

 

Chapter 8.42 USE OF POLICE SERVICES AT LOUD PARTIES OR OTHER ACTIVITIES
8.42.005 Intent and Purpose
The intent of this chapter is to address inadequate supervision of parties and other types of events or gatherings of people on private property resulting in loud and/or unruly behavior that constitutes a threat to the peace, health, safety, and/or general welfare of the public. This chapter is also intended to address the problem of hosts of such gatherings who fail to ensure that alcoholic beverages are not served to, possessed by, or consumed by underage persons. Hosts of parties, gatherings or events will be more likely to properly supervise or stop the consumption of alcohol by minors if they are held responsible for enabling or tolerating such conduct. (3972-4/13)

 

8.42.010 Definitions
The following words, phrases and terms as used in this chapter shall have the meaning as indicated below:

“Alcohol” means ethyl alcohol or hydrated oxide of ethyl from whatever source or by whatever process produced.

“Alcoholic beverage” means alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer, and every liquid or solid containing alcohol, spirit, wine, or beer, and which contains one-half of one percent or more of alcohol by volume and which is fit for beverage purposes either alone or when diluted, mixed, or combined with other substances.

“Host” is the person who owns the property where the party, gathering or event takes place; the person in charge of the premises and/or the person who organized the event. If the host is a minor, then the parents or guardians of that minor will be jointly and severally liable for the fee incurred for police services.

“Juvenile” means any person less than 18 years of age.

“Large party, gathering or event” is a group of persons who have assembled or are assembling for a social occasion or for a social activity.

“Parent or legal guardian” means a person who is a natural parent, adoptive parent, foster parent, or step-parent of another person, or a person who, under court order, is the guardian of another person, or a public or private agency with which a minor has been placed by the court.

“Party, gathering or event” means a group of persons who have assembled or are assembling at a residence or other private property, whether such residence or property is owned, leased, rented or used without compensation.

“Police services fee” is the cost to the City of any special security assignment. Such fee may be either a flat fee of $250.00 or an itemized fee based on, but not limited to, salaries of police officers while responding to or remaining at the party, gathering or event, the pro rata cost of equipment, the cost of repairing City equipment and property, the cost of any medical treatment of injured police officers.

“Responsible person or host” means any of the following:

1.     Any person or entity that owns, rents, leases, or otherwise has control of a residence or other private property, including without limitation, a hotel/motel room or rented or leased area, where a party, gathering or event occurs.

2.     Any person or entity present at a party, gathering or event who provides an alcoholic beverage to anyone under the age of 21 years.

3.     Any person or entity present at a party, gathering or event where unruly or loud conduct occurs and that receives money or other consideration for granting access to the party, gathering or event, or hosts, organizes, supervises, officiates, conducts or controls, or willingly accepts responsibility for such a party, gathering or event.

“Special security assignment” is the assignment of police officers, services and equipment during a second or subsequent response to the party, gathering or event after the distribution of a written notice to the host that a fee may be imposed for costs incurred by the City for any subsequent police response.

“Underage person” means any person less than 21 years of age.

“Unruly or loud conduct” includes the obstruction of streets by crowds of vehicles, public drunkenness, public urination, service to, possession of or consumption of alcoholic beverages by an underage person, assaults, batteries or other disturbances of the peace including, but not limited to, vandalism, littering, or other conduct that constitutes a threat to public health, safety, or quiet enjoyment of residential property or public property. (2956-9/88, 3229-3/94, 3972-4/13)

 

8.42.020 Initial Police Responses to Large Parties, Gatherings or Events
When any police officer responds to any large party, gathering or event, and that police officer determines that there is a threat to the public peace, health, safety, or general welfare, the police officer shall issue a written notice to the host or hosts that a subsequent response to that same location or address within a 30-day period, such response or responses shall be deemed a special security assignment rendered to provide security and order on behalf of the party, gathering or event and that the host may be liable for a police services fee as defined in this chapter. (2956-9/88, 3229-3/94)

 

8.42.030 Subsequent Police Responses to Large Parties, Gatherings or Events—Liability
A.    If after a written notice is issued pursuant to Section 8.42.020, a subsequent police response or responses is necessary to the same location or address within a 30-day period, such response or responses shall be deemed a special security assignment. Persons previously warned shall be jointly and severally liable for a police services fee as defined in this chapter.

B.     The amount of such fee shall be a debt owed to the City by the person or persons warned, and if he or she is a minor, the debt shall be owed by his or her parents or guardians. In no event shall the fee be more than $1,000.00.

C.     The City reserves its rights to seek reimbursement for actual costs exceeding $1,000.00 through other legal remedies or procedures.

D.    The subsequent response may also result in the arrest and/or citation of violators of the State Penal Code or other regulations, ordinances or laws. (2956-9/88, 3229-3/94)

 

8.42.031 Prohibition on Parties, Gatherings or Events Where Alcohol is Served to, Consumed by, or in the Possession of an Underage Person
It is unlawful and a public nuisance for a responsible person or host to cause or allow a party, gathering or event to occur at any residence or other private property at which any underage person is being served, is in possession of, or is consuming an alcoholic beverage, if the responsible person or host knows or reasonably should know that an underage person is being served, is in possession of, or is consuming an alcoholic beverage. A responsible person or host need not have been issued a prior warning in order to be subject to the penalties for violation of this section. A responsible person or host shall be presumed to have knowledge that an underage person was being served, was in possession of, or was consuming an alcoholic beverage at a party, gathering or event if the responsible person or host did not take all reasonable steps to prevent such activity from occurring. Reasonable steps include, without limitation: controlling the access to and serving of alcoholic beverages to underage persons, and monitoring the responsible, safe and lawful conduct of underage persons. (3972-4/13)

 

8.42.032 Exempted Activities
This chapter shall not apply to, nor be construed to apply to, any of the following:

A.    A responsible person or host who takes all reasonable steps, including, but not limited to, requesting assistance of law enforcement, to exclude all uninvited persons at a gathering who provide, serve or facilitate the possession of consumption of alcohol by an underage person.

B.     Conduct protected under the United States and/or California Constitution, including, but not limited to, religious activities protected by Article I, Section 4 of the California Constitution.

C.     Conduct regulated by state and/or federal law or regulation, including, but not limited to, the California Alcoholic Beverage Control Act, in such a manner that the City is preempted or precluded from imposing additional regulation. (3972-4/13)

 

8.42.033 Violations
A.    For any responsible person or host who is a juvenile, each parent and/or legal guardian of the juvenile shall be considered a responsible person(s) liable for any fines, penalties and fees imposed pursuant to this chapter.

B.     Each separate violation of Section 8.42.031 shall be subject to the issuance of a civil citation to each responsible person and host. Each separate violation shall, in addition to any police services fee that may be assessed pursuant to this chapter, be subject to the following administrative fines:

1.     For a first violation, an administrative fine shall not exceed $750.00.

2.     For a second violation within a 12-month period, an administrative fine shall not exceed $1,500.00.

3.     For a third violation, or any subsequent violation thereafter, within a 12-month period, an administrative fine shall not exceed $3,000.00. (3972-4/13)

 

8.42.040 Cost—Collection
The Police Chief shall notify the City Treasurer in writing of the performance of a special security assignment and/or administrative fees imposed pursuant to this chapter, of the name and address of the responsible person or persons, the date and time of the incident, the services performed, the costs thereof and such other information as may be required. The City Treasurer shall thereafter cause appropriate billings to be made. (2956-9/88; 3972-4/13)

 

8.42.050 Administrative Appeal
An administrative appeal of a police service fee and/or administrative fines imposed pursuant to this chapter, may be made to the Police Chief or designee within 10 business days from the date of mailing of the billing. The request for a hearing shall be in writing and addressed to the Police Chief and shall include a copy of the billing and grounds for the appeal. (3229-3/94, 3972-4/13)

 

Chapter 8.43 COSTS OF EMERGENCY RESPONSE
Note
*       Repealed by Ord. 4010-4/14.

 

Chapter 8.44 VEHICLES AND MOTORCYCLES
8.44.010 Scope and Purpose
The City Council finds that the operation of licensed and unlicensed vehicles, motorcycles and motor-driven cycles on unimproved private property and on public parkways, sidewalks, parklands, beaches and other public property (except public streets and highways) in the City creates excessive amounts of irritating dust, fumes, noise, erosion and fire danger, and constitutes a public nuisance to the residents of Huntington Beach. This chapter is designed to regulate the operation of registered and unregistered vehicles, motorcycles and motor-driven cycles by all persons, whether they possess a valid California motor vehicle operator’s license or not, upon unimproved private property and upon all public property except public streets and highways in the City. (1587-6/70, 1926-8/74)

 

8.44.020 Definitions
Unless a different meaning is apparent from the context or is specified elsewhere in the code, the following are to be as defined by the California Vehicle Code:

“Highway” (California Vehicle Code Section 360).

“Motorcycle” (California Vehicle Code Section 400).

“Motor-driven cycle” (California Vehicle Code Section 405).

“Motorized bicycle” or “moped” is any two-wheeled or three-wheeled device having fully operative pedals for propulsion by human power, or having no pedals if powered solely by electrical energy, and an automatic transmission and a motor which produces less than two gross brake horsepower and is capable of propelling the device at a maximum speed of not more than 30 miles per hour on level ground (California Vehicle Code Section 406).

A “motorized bicycle” is also a device that has fully operative pedals for propulsion by human power and has an electric motor that meets all of the following requirements:

1.     Has a power output of not more than 1,000 watts.

2.     Is incapable of propelling the device at a speed of more than 20 miles per hour on ground level.

3.     Is incapable of further increasing the speed of the device when human power is used to propel the motorized bicycle faster than 20 miles per hour.

“Motorized scooter” shall be defined as in Section 402.5 of the California Vehicle Code. A motorized scooter is regulated as a bicycle under Chapter 10.84 of this Code.

“Motorized skateboard” means a skateboard to which a motor is attached whether the motor is running or not.

“Unimproved private property” under this chapter means any parcel of land or parcels of land under common ownership which contain no buildings or which are not surfaced with cement, concrete, asphaltic concrete, or other similar material, or which do not have a hard surface made up of a mixture of rock, sand or gravel bound together with a chemical or mineral substance other than natural soil.

“Vehicle” means a device by which any person or property may be propelled, moved, or drawn upon a highway, excepting a device moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. Farm, construction and commercial vehicles are exempted from this definition. (1587-6/70, 1926-8/74, 3370-11/97, 3457-5/00)

 

8.44.025 Motorized Scooter
No motorized scooter shall be propelled on any sidewalk, or on any bikeway, bicycle path or trail, unless such path or trail is part of a highway or street shared with general vehicular traffic, equestrian trail, hiking, recreational trail, or the municipal pier, except in areas where use is permitted by state law. (3370-11/97, 3457-5/00)

 

8.44.030 Prohibited Areas of Operation
A.    No person shall operate a vehicle, motorcycle or motor-driven cycle other than a publicly-owned vehicle, motorcycle or motor-driven cycle, upon a public sidewalk, walkway, parkway or in any public park or recreational area or upon any other publicly-owned property, except highways, within the City. This shall not be construed to prohibit the operation of a vehicle, motorcycle or motor-driven cycle having a valid California vehicle registration by any person possessing a valid California operator’s license upon the public highways in the City.

B.     No person shall operate a vehicle, motorcycle or motor-driven cycle, other than a publicly-owned vehicle, motorcycle or motor-driven cycle, upon any unimproved private property within the City, except as set forth in Section 8.44.040. (1587-6/70, 1926-8/74)

 

8.44.040 Exceptions—Permit Obtained
A.    Any person desiring to operate a vehicle, motorcycle or motor-driven cycle, and any owner of private property desiring to allow a person or persons to operate a vehicle, motorcycle or motor-driven cycle on his or her private property may do so upon first obtaining a permit from the Police Chief of the City. Permits shall be issued upon his or her determination that:

1.     The owner or owners of said real property concerned, or the person or persons in lawful possession thereof, have consented in writing to the proposed operation;

2.     The City Fire Chief has certified that such proposed operation will not create any undue fire hazard by reason of the nature of the vehicle and its proposed operation or by reason of the nature of the property concerned; and

3.     Such operation is of sufficient distance from occupied residences, churches, assembly halls or schools, as not likely to constitute a noise, dust or fumes nuisance.

B.     Any owner of property meeting the requirements of this section, or his or her agent, may in writing authorize the Police Chief to issue permits for the operation of vehicles, motorcycles or motor-driven cycles on his or her property. Such authorization is to be in the form prescribed by the Police Chief and must describe the real property and may limit the authority to the persons set forth in said authorization. Any change of interest in ownership in the real property shall be deemed an automatic revocation of such authorization. All persons holding a title interest in and to a parcel of real property must join in said authorization. (1587-6/70, 1926-8/74)

 

8.44.050 Permit—Contents
The permit shall contain:

A.    Name, birth date and physical description of the permittee;

B.     A statement that permittee shall not operate or cause to be operated a vehicle, motorcycle or motor-driven cycle on any real property except the real property set forth in the permit by description;

C.     A statement of the hours that the permit authorizes operation of the vehicle, motorcycle or motor-driven cycle;

D.    A statement that said permit shall be carried by permittee at all times that he or she is operating a vehicle, motorcycle or motor-driven cycle on public or private property as defined in this chapter and that the permit shall be exhibited to any police officer upon demand;

E.     The date of expiration of the permit in no event to exceed one year, unless sooner revoked or suspended;

F.     A statement that the permit is not an expression by the City that the proposed operation can be done with safety to the permittee or other persons or property, all of which risks are assumed by permittee or property owner. (1587-6/70, 1926-8/74)

 

8.44.060 Permit—Refusal—Appeal
Any applicant refused a permit may appeal such refusal to the City Council by filing an appeal in writing, setting forth the grounds. (1587-6/70)

 

8.44.070 Permit—Revocation or Suspension
Any permit issued hereunder is subject to suspension or revocation by the City Council, after notice to the permittee and public hearing, on any of the following grounds:

A.    The owner or agent of the real property has withdrawn his or her consent.

B.     Conditions concerning the real property covered by the permit have changed so that conditions exist which would be grounds for refusal to issue the permit.

C.     Permittee has violated any of the terms or conditions of the permit or any law while on private or public property pursuant to the permit issued herein. (1587-6/70)

 

8.44.080 Violations—Penalties
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be subject to a fine of not less than $25.00 but not exceeding $100.00, or imprisonment for a period not to exceed 30 days, or by both said fine and imprisonment. (1587-6/70)

 

Chapter 8.48 ABATEMENT OF ABANDONED, WRECKED, DISMANTLED AND INOPERABLE VEHICLES
8.48.010 Intent and Purpose
This chapter is intended to provide a procedure for the abatement of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled and inoperable vehicles, and vehicle parts, and is enacted under the authority of the Huntington Beach Charter and Section 22660 of the California Vehicle Code.

It is the intent of the City Council to provide that the abatement of public nuisances consisting of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled and inoperable vehicles may be carried on either concurrently with or separately from the abatement of other conditions, if any, constituting a public nuisance on any premises within the City, as deemed appropriate under the circumstances. (4201-9/20)

 

8.48.020 Definitions
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall mean as follows, unless the context in which they are used clearly indicates to the contrary:

“Abandoned vehicle” means a vehicle abandoned on a street, public property or private property in such an inoperable or neglected condition and the Director determines that the owner relinquished all rights or interest in the vehicle.

“Director” means the Director of the Department of Community Development, or designee.

“Dismantled vehicle” means any vehicle which is partially or wholly disassembled.

“Inoperable vehicle” means any vehicle in a condition that renders it unable to drive or unsafe for operation upon a street, or in which operation upon a street would violate the vehicle Code or any other law or regulation related to the operation of vehicles upon a street in the City of Huntington Beach or the State of California.

“Public property” is any property owned by the City, or any State, County or local government agency. Public property does not include a street.

“Street” means any highway, sidewalk, alley or right-of-way dedicated to the public, or maintained as private.

“Vehicle” generally means a device, or substantial part of a device by which any person or property may be propelled, moved or drawn upon a street, except a device moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. The term “vehicle” includes automobiles, tractors, boats, motorcycles, special purpose vehicle, etc. as well as trailers designed for carrying persons or property on its own structure and for being drawn by a motor vehicle and so constructed that no part of its weight rests upon any other vehicle. The term “vehicle” includes any abandoned, dismantled, inoperable, wrecked or part of a vehicle.

“Vehicle part” includes, but is not limited to, any item, device, component, frame, bumper, wheel or glass associated with a vehicle.

“Wrecked vehicle” means any vehicle, or a substantial part of a vehicle that is damaged to such an extent that it cannot be operated upon the street. A vehicle which has been wrecked in a traffic accident, and which has been removed from the street to a storage facility, but which has not been claimed by its owner, is not an abandoned vehicle. (4201-9/20)

 

8.48.030 Applicability
This chapter shall not apply to:

A.    A vehicle or vehicle part, which is completely enclosed within a building in a lawful manner where it is not visible from the street or other public or private property.

B.     A vehicle or vehicle part which is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed dismantler, licensed vehicle dealer, a junk dealer, or when such storage or parking is necessary to the operation of a lawfully conducted business or commercial enterprise.

C.     These exceptions shall not authorize the maintenance of a public or private nuisance as defined under provisions of law other than this chapter. (4201-9/20)

 

8.48.040 Enforcement
Except as otherwise provided herein, both the Police Chief and the Director of Community Development may administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter. (4201-9/20)

 

8.48.050 Notice
Upon discovery of an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperable vehicle or vehicle part, the City may issue a 10-day notice of intention to abate and remove the vehicle or vehicle part as a public nuisance. The notice shall be mailed, by registered or certified mail, to the owner of the land as shown on the last equalized assessment roll and to the last registered and legal owner of record of the vehicle, unless the vehicle is in such condition that the identification number is not available to determine ownership. (4201-9/20)

 

8.48.060 Circumstances Where Notice of Intent Not Required
A notice of intention to abate shall not be required:

A.    If the property owner and the owner of the vehicle have signed releases authorizing removal and waiving further interest in the vehicle or vehicle part.

B.     The vehicle is located upon a parcel that either is zoned for agricultural use or is not improved with a residential structure containing one or more dwelling units and:

1.     The vehicle or vehicle part is inoperable due to the absence of a motor, transmission, or wheels and is incapable of being towed;

2.     The vehicle or vehicle part is valued at less than $200.00 by the Director;

3.     The Director has determined that the vehicle or vehicle part is a public nuisance presenting an immediate threat to public health and safety;

4.     The property owner has signed a release authorizing the removal and waiving further interest in the vehicle or vehicle part.

If a vehicle is removed pursuant to this section, prior to final disposition, the registered or legal owner shall be notified of the intent to dispose of the vehicle or vehicle part. If the vehicle or vehicle part is not claimed and removed from the scrapyard, automobile dismantler’s yard or public disposal area within 12 days after the notice to dispose of the vehicle is mailed, final disposition may proceed. (4201-9/20)

 

8.48.070 Public Hearing Upon Written Request
A.    If the vehicle owner or the owner of the property where the vehicle is located requests a hearing within 10 days of mailing the notice of intention to abate, the Director shall conduct a public hearing. The landowner and/or vehicle owner may appear in person at the hearing or present a sworn written statement in time for consideration at the hearing and deny responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on the land and his or her reasons for such denial.

B.     At the public hearing, the Director shall hear all relevant facts and testimony. The Director shall determine two questions:

1.     Whether the vehicle or vehicle part is abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperable vehicle or vehicle part such that it is a public nuisance.

2.     Whether the City should assess the administrative costs and the costs of removal of the vehicle, or vehicle part, against the property on which it is located in consideration of the circumstances that lead to the vehicle or vehicle part being located on the property.

C.     If the City does not receive a request for a hearing within 10 days after mailing of the notice of intention to abate and remove, the City shall have the authority to abate and remove the vehicle, or vehicle part, as a public nuisance without holding public hearing. (4201-9/20)

 

8.48.080 Notice of Decision
A.    At the conclusion of the public hearing, the Director may find that a vehicle or vehicle part has been abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperable such that it is a public nuisance and ordered removal or disposal, and determine the administrative costs and the cost of removal and disposal to be charged against the responsible person. The order requiring removal shall include a description of the vehicle, or vehicle part, and the correct identification number and license number of the vehicle, if available at the site.

B.     The Director shall not assess the costs of administration or removal of the vehicle or vehicle part against the property upon which the vehicle or vehicle part is located if he or she determines that the vehicle or vehicle part was placed on the property without the owner’s consent.

C.     Any interested party makes a written statement to the Director but does not appear, he or she shall be notified in writing of the decision.

D.    The Director’s decision shall be final and set forth in an order that is mailed to both the owner of the property and the owner of the vehicle or vehicle part. The order shall specify that the vehicle or vehicle part shall be removed from the property within 15 days of the mailing of the order to the property owner and owner of the vehicle or vehicle part. (4201-9/20)

 

8.48.090 Notice of Removal to Department of Motor Vehicles
The Director will provide notice to the DMV identifying the vehicle removed, or the parts thereof within five days after removal. The Director shall also transmit to the DMV any evidence of registration available, including, but not limited to, the registration card, certificates of ownership, and license plates. (4201-9/20)

 

8.48.100 Removal—Costs—Lien
If the administrative costs and the cost of removal which are charged against the owner of a parcel of land pursuant to this chapter are not paid within 30 days of the date of the order, such costs shall be assessed against the parcel of land pursuant to Section 38773.5 of the Government Code and shall be transmitted to the tax collector for collection. The assessment shall have the same priority as other City taxes. (4201-9/20)

 

8.48.110 Violation—-Abandonment
It is unlawful and an infraction for any person to abandon or fail or refuse to remove an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle or part thereof or refused to abate such nuisance when ordered to do so in accordance with the abatement provisions of this chapter or state law where such law is applicable. (4201-9/20)

 

Chapter 8.50 MOBILE SOURCE AIR POLLUTION REDUCTION
8.50.010 Intent
This chapter is intended to support the SCAQMD’s imposition of the vehicle registration fee and to bring the City into compliance with the requirements set forth in Section 44243 of the Health and Safety Code in order to receive fee revenues for the purpose of implementing programs to reduce air pollution from motor vehicles. (3105-6/91)

 

8.50.020 Definitions
As applied in this chapter, the following words and terms shall be defined as follows:

“City” shall mean the City of Huntington Beach.

“Fee administrator” shall mean the City Treasurer or his or her designee.

“Mobile source air pollution reduction programs” shall mean any program or project implemented by the City to reduce air pollution from motor vehicles which it determines will be consistent with the California Clean Air Act of 1988 or the plan proposed pursuant to Article 5 (commencing with Section 40460) of Chapter 5.5 of Part 3 of the California Health and Safety Code. (3105-6/91)

 

8.50.030 Administration of Vehicle Registration Fee
A.    Receipt of Fee. The additional vehicle registration fees disbursed by the SCAQMD and remitted to the City, pursuant to this chapter, shall be accepted by the fee administrator.

B.     Establishment of Air Quality Improvement Trust Fund. The fee administrator shall establish a separate interest-bearing trust fund account in a financial institution authorized to receive deposits of City funds.

C.     Transfer of Funds. Upon receipt of vehicle registration fees, the fee administrator shall deposit such funds into the separate account established pursuant to subsection B of this section. All interest earned by the trust fund account shall be credited only to that account.

D.    Expenditure of Air Quality Trust Fund Revenues. All revenues received from the SCAQMD and deposited in the trust fund account shall be exclusively expended on mobile source emission reduction programs as defined in Section 8.50.020. Such revenues, and any interest earned, shall be expended within one year of the completion of the programs.

E.     Audits. The City consents to an audit of all programs and projects funded by vehicle registration fee revenues received from the SCAQMD pursuant to Section 44223 of the Health and Safety Code. The audit shall be conducted by an independent auditor selected by the SCAQMD as provided in Sections 44244 and 44244.1(a) of the Health and Safety Code. The City may audit through the public hearing process designated by Section 44244.1(c) of the Health and Safety Code. (3105-6/91)

 

Chapter 8.56 MOBILE X-RAY UNITS
8.56.010 Definitions
“Mobile X-ray operator” means any person or other entity, who owns or legally possesses, or operates a mobile X-ray unit.

“Mobile X-ray unit” means any X-ray generator which is, or can be used for the purpose of making medical diagnostic photofluorographic films of persons, and which is installed in or upon a motor vehicle or trailer so that it may be transported from place to place. (1569-5/70)

 

8.56.020 Scope
All mobile X-ray units shall comply with the requirements of the radiation control law, Division 20, Chapter 7.6, California Health and Safety Code, together with regulations enacted pursuant thereto. (1569-5/70)

 

8.56.030 License—Applicant Investigation
Any person or entity desiring to operate a mobile X-ray unit within the City shall make application to the County Health Officer on forms prescribed by him or her for issuance of a license. The County Health Officer shall cause to be conducted an investigation of the applicant for a license to determine, among other things, the following items of information:

A.    The unit has a valid state registration as provided by Division 20, Chapter 7.6, California Health and Safety Code;

B.     The applicant has complied with applicable laws, ordinances and regulations including those relating to the reporting to the health officer of abnormal X-ray findings pursuant to regulations of the state department of public health;

C.     The proper public notices, as required by state law, regulations enacted pursuant thereto, and local ordinances, have been posted in or upon the mobile unit;

D.    The location and mailing address of all film files to be maintained by said mobile unit as hereinafter provided;

E.     The applicant and his or her specified personnel are qualified personnel by reason of training and experience to operate a mobile X-ray unit in such a manner as to provide reasonable assurance of protection to health, life and property;

F.     The applicant’s equipment, facilities, proposed uses and procedures are such as to provide reasonable assurance of protection to health, life and property;

G.    Such other information as shall be required by the county health officer. (1569-5/70)

 

8.56.040 License—Compliance Determination
No license shall be granted, renewed or reinstated unless the county health officer determines, upon completing his or her investigation, that the mobile X-ray unit is, or can be, operated in compliance with applicable laws, ordinances and administrative regulations, and in a manner not detrimental to the health of the patrons, employees and the general public and all operations of mobile X-ray equipment have been certified by the county health officer to operate same. (1569-5/70)

 

8.56.050 License—Granting
Licenses may be granted at any time during the year, but all licenses shall expire at the end of the calendar year. (1569-5/70)

 

8.56.060 License—Unit Operators
No mobile X-ray shall be operated unless the operator thereof has been licensed as hereinbefore provided. No mobile X-ray unit shall be operated by any person other than the applicant or the persons specified in his or her license. (1569-5/70)

 

8.56.070 Conditions of Operation
All mobile X-ray units shall be operated so as to comply with the following conditions:

A.    No person under the age of 15 years is to be X-rayed unless such person has had a positive tuberculin skin test and presents a written statement, signed by a licensed practitioner of the healing arts, showing the method and the date of such positive skin test. A sign shall be posted in a prominent location of the mobile X-ray unit stating that no person under the age of 15 years is to be X-rayed unless such person has had a positive tuberculin skin test.

B.     No pregnant woman shall be X-rayed in a mobile X-ray unit unless so ordered in writing by a licensed practitioner of the healing arts. A sign shall be posted in a prominent location on the mobile X-ray unit stating that no pregnant woman shall be X-rayed.

C.     The mobile X-ray operator shall require all persons, before being X-rayed, to complete an informal form showing the name, age, sex, address, telephone number, the person’s physician’s name and address, if a female, whether pregnant, if under 15 years of age, whether the person has had a positive tuberculin skin test, and the date of such test.

D.    All X-ray films shall be retained by the operator for at least 10 years. Each patient shall receive from the mobile X-ray operator a report of his or her X-ray findings within 30 days. Every 30 days, the operator shall submit to the health officer a report of the total number of X-ray films taken during the preceding calendar month.

E.     The mobile X-ray operator shall make X-ray films available for use by the physician of the person X-rayed, provided the person gives his or her consent in writing. The operator may make a reasonable charge for such service.

F.     A sign shall be posted in a prominent location on the mobile X-ray unit stating essentially the following:

A chest X-ray film is a useful aid to the physician in diagnosing chest disease. It is not a complete examination. See your family doctor for an examination at least once a year.

G.    The county health officer shall have the right to determine the location, size and wording of all required signs.

H.    The mobile X-ray operator shall give the county health officer notice at least 14 calendar days in advance concerning proposed dates, times and places of use of the unit. All such information will be forwarded by the county health officer to the City.

I.      The name and address of the mobile X-ray operator shall be plainly printed on each side of the exterior of the vehicle or trailer in letters at least three inches high. The name and address of the mobile X-ray operator shall appear on all forms, letters, pamphlets or other printed matter used in conjunction with the unit. Neither sign nor printed matter shall contain any statements expressed or implied that the mobile X-ray unit is associated with any health department or other public or private health agency.

J.      The mobile X-ray operation shall comply with all applicable City ordinances and resolutions while operating in the City. (1569-5/70)

 

Chapter 8.60 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AND HOMELAND SECURITY
8.60.010 Purposes
The declared purpose of this chapter is to provide for the preparation and carrying out of plans for the protection of persons and property in this City in the event of an emergency; the direction of the Emergency Management and Homeland Security Office; and the coordination of the emergency functions of this City with all other public agencies, corporations, organizations and affected private persons. (1757-8/72, 4031-11/14)

 

8.60.020 Definitions
Unless a different meaning is apparent from the context or is specified elsewhere in the code, the following definitions shall be used:

“Emergency Management” means the preparation for and the carrying out of all emergency functions necessary to mitigate, prepare for, respond to, and recover from emergencies and disasters caused by all hazards, whether natural, technological, or human caused. Comprehensive emergency management consists of four related components: all hazards, all phases, all impacts, and all stakeholders.

“Homeland Security” is a concerted national effort to prevent terrorist attacks within the United States, reduce America’s vulnerability to terrorism, minimize the damage, and recover from attacks that do occur.

“Emergency Response Organization (ERO)” means the organization that prepares for and carries out emergency operations by government, in order to prepare for, minimize and repair injury and damage resulting from actual or threatened emergency. All City departments have a role in the ERO and all employees are Disaster Services Workers as set forth in California Government Code Section 3100-3109.

“Emergency Operations Plan” means a written document which provides for the full utilization of all resources of the City, both human and material, during an emergency. This plan is maintained, updated and submitted to the Huntington Beach City Council for approval. It meets the California Local Government Emergency Operations Plan Crosswalk for Plan Review.

“Director” means the Director of Emergency Management of the City.

“Emergency” means the actual or threatened existence of conditions of disaster or of extreme peril to the safety of persons and property in this City caused by such conditions as air pollution, fire, flood, storm, epidemic, riot or earthquake, or other conditions, including conditions resulting from war or imminent threat of war, but other than conditions resulting from a labor controversy, which conditions are or are likely to be beyond the control of the services, personnel, equipment and facilities of this City, requiring the combined forces of other political subdivisions to combat. (1757-8/72, 4031-11/14)

 

8.60.030 Council Created
There is created an Emergency Management and Homeland Security (EMHS) Council, consisting of the Director, who shall be Chair, Deputy Director who shall be the Vice Chair, Fire Chief, Police Chief, Director of Public Works, or their representatives; Emergency Services Coordinator and any City department head who may be appointed by the director. The Council may also include representatives of civic, business, labor, veterans, professional or other organizations, not to exceed five in number, as may be appointed by the director. (1757-8/72, 2464-12/80, 4031-11/14)

 

8.60.040 Council—Powers and Duties
A.    Powers and Duties—Emergency Management and Homeland Security Council. It shall be the duty of the Emergency Management and Homeland Security Council to oversee the preparedness activities of City departments, ensuring unity of purpose. This includes preparation and approval of plans, training of employees for emergency and disaster-related functions, and related emergency preparedness activities.

B.     Powers and Duties—Chair of the Emergency Management and Homeland Security Council. The chair of the Emergency Management and Homeland Security Council shall:

1.     Coordinate the activities of the Emergency Management and Homeland Security Council;

2.     Coordinate and provide for dissemination of public information relating to emergency preparedness activities;

3.     Review and recommend to City Council the adoption of emergency and mutual aid plans and agreements.

C.     Powers and Duties—Emergency Management and Homeland Security Council members:

1.     Formulate and maintain plans for use during emergency conditions, including a written plan for activation of the department as part of, and which carries out its role in the City Emergency Response Organization;

2.     Ensure that department personnel are trained in emergency management/operations and that designated personnel participate in regular refresher training and emergency exercises, as directed by the Emergency Management and Homeland Security Council;

3.     The Emergency Management and Homeland Security Council shall meet on a quarterly basis or upon call of the chair, or in his or her absence or inability to call such meeting, upon the call of the chair’s authorized representative or the vice chair.

D.    Local Emergency Planning Committee (LEPC). The LEPC is created as a standing and working Emergency Management and Homeland Security Council subcommittee. The committee’s membership will include the Emergency Services Coordinator, who shall be chair, and a senior manager from each City department. The LEPC will provide operational direction for implementation of the programs and policies established by the Emergency Management and Homeland Security Council, assist in the preparation of emergency plans, coordinate department emergency training/exercises and speak on behalf of the department. The committee will meet monthly, at the direction of the Council, or upon call of the committee chair.

E.     Citizen Corps Council. The Citizen Corps Council is a subcommittee of the Emergency Management and Homeland Security Council that collaborates with government and non-government agencies and volunteer organizations, the private sector, faith based and other entities involved in public safety activities, and works toward achieving common emergency management goals. The Council shall be members of the LEPC and will work with members of the community to meet Citizen Corps goals and objectives. A segment of the LEPC and quarterly meeting of the EMHS Council will be devoted to issues and discussion relating to Citizen Corps Programs. (1757-8/72, 4031-11/14)

 

8.60.050 Director—Emergency Management Created
There is created the Director of Emergency Management who shall be the City Manager of Huntington Beach. (1757-8/72, 4031-11/14)

 

8.60.060 Deputy Director—Emergency Management Created
There is created the Deputy Director of Emergency Management who shall be the Fire Chief or Police Chief of Huntington Beach. (1757-8/72, 2464-12/80, 4031-11/14)

 

8.60.070 Director—Powers and Duties Enumerated
The director is hereby empowered to:

A.    Request the City Council to proclaim the existence or threatened existence of a local emergency if the City Council is in session, or to issue such proclamation if the City Council is not in session. Whenever a local emergency is proclaimed by the director, the City Council shall take action to ratify the proclamation within seven days thereafter or the proclamation shall have no further force or effect;

B.     Request the Governor to proclaim a State of Emergency when, in the opinion of the director, the locally available resources are inadequate to cope with the emergency;

C.     Control and direct the effort of the emergency response organization of this City to accomplish the purpose of this chapter;

D.    Direct cooperation between and coordinate services and staff of the Emergency Response Organization of this City, and resolve questions of authority and responsibility that may arise between them;

E.     Represent this City in all dealings with public or private agencies on matters pertaining to emergencies as defined herein;

F.     In the event of the proclamation of a local emergency, as herein provided, the proclamation of a State of Emergency by the governor or the Director of the California Office of Emergency Services, or the existence of a state of war emergency, the director is hereby empowered:

1.     To make and issue rules and regulations on matters reasonably related to the protection of life and property as affected by such emergency; provided, however, such rules and regulations shall be confirmed at the earliest practicable time by the City Council;

2.     To obtain vital supplies, equipment and such other properties found lacking and needed for the protection of life and property, and to bind the City for the fair value thereof and, if required immediately, to commandeer same for public use;

3.     To require emergency services of any City officer or employee and, in the event of the proclamation of a State of Emergency in the county in which this City is located or the existence of a State of War emergency, to command the aid of as many citizens of this community as he/she deems necessary in the execution of his or her duties. Such persons shall be entitled to all privileges, benefits and immunities as are provided by state law for registered disaster service workers;

4.     To requisition necessary personnel or material of any City department or agency;

5.     To execute all of his or her ordinary power as City Manager, of all special powers conferred upon him or her by this chapter or by resolution or emergency plan pursuant hereto adopted by the City Council; all powers conferred upon him or her by any statute, by any agreement approved by the City Council, and by any other lawful authority.

G.    The Director of Emergency Management shall designate the order of succession to his or her office to take effect in the event the director is unavailable to attend meetings and otherwise perform his or her duties during an emergency. Such order of succession shall be approved by the City Council;

H.    The deputy director shall, under the supervision of the director, have such other powers and duties as may be assigned by the director. (1757-8/72, 2464-12/80, 4031-11/14)

 

8.60.080 Creation of the Office of Emergency Management and Homeland Security
A.    There is created the Office of Emergency Management and Homeland Security. The chief administrative officer shall be the Director of Emergency Management.

B.     There is created the position of Emergency Services Coordinator.

C.     The Office of Emergency Management and Homeland Security shall have such staffing as determined by the director. (4031-11/14)

 

8.60.090 Office Powers and Duties
A.    The Director of the Office of Emergency Management and Homeland Security shall have complete authority for organizing, directing, and coordinating the emergency organization of the City, including training, directing the development and approval of all multi-departmental emergency response plans, review and approval of all emergency response plans and all emergency preparedness activities in all matters relating to preservation of life, property and environment within the City, and consistent with his or her authority as Director of Emergency Management.

B.     The Fire Chief (or designee) and Emergency Services Coordinator, acting by and for the Director of Emergency Management, shall:

1.     Supervise the day-to-day responsibilities associated with organizing, directing, and coordinating the emergency response organization of the City;

2.     Coordinate and collaborate with government and non-government agencies and volunteer organizations, the private sector and other entities involved in public safety activities, and work toward achieving common emergency management goals;

3.     Develop appropriate plans, standard operating procedures, and planning guidance in collaboration with other City departments;

4.     Prepare and process emergency management documents and applications for federal and state funds;

5.     Maintain the Emergency Operations Center (EOC) to serve the City and, upon activation in all instances of an emergency, as defined herein, to collect and disseminate emergency information to concerned jurisdictions and agencies;

6.     Activate the EOC during local emergencies and special events to support field resources at the incident command level;

7.     Liaison with multiple partners at all levels of federal, state and local government to develop a synergistic approach to coordination on response, planning, training and exercise, emergency management and homeland security issues;

8.     Increase public awareness through education on disaster mitigation, preparedness, response and recovery from local, state and federal emergencies, and/or disasters. (4031-11/14)

 

8.60.100 Emergency Operations Plan (EOP)—Formulation
The director shall prepare and maintain, on a current basis, an Emergency Operations Plan, as necessary, to carry out the purpose of this chapter. The Emergency Operations Plan shall be based on the Standardized Emergency Management System (Government Code 8607), the National Incident Management System (Homeland Security Presidential Directive 5), and consistent with the plans of the state and federal governments and shall hereinafter be referred to as “the EOP.” (1757-8/72, 4031-11/14)

 

8.60.110 EOP—Contents
The EOP shall set up the assignment of emergency duties and functions of all City agencies and employees, and volunteer organizations, as well as the lines of succession of the members of the Emergency Response Organization. (1757-8/72, 4031-11/14)

 

8.60.120 EOP—Adoption and Amending
The EOP and amendments thereto shall be placed on file with the City Clerk by the director, and approved or disapproved by the City Council within 30 days of such filing. The EOP, and amendments if any, shall be effective upon filing with the City Clerk unless disapproved by the City Council within 30 days of such filing. (1757-8/72, 4031-11/14)

 

8.60.130 Director—Assignment of Duties and Functions
In assigning emergency duties and functions to City agencies and personnel, the director shall assign responsibilities to utilize to the maximum the skills and talents of City employees. When the requisite skill or talent for a particular responsibility is not available within the City government, the director is authorized to seek assistance on a volunteer basis from persons outside the City government. The director shall assign duties to such persons, and grant the authority to carry out their respective responsibilities during and after the occurrence of a disaster. (1757-8/72, 4031-11/14)

 

8.60.140 EOP—Effect
The EOP shall be binding upon all agencies of City government, its employees and registered volunteer disaster service workers, and have the effect of law whenever an emergency, as provided in this chapter, has been proclaimed. (1757-8/72, 4031-11/14)

 

8.60.150 Organization—Creation
There is created the Huntington Beach Emergency Response Organization. All officers and employees of the City shall be a part of such organization. The director or designee shall train and organize all employees and officers of the City for purposes of maintaining the emergency capability of the City. The director is authorized to use volunteer forces during an emergency including, but not limited to, groups, organizations, and persons who by agreement or by operation of law are charged with the duty to protect the life and property of persons in the City during a disaster. (1757-8/72, 4031-11/14)

 

8.60.160 Emergency Curfew
The director is hereby empowered to establish an emergency curfew in the event of a local emergency, or when a disaster or State of Emergency is declared by the President of the United States or the Governor of the State of California. (1757-8/72, 4031-11/14)

 

8.60.170 Expenditures
Any expenditures made in connection with emergency activities including mutual aid activities, shall be deemed conclusively to be for the direct protection and benefit of the inhabitants and property of the City of Huntington Beach. (1757-8/72, 4031-11/14)

 

8.60.180 Violations—Misdemeanor
It shall be a misdemeanor for any person during an emergency to:

A.    Willfully obstruct, hinder or delay any member of the emergency response organization in the enforcement of any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter, or in the performance of any duty imposed upon him or her by virtue of this chapter;

B.     Do any act forbidden by any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter if such act is of such a nature as to give or be likely to give assistance to an enemy or to imperil the lives or property of inhabitants of this City, or to prevent, hinder or delay the defense or protection thereof;

C.     Wear, carry or display, without authority, any means of identification specified by the emergency agency of the state. (1757-8/72, 4031-11/14)

 

Chapter 8.61 PURCHASING DURING A PROCLAIMED EMERGENCY OR DISASTER
8.61.010 Purpose
This chapter is created to modify the City’s regular purchasing practices to ensure that the City is able to acquire necessary goods and services while maintaining a purchasing process in compliance with applicable purchasing laws when an emergency or disaster is proclaimed. This chapter ensures that if the City is included in a federal emergency or disaster as declared by the President of the United States, the City procurements comply with federal regulations applicable to FEMA disaster grant reimbursement. (4080-8/16)

 

8.61.020 Definitions
A.    “Proclaimed emergency or disaster” as defined in this section means:

1.     The President or Governor has declared or proclaimed a State of Emergency for an area that includes the geographic territory of the City; or

2.     The City Council, the City Manager, or the Director of Emergency Management (as defined in the Huntington Beach Municipal Code) of the City has proclaimed an emergency in the City.

B.     “Exigent circumstances” as defined in this section means:

1.     An emergency or disaster has been proclaimed by local, state, or federal authorities, and

2.     The City’s immediate need for goods or services to address imminent threats to public health, life, safety, or improved property will not permit competitive bidding.

C.     “Simplified acquisition threshold” as defined in this section means:

1.     The dollar amount below which a non-federal entity may purchase goods or services using small purchase methods, as set forth in Title 2 of the Code of Federal Regulations, Part 200, as it may be amended from time to time. (4080-8/16)

 

8.61.030 Delegation of Purchasing Authority in the Event of Exigent Circumstances
A.    If the City Manager determines that goods and services must be procured before the City Council is able to meet and approve purchases, the City Manager has authority, subject to the limitations set forth in this chapter, to contract for, purchase or rent or lease any equipment, supplies, services or other items necessary to respond to an immediate threat to health, safety, or property.

B.     The City Manager has the authority to delegate to the Chief Financial Officer, or his/her designee, the authority to rent, lease, or purchase any equipment, supplies, services, or other items necessary to respond to an immediate threat to health, safety, or improved property, up to a maximum of the simplified acquisition threshold, following procedures in Section 8.61.040.

C.     The City Manager or his/her designee has the authority to approve purchases up to $500,000.00, following the procedures in Section 8.61.040.

D.    Purchases that exceed $500,000.00 require the approval of the Mayor, the Mayor Pro Tem or, in their absence, another City Councilmember.

E.     Administrative Procedures and Reporting Requirements.

1.     As soon as possible after purchases are made under this section, the City Manager, or authorized department head shall submit to the Chief Financial Officer or designee a requisition and a notation that the commodity has been ordered on an emergency basis from the vendor designated.

2.     The Chief Financial Officer or designee will inform the City Manager and the City Council of any individual purchase under this section with a contract amount greater than the simplified acquisition threshold, and also whenever the aggregate of purchases under this section is greater than $1,000,000.00.

3.     The Chief Financial Officer or designee will expedite the verification of funds available and complete the preparation of the purchase order. (4080-8/16)

 

8.61.040 Procurement Procedures During a Proclaimed or Declared Emergency or Disaster
A.    The regulations in Title 2 of the Code of Federal Regulations, Part 200, as it may be amended from time to time, are incorporated herein by reference.

B.     Procedures for Competitive Procurements.

1.     Competitive procurements for purchases below the simplified acquisition threshold shall not be required to be formally bid.

2.     Competitive procurements for purchases equal to or exceeding the simplified acquisition threshold shall be conducted in accordance with the City’s standard procurement process.

C.     Procedures for Non-Competitive Procurements.

1.     Non-competitive procurements may be used when one or more of the following circumstances exist:

a.     Public exigency or emergency will not permit a delay resulting from competitive procurement;

b.     The item is available only from a single source;

c.     After solicitation of a number of sources, competition is determined inadequate; or

d.     The federal awarding agency or pass-through entity expressly authorizes non-competitive proposals in response to a written request from the non-federal entity.

2.     The authorized purchaser shall document the justification for non-competitive procurement in accordance with established procedures.

3.     When a non-competitive procurement is used due to public exigency or emergency, the procurement shall be limited to that portion of the work that must be performed immediately. Procurement for any additional work shall be conducted through competitive procurement procedures. (4080-8/16)

 

8.61.050 Notification and Ratification
A.    Posting of Contract Awards. Under this section, all contracts awarded that exceed the simplified acquisition threshold shall be presented to the City Council at the next practicable opportunity for ratification and thereafter shall be publicly posted within 60 days of the award.

B.     Authority to Cancel Emergency Procurements. As a provision of this chapter, the City Manager is delegated the authority to rescind a contract for non-performance within 24 hours when a contractor or vendor, once awarded a contract, is unable to perform under the terms of the contract and the resulting delay or non-performance presents an immediate threat to life, safety, or improved property.

C.     Requirement for Separate Invoicing. All purchases, rentals, or leases made during a declared or proclaimed emergency or disaster conditions shall require separate invoicing from routine (non-disaster or non-emergency related) purchases. All invoices shall state the goods, services, or equipment provided and shall specify where the goods or services were delivered.

D.    Auditing of Invoices for Debris Clearance Prior to Payment. All invoices for debris clearance and removal shall be audited by the City prior to payment to the vendor. Vendors shall be notified of this requirement prior to the awarding of any contract for debris clearance and/or removal. Audits shall be in accordance with procedures for debris removal monitoring specified in FEMA’s Publication 325, Debris Management Guide.

E.     Limitations of Proclaimed Emergency or Disaster Purchasing Policy. Any purchases that do not meet the standard of being necessary for responding to an immediate threat to public health, life, safety or improved property shall follow the City’s regular purchasing provisions.

F.     Within the procedures and limits set forth in this chapter for purchasing during a proclaimed emergency or disaster, whenever possible, contracts for dollar amounts in excess of the simplified acquisition threshold shall be, when feasible, broken into a contract for the immediately required work to meet the emergency conditions, and a separate contract for any amount exceeding the simplified acquisition threshold, when that portion of the work exceeding the simplified acquisition threshold is not required to meet the emergency conditions which present an imminent threat to life, safety, the public health or improved property.

That portion of the contract in excess of the simplified acquisition threshold and not immediately needed to meet the emergency conditions shall be procured following the City’s normal purchasing policy and the federal procurement regulations in Title 2 of the Code of Federal Regulations, Part 200, which require sealed bids or proposals for contracts in excess of the simplified acquisition threshold. (4080-8/16)

 

Chapter 8.64 LABOR CAMPS
8.64.010 Definition
As used in this chapter, the term “labor camp” shall mean any labor camp as defined in Section 2616 of the California Labor Code, maintained in connection with any employee housing operation in this City. (1970-4/75, 2035-3/76)

 

8.64.020 Enforcement
Pursuant to Section 2640 of the California Labor Code, this City has assumed responsibility for the enforcement of Chapter 4, Part 9, Division 2 of the Labor Code in this City in relation to labor camps. The Orange County Health Department is hereby designated as the enforcement agency and the agency to collect the fees. (1970-4/75, 2035-3/76)

 

8.64.030 Fees—Permit
Pursuant to the provisions of Section 2650 of the Labor Code, every person who operates or intends to operate a labor camp shall obtain an annual permit and shall pay the following fees to the Orange County Health Officer:

A.    A permit issuance fee of $25.00.

B.     A permit to operate fee of six dollars for each employee which the labor camp has the capacity to house, where such housing is supplied by the operator, and a fee of six dollars for each lot or site provided for parking of mobile homes or recreational vehicles by employees.

C.     An amended permit fee of $25.00 for any transfer of ownership or possession of the labor camp.

D.    An amended permit fee of $25.00 and other fees specified in this section, for any increase in the number of employees to be housed or an increase in the number of lots or sites provided for parking of mobile homes or recreational vehicles by employees. (1970-4/75, 2035-3/76)

 

8.64.040 Fees—Reinspection
The fees for a permit to operate shall be considered as inspection fees for the initial annual inspection of a labor camp. When any reinspection is required pursuant to Title 25, California Administrative Code, Section 2016.4, the operator shall pay a fee for each such reinspection, as follows:

A.    Twenty-five dollars provided that such inspection is not in excess of one hour in duration.

B.     If such inspection is in excess of one hour in duration, $25.00 plus $12.50 for each 30 minutes or fractional part thereof in excess of one hour. (1970-4/75, 2035-3/76)

 

Chapter 8.68 FIREMED PROGRAM
8.68.010 Purpose
The declared purpose of this chapter is to reduce life loss and disability by implementing a program funding additional paramedic units in order to meet current response time standards. A fee for service and voluntary membership program is desired to meet these goals by offering a mechanism for residents and businesses to cap their emergency medical service and ambulance transportation costs while supporting the expansion of the City’s paramedic system. (3026-2/90)

 

8.68.020 Definitions
Unless a different meaning is apparent from the context or is specified elsewhere in the code, the following definitions shall be used:

Advanced Life Support (ALS). Any advanced life support medical treatment performed by paramedics (EMT-P) outside of a hospital. This treatment shall follow the current “Advanced Life Support Treatment Guidelines” as specified by the Orange County Emergency Medical Services Agency.

Ambulance. The designated ground ambulance service, licensed by the State of California and the County of Orange, which provide services for the Huntington Beach Fire Department.

Basic Life Support (BLS). Any basic life support treatment which is authorized by the State of California Department of Health to be performed by emergency medical technicians I (EMT-I) and/or paramedics (EMT-P) at the scene of medical emergency.

FireMed Program. A voluntary membership plan where its members shall prepay at a fixed price, the uninsured portion of emergency medical and ambulance services provided by the Huntington Beach Fire Department, or its equivalent.

FireMed Services. Those services provided by the Huntington Beach Fire Department and its designated ambulance provider related to treatment and transportation provided during the course of an emergency medical incident.

Member. Residents of Huntington Beach households, resident businesses and their employees, who have registered with the City and prepaid the voluntary membership fee. (3026-2/90, 3616-10/03)

 

8.68.030 Administration
The Fire Chief or his or her designee shall be responsible for the development of rules, policies and procedures relating to implementation and administration of the FireMed Program. The Fire Chief shall report on a yearly basis to the City Manager and the City Council on the status of the FireMed Program. The report shall include a full financial statement which sets forth the program’s financial status. (3026-2/90)

 

8.68.040 Eligibility
The FireMed Program is open to residents, businesses and employees of non-member businesses located in the City of Huntington Beach. (3026-2/90)

 

8.68.050 Enrollment
Each resident and business of the City will have the opportunity to join the FireMed Program at any time throughout the year.

A.    Persons receiving a residential utility billing from the City may enroll in the FireMed Program and place the monthly charge on their bill.

B.     Households, resident businesses, and employees of resident businesses not receiving a utility bill may enroll in the FireMed Program and establish an annual bill. (3026-2/90, 3616-10/03)

 

8.68.060 Member Benefits
FireMed members shall receive the following benefits by joining the voluntary membership program:

A.    If the member is insured, prepayment of the uninsured portion of:

1.     ALS charges

2.     BLS charges

3.     Emergency ambulance transportation.

B.     If the member is uninsured, prepayment of 20% of:

1.     ALS charges

2.     BLS charges

3.     Emergency ambulance transportation.

Member benefits may be added and modified at the discretion of the Fire Chief. (3026-2/90, 3616-10/03)

 

8.68.065 Additional Member Benefits
A.    CPR class.

B.     Emergency medical information program. (3616-10/03)

 

8.68.070 Authorization for Fees
Advanced life support, basic life support and ambulance fees are hereby authorized and shall be charged in connection with emergency medical care and ambulance services provided by the Huntington Beach Fire Department.

A.    The “fee for services” shall be a user fee designed to recover costs associated with the delivery of emergency medical care and ambulance services. Such fees shall be based on:

1.     Emergencies requiring basic life support (BLS) services; and

2.     Emergencies requiring advanced life support (ALS) services; and

3.     Emergencies requiring ambulance transportation to the nearest medical facility best suited to meet the patient’s emergency medical needs.

B.     The “voluntary membership fee - FireMed” shall be a membership offered to Huntington Beach residents and resident businesses on a voluntary basis for the purpose of allowing its members to prepay, at a fixed price, the uninsured portion of emergency ambulance and emergency medical charges for services provided by the Huntington Beach Fire Department.

1.     Payment of the voluntary fee by households shall entitle membership to permanent residents of that household, related or not. Household guests who receive emergency medical care at a residential FireMed address will be regarded as a FireMed member.

2.     Fees paid by resident businesses and employees of non-member resident businesses entitle membership to the employee only. Customers, patrons, visitors or others using the facilities of such businesses shall be charged directly for paramedic and ambulance services. (3026-2/90, 3616-10/03)

 

8.68.080 Implementation
Implementation of user fees for paramedic services shall begin July 1, 1990. The Fire Chief shall be authorized to administer the FireMed Program beginning 30 days after adoption of this chapter. (3026-2/90)

 

8.68.090 Duty to Respond
Under no circumstances will the delivery and application of available emergency medical services and ambulance transportation be delayed or refused based upon whether or not a person is a FireMed member or can demonstrate an ability to pay. (3026-2/90)

 

8.68.100 Exemptions
Determination for an exemption or reduction of fee for services or the voluntary membership fee by persons claiming a hardship shall be determined by the Fire Chief. (3026-2/90, 3616-10/03)

 

8.68.110 Funding
Revenues derived from the FireMed Program shall be used to improve and maintain the emergency medical services provided by the Huntington Beach Fire Department. (3026-2/90)

 

8.68.120 Program Termination
The FireMed Program may be cancelled by a majority vote of the Huntington Beach City Council. If the Council chooses to terminate the program prior to the new program year, the City may, at its option, refund membership fees back to FireMed members on a prorated basis. The City shall be obligated to provide 30 days’ written notice to FireMed members prior to program termination. (3026-2/90)

 

Chapter 8.72 TATTOOING, BODY PIERCING AND PERMANENT COSMETICS REGULATIONS
8.72.010 Definitions
Aftercare Instructions. Written instructions given to the client, specific to the body art procedure(s) rendered, about caring for the tattoo or body piercing and surrounding area. These instructions will include information about when to seek medical treatment, if necessary.

Antiseptic. A chemical that kills or inhibits the grown of organisms on skin or living tissue.

Autoclave. An apparatus that is registered and listed with the Federal Food and Drug Administration for sterilizing articles by using superheated steam under pressure.

Bloodborne Pathogens. Pathogenic microorganisms that are present in human blood and can cause disease in humans. These pathogens include, but are not limited to, Hepatitis B virus (HBV), Hepatitis C (HCV), and HIV.

Body Pierce. To puncture, perforate, or penetrate any human body part or tissue with an object, appliance, or instrument for the purpose of placing a foreign object in the perforation to prevent the perforation from closing. The puncturing of the outer perimeter or lobe of the ear shall not be included in this definition.

Contaminated. The presence or reasonably anticipated presence of blood, body fluid, or other potentially infectious materials, as defined in 29 Code of Federal Regulations, Part 1910.1030 (latest edition), known as “Occupational Exposure to Bloodborne Pathogens” in or on the surface of an item or person.

Contaminated Waste. Any contaminated material used in tattooing, body piercing, or permanent cosmetics that is to be disposed of.

Department/Officer. That person or office designated by order of the City Council of the City of Huntington Beach or by contract approved by the said Council as the person or office having responsibility for the enforcement of the provisions of this article. This also includes any Orange County Health Officer.

Disinfectant. A chemical that is capable of destroying disease-causing organisms on inanimate objects, with the exception of bacterial spores.

Establishment. Any place whether public or private, temporary or permanent, in nature or location, where tattooing, body piercing, or application of permanent cosmetics is performed.

Equipment. All machinery, including fixtures, containers, vessels, tools, devices, implements, furniture, display and storage areas, sinks, and all other apparatus and appurtenances used in connection with the operation of a tattoo, body piercing, or permanent cosmetic establishment.

Minor. Any person under the age of 18 years.

Operator. Any person, whether the proprietor or another person, administering a tattoo, body piercing, or permanent cosmetic to any customer of the establishment.

Proprietor. The person having general control and management over the conduct of the business at a tattoo, body piercing, or permanent cosmetic establishment, whether or not such person is the legal owner of the premises or the business.

Practitioner/Operator. A person registered with the Orange County Health Officer and approved by the Police Chief who performs tattooing, body piercing, and/or permanent cosmetics on another person at that person’s request.

Premises. An establishment, its contents, and the contiguous land or property and its facilities and contents that are under the control of the proprietor that may impact the establishment personnel, facilities, or operation.

Tattoo. Any method of placing ink or other pigment into or under the skin or mucosa by the aid of needles or any other instrument used to puncture the skin, resulting in permanent coloration of the skin or mucosa. This term includes all forms of cosmetic tattooing and permanent cosmetics or permanent makeup.

Workstation. Any area that is set up to perform tattooing, body piercing, or permanent cosmetics. A workstation can be a separate room or an area that can be screened to ensure privacy when performing nipple, genital, or other discretionary area tattooing or body piercing. All workstations will comply with sanitation rules and guidelines set forth in this Code. (3625-1/04)

 

8.72.020 Locational Criteria
No person or practitioner may tattoo or body pierce another person unless such tattooing or body piercing is done at a licensed establishment that meets the requirements of this chapter. Such establishment must be located in an area approved for such purpose per the City of Huntington Beach Zoning and Subdivision Ordinance. (3625-1/04)

 

8.72.030 License Required
All owners of a tattoo and/or body piercing establishment, or those establishments providing tattoo and/or body piercing, must obtain a business license from the City of Huntington Beach. All independent contractors, or any person providing any service relating to tattoo and/or body piercing who is not an employee must obtain a business license from the City of Huntington Beach. (3625-1/04)

 

8.72.040 Record Retention
A.    Records shall be kept of all tattoos and body piercing. The records shall be kept on the premises of the establishment where administered. These records shall be available for inspection for a period of three years after the date of the procedure.

B.     The records shall include:

1.     The date and time of the procedure.

2.     Record of information from the patron’s picture identification showing the name, date of birth, gender, address of patron, and driver’s license or identification card number. U.S. passports must be accompanied with a second valid form of identification.

3.     The location of any tattoo, permanent cosmetic, or body piercing.

4.     The name and registration number of the practitioner.

5.     A copy of the signed client information and consent form to perform the tattoo or body piercing. (3625-1/04)

 

8.72.050 Practitioner Health and Sanitary Requirements
A.    The practitioner shall be free of communicable disease that may be transmitted by the practitioner of tattooing or body piercing. The practitioner shall submit to the City on an annual basis a certificate from a medical doctor, stating that the applicant has, within 30 days immediately preceding the date of exam, been examined and found to be free of any contagious or communicable diseases, such as Hepatitis B, Hepatitis C, Tuberculosis, and Infectious Mononucleosis.

B.     Practitioners with open sores, rashes, lesions, boils or skin infections shall not engage in the practice of tattooing or body piercing.

C.     No practitioner shall work while under the influence of alcohol or any other mind-altering drug, prescription or non-prescription.

D.    No practitioner shall smoke, eat, or drink at the workstation during or between procedures.

E.     The practitioner shall wash his or her hands and forearms thoroughly with soap and hot water before any skin preparation or procedure. The hands shall be dried with single-service towels. Single-service disposable rubber gloves shall be worn throughout the entire procedure. (3625-1/04)

 

8.72.060 Operator
A.    No operator shall:

1.     Allow practitioners with open sores, rashes, lesions, boils or contagious skin infections to engage in the practice of tattooing or body piercing.

2.     Allow any practitioner to work while that practitioner is under the influence of alcohol or any mind-altering drug.

3.     Allow any practitioner to use tobacco products, eat or drink while performing an actual procedure.

B.     The operator shall:

1.     Allow access to the officer for the City of Huntington Beach or a designee of the Orange County Health Care Agency to enter the tattooing or body piercing establishment at any time during normal business hours in order to ensure that the provisions of this chapter are being met. The officer may enter, inspect, issue notices of violations, copy records, impound, seize and secure any samples, photographs, or other evidence from any establishment.

2.     Require each practitioner working at the establishment to be registered with the Orange County Health Care Agency.

3.     Maintain a list of registered practitioners that work at or have worked at the establishment for a review by the officer during inspections. This includes all employees and independent contractors. (3625-1/04)

 

8.72.070 Establishment
The operator shall be responsible for and ensure the following;

A.    The entire premises of the establishment and all facilities used in connection therewith shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition and in good repair.

B.     The establishment shall be equipped with potable hot and cold running water under pressure as well as toilets and hand sinks that are connected to water and sewage disposal systems. Hand sinks shall be supplied with cleansing compound and single-service towels. At least one additional hand sink shall be located within the immediate area of the workstation. In addition to adequate hand sinks, the establishment shall have a separate janitorial sink available for use by the establishment.

C.     The establishment, including the immediate workstation area where tattooing and body piercing is performed, shall be adequately lighted and ventilated.

D.    Floors, walls, and ceilings in the immediate workstation area shall have smooth, nonporous, nonabsorbent and washable surfaces, and shall be maintained in a clean condition. Concrete blocks or other masonry used in wall construction shall be covered or made smooth and sealed for a nonporous washable surface. Carpeting is prohibited.

E.     Approved waste containers with nonabsorbent, durable plastic liners, shall be used for all tissues, towels, gauze pads and other similar items used on the patron. Bio-hazardous waste shall be disposed of in an acceptable manner. Needles and razors shall be disposed of in a SHARPS container.

F.     Smoking or consumption of food shall not be allowed in the immediate workstation area where the procedure is being performed. No alcoholic beverages will be consumed in workstation area of the establishment at any time.

G.    No animals, except guide dogs for visual or hearing-impaired persons, shall be permitted in the establishment.

H.    The establishment shall be equipped with a telephone for use in case of need for emergency services.

I.      No establishment shall be used as a sleeping room or dormitory. (3625-1/04)

 

8.72.080 Equipment and Supplies
A.    All establishments shall be equipped with an autoclave, or similar device approved for use in sterilizing instruments to be used on humans, and which is in good working order and which is manufactured with temperature and pressure gauges marked and visible on the outside of the unit. Sterilization tape, or similar indicator, shall be used with each batch autoclave or dry sterilizer to monitor functioning of the sterilization unit.

B.     All instruments used on any patron shall be sterilized.

C.     All instruments shall be thoroughly cleaned before being sterilized. This may be done with an ultrasonic cleaner or with a probe, needle or brush able to enter the smallest opening of the instrument. The cleaning of the instruments shall be done with detergent and hot water.

D.    Equipment or instruments requiring sterilization may be wrapped with an approved paper or plastic or placed in glass or plastic tubes. All such packages of containers shall be marked with temperature recording tape or labels and dated with the date of sterilization.

E.     All surfaces and equipment, including, but not limited to, chairs, workstations, counters, recliners, dispensers, shall be made of smooth, nonabsorbent, nonporous material that can withstand repeated disinfection.

F.     Engineering and work practice controls shall be utilized to eliminate or minimize exposure to blood and body fluids. Extraordinary care must be taken to avoid accidental wounds from sharp instruments contaminated with blood or body fluids and to avoid contact with open skin lesions. Needles shall not be broken, bent or recapped, unless the needle is equipped with a factory installed, medically approved, recapping device.

G.    All establishments shall have clean or single-use disposable, laundered towels, washcloths and disposable paper towels in sufficient quantity.

H.    A clean or single-use disposable towel and washcloth shall be used for each customer.

I.      Clean towels and washcloths shall be stored in a closed, dust-proof container.

J.      Soiled towels and washcloths shall be disposed of or stored in an approved covered container.

K.    Any material or supply which has made contact with the blood or body fluids of any person, or by an instrument which has had such contact, shall be deemed contaminated and must be disposed of unless it may be sterilized and reused under the specific provisions of this chapter.

L.     A disinfectant shall be used after cleaning to disinfect any surface contaminated with blood or body fluids.

M.    All facilities shall have a waiting area that is separated from the workstation area.

N.    A public restroom shall be available to patrons during business hours.

O.    The workstation area and patron chair/table shall be wiped down with a disinfectant using a single-use paper towel before and after serving each patron.

P.     Wall mounted hand washing cleanser and wall mounted single-use towel dispensers shall be provided and filled at all hand washing sinks. (3625-1/04)

 

8.72.090 Patrons
A.    Inquiry shall be made and no tattooing or body piercing shall be performed on an individual who is suspected of having jaundice or hepatitis or who recovered from jaundice or hepatitis within the preceding six months.

B.     Tattooing or body piercing shall not be performed on an individual in an area with an evident skin infection or other skin disease or condition, including, but not limited to, rashes, pimples, boils, infections, open lesions, or sunburn which shows any evidence of unhealthful conditions without medical clearance.

C.     Tattooing or body piercing shall not be performed on any patron who appears to be impaired by or under the influence of alcohol or any mind-altering drug. (3625-1/04)

 

8.72.100 Skin Preparation
The following aseptic techniques shall be utilized in the practice of tattooing and body piercing:

A.    Practitioners shall wash their hands thoroughly with hot water and soap before gloving, prior to each patron. Hands shall be dried with individual paper towels. Practitioners shall wear single-use gloves during the procedure and shall discard the gloves at the end of the procedure.

B.     If the patron’s skin is to be shaved, the skin shall be washed with a cleansing, medicated soap before shaving. A safety razor shall be used. A new blade shall be used for each customer. The blade shall be discarded in a SHARPS container after each use. If reusable blade holders are used, they shall be autoclaved between uses on different patrons.

C.     The skin area to be tattooed or pierced shall be prepared by thoroughly washing the area with 70% isopropyl alcohol. The solution shall be applied with cotton or gauze or sprayed on.

D.    Single-use gauze pads, cloths and towels shall be used in the skin cleaning and preparation process. Such materials shall be discarded after use.

E.     All patrons that have received a tattoo or body piercing, or portion of a tattoo or body piercing, shall be provided with printed aftercare instructions regarding care during the healing process of any tattoo or body piercing done at such establishment. (3625-1/04)

 

8.72.110 Tattoo
A.    It shall be unlawful for any person to tattoo a person under the age of 18 years, regardless of parental consent.

B.     Before administering a tattoo, the patron must be advised in writing of the consent form in regards to the following:

1.     That the tattoo should be considered permanent;

2.     That there is potential for adverse healing such as keloid formation, and hypertrophic scarring;

3.     That it can only be removed with a surgical procedure; and

4.     That any effective removal may leave scarring.

C.     One copy of the consent form will be retained by the establishment for three years and a copy of the consent form will be given to the patron.

D.    Any dye or ink in which needles were dipped shall not be used on another person. Ink cups shall be for single patron use.

E.     Needles shall be used on only one patron and then properly discarded.

F.     Needles may be reused during the same session on the same person by rinsing them under running tap water, followed by rinsing them in 70% isopropyl alcohol.

G.    No stencil may be re-used unless it has been disinfected/sanitized.

H.    Plastic stencils shall be thoroughly cleaned after each use and sanitized by immersion for 10 minutes in a chlorine disinfectant solution prepared by mixing one tablespoon of household bleach containing five percent chlorine with one pint of water. A fresh solution of chlorine must be prepared for each stencil. After sanitizing, the stencils shall be rinsed in running tap water and air-dried or blotted dry with a clean, single-use towel. Prior to use, each pre-cleaned stencil shall be rinsed in a 70% isopropyl alcohol solution.

I.      Paper stencils shall only be used once. New paper stencils shall be used for every individual.

J.      All inks, pigments, dyes and instruments used in the practice of tattooing shall be maintained in a condition to prevent contamination.

K.    All inks, pigments, and dyes shall be obtained from sources recognized as safe. Information indicating the sources of all ink and pigments shall be available to the officer or County Health Department upon request.

L.     Only inks, pigments and dyes shall be used and shall be dispensed from bottles and containers.

M.    Immediately before applying a tattoo, the dye to be used for the tattoo shall be squeezed from the dye bottles into disposable cups. Upon the completion of the tattoo, the cups and unused dye shall be discarded. Any dye in which the needles were dipped shall not be used on another person.

N.    Petroleum jelly, or other applying agent, used for applying stencils shall be dispensed from a single-use disposable container or with a tongue blade or applicator stick, which shall be discarded after each use.

O.    After completing work on any patron, the tattooed area shall be washed with 70% isopropyl alcohol. A dry, gauze or plastic wrap dressing shall be used to cover the tattooed area. Pierced areas shall be treated to ensure the prevention of infection. (3625-1/04)

 

8.72.120 Body Piercing
A.    It shall be unlawful for any person to body pierce an individual under the age of 18 years unless such body piercing is performed in the presence of, or as directed by a notarized writing by, the minor’s parent or legal guardian. The minor shall present valid identification and the parent or legal guardian shall present a valid photo identification to the practitioner prior to any body piercing.

B.     Nipple and genital piercing is prohibited on minors regardless of parental consent. (3625-1/04)

 

8.72.130 Interpretation
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall be held to a minimum requirement and shall be liberally construed in favor of the City of Huntington Beach, and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any other power granted by the City of Huntington Beach Municipal Code. (3625-1/04)

 

8.72.140 Severability
If any section, sentence, clause or phrase of this section is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by a decision of any court, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. (3625-1/04)

 

8.72.150 Enforcement
A.    The officer shall have the authority, under the Huntington Beach Municipal Code, to inspect any establishment under the provisions of this chapter for the purpose of determining compliance with any of the terms of this chapter.

B.     Access. The officer for the City of Huntington Beach or a designee of the Orange County Health Care Agency shall be permitted to enter the tattooing or body piercing establishment at any time, during normal business hours, in order to ensure that the provisions of this chapter are being met. The officer may enter, inspect, issue notices of violations, copy records, impound, seize and secure any samples, photographs, or other evidence from any licensed or unlicensed establishment. (3625-1/04)

 

8.72.160 Violations
Violations of this chapter are an immediate and present danger to the public health and welfare. Unlicensed or unsanitary operation of a tattoo or body piercing business shall be deemed to cause irreparable harm. Violations of this chapter may be enjoined, without prejudice to seek forfeiture for the violations involved. (3625-1/04)

 

8.72.170 Penalties
Each of the following acts or omissions shall constitute a misdemeanor.

A.    Any performance of a tattooing or body piercing operation by an operator in violation of any requirement of prohibition imposed in this article.

B.     Any failure by a proprietor to maintain a tattooing or body piercing establishment in conformity with the requirements of this article. For purposes of this subsection, each day upon which such a failure to conform occurs shall constitute a separate violation. (3625-1/04)

 

Chapter 8.75 STREET PERFORMERS
8.75.010 Purpose
The City finds that the existence in the City of street performers provides, for some, a public amenity that enhances their enjoyment in, and character of, the City in a manner consistent with the overall public interest. The City also recognizes that street performers seek to and do draw crowds to their performance. Doing so can create conflicts in the use and enjoyment of public areas by impacting the ability of pedestrians to move freely and safely on the sidewalks and through crosswalks, by blocking and impeding vehicular traffic on City streets, by impacting pedestrians’ ability to enter and exit various businesses, and impacting public safety personnel in responding to calls for service. Recognizing that street performers are engaged in First Amendment activities, and, the difficulty of striking and maintaining a balance between these open competing interests has been increased by changing conditions in the City, changing activities undertaken by street performers in public areas, this chapter imposes reasonable time, place and manner regulations. The regulations are for the public health, safety and welfare to ensure the safety of performers, their audience, and the general public, to prevent unreasonable interference with the public’s use and enjoyment of public areas, to allow residents’ enjoyment of peace and quiet in their homes, and the ability of businesses to operate and conduct their business. (3912-4/11)

 

8.75.020 Definitions
For purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meaning set forth unless a different meaning is clearly intended from the context in which such word or phrase is used. Any word or phrase not defined herein shall have the meaning attributed to it in ordinary usage.

Charge. To require someone to pay a fee or to set, negotiate or establish a fee for a performance. Seeking voluntary contributions, through passing around a hat, leaving open an instrument case or other receptacle, or soliciting donations after a performance, is not a charge.

Perform. To engage in a performance including, but not limited to, playing musical instruments, singing, dancing, acting, pantomiming, puppeteering or juggling.

Performer. An individual or group who performs public entertainment in a public area for tips or gratuities.

Public Areas. Sidewalks, streets, parkways, walkways and all other public spaces located in the City. (3912-4/11)

 

8.75.030 Rules and Regulations
A.    Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code, no performer may perform:

1.     Within 10 feet of any bus stop;

2.     Within 10 feet of any street corner or a marked pedestrian crosswalk;

3.     Within 10 feet of the other edge of any entrance of any business, including, but not limited to, doors, vestibules, driveways, outdoor dining entries and emergency exits, during the hours that any business on the premises is open to the public or to persons having or conducting lawful business within those premises.

B.     A performer and the performer’s equipment may not block or obstruct the free and safe movement of pedestrians. If a sufficient crowd gathers to observe a performer such that the passage of the public through a public area is blocked or obstructed, a police officer or fire official may disperse that portion of the crowd that is blocking or obstructing the passage of the public. If a performer cannot conduct a performance in a location without blocking or obstructing the passage of the public, a police officer or fire official may cause the performer to leave the location or require that the performer relocate his or her equipment, but shall not prevent the performer from occupying another location.

C.     A performer who performs for a charge shall obtain a business license and be subject to all applicable provisions of Chapter 5.08. A performer who performs without charge shall not be required to obtain a business license.

D.    No performer shall construct, erect, or maintain any stage, platform, or similar structure for use during any performance unless the stage or platform:

1.     Is integral to the performance and the performance only takes place on the stage;

2.     Does not exceed four feet by four feet and one-quarter inch in height;

3.     Is removed from the public way when the performer is not performing;

4.     Has beveled edges.

E.     No performer shall use any knife, sword, torch, flame, axe, saw or other object that can cause serious bodily injury to any person.

F.     No performer shall ask or allow any observer, bystander, or audience member to engage in any activity, including, but not limited to, acrobatics, tumbling, or cycling, that can cause serious bodily injury to any person.

G.    No performer shall use any generator, wet cell battery with removable fill caps, or any other power source that poses a fire or public safety hazard. No performer shall connect or maintain an electrical cord to an adjacent building or to a City power source.

H.    No performer may litter his or her performance site or damage or mark any public property.

I.      No performer shall utilize or prevent the public from utilizing any public benches, waste receptacles or other street furniture during the performance.

J.      No minor under the age of 16 can perform unless the minor is at all times accompanied by a responsible adult 18 years of age or older, has obtained an entertainment work permit issued by the Department of Industrial Relations of the State of California and maintains the permit in his or her possession at the time of the performance.

K.    No performer shall place any object on a public sidewalk which causes less than a four-foot continuous sidewalk width being kept clear for pedestrian passage.

L.     No performer shall perform with more instruments, props, equipment, merchandise, or other items than the performer can reasonably transport or remove at one time.

M.    No performer shall leave his or her instruments, props, equipment, merchandise, or other items unattended.

N.    No performer shall perform in contravention of the allowable noise levels established by Chapter 8.40 of this Code.

O.    No performer shall block or obstruct a curb cut.

P.     No performer shall perform after 11:00 p.m. or before 8:00 a.m. (3912-4/11)

Title 9 PUBLIC PEACE, MORALS AND WELFARE
Note
*       Note: Ch. 9.07 repealed by Ord. 3593-12/02; Ch. 9.22 repealed by Ord. 4026-7/14; Ch. 9.28 repealed by Ord. 3977-5/13; Ch. 9.48 repealed by Ord. 3608-6/03; Ch. 9.56 repealed by Ord. 2154-2/77; Ch. 9.60 repealed by Ord. 3980-7/13; Ch. 9.64 repealed by Ord. 3623-1/04.

 

Chapter 9.04 INTERFERENCE WITH POLICE
9.04.010 Interfering with Vision
No person shall use a mirror, glass or any similar object in a manner which would cause the sun or any other bright light to reflect on such mirror, glass or other similar object for the purpose of willfully interfering with the vision of any police officer, peace officer or special officer of the City while in the performance of his or her duties. (1535-11/69)

 

9.04.020 Nuisance
It shall be deemed a public nuisance for any person to use a mirror, glass or any similar object in a manner which would cause the sun or any other bright light to reflect on such mirror, glass or other similar object for the purpose of interfering with the vision of any police officer, peace officer or special officer of the City while in the performance of his or her duties. (3288-8/95)

 

Chapter 9.06 PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES
9.06.010 Manned Flight Device
No person shall operate or permit the operation by any person of any aircraft, balloon, kite, ultralite aircraft, hang glider, or any similar device involving manned flight within 500 feet of the ground in the corporate limits of the City of Huntington Beach without first filing an application with the Police Chief for a permit, accompanied by a processing fee of $25.00. (2573-10/82)

 

9.06.020 Contents of Application
Applications for manned flight permits shall be made in writing, signed by the applicant if an individual, or by a duly authorized agent thereof, if a club, organization, or corporation, and shall contain the following:

A.    The name, address and telephone number of the applicant, in the case of an individual; in the case of a club, organization or corporation, the names and addresses of the officers and directors thereof; and

B.     The date or dates, location, time of day, and number of manned flights applicant desires to make. (2573-10/82)

 

9.06.030 Permit Issuance
The Police Chief shall issue a manned flight permit if he or she finds that:

A.    The conduct of the activity will not create a noise nuisance under the provisions of Chapter 8.40;

B.     The conduct of the activity will not create a dust problem under the provisions of Chapter 8.24;

C.     The conduct of the activity will be in compliance with all applicable provisions of the Huntington Beach Municipal Code with respect to land use; and

D.    The applicant, prior to the issuance of such permit, shall provide evidence of public liability insurance and property damage insurance coverage, written by an insurance company acceptable to the City in the minimum limits set by resolution of the City Council. (2573-10/82)

 

9.06.040 Exception to Provisions
No manned flight permit shall be required for any person operating aircraft under the provisions of federal law and regulations. Further, the foregoing sections shall have no application to the flying of unmanned kites, model airplanes and the like except as provided elsewhere in this Code. (2573-10/82)

 

9.06.050 Penalty—Misdemeanor
Any person who violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of these sections governing manned flights, or any of the terms, conditions or regulations of the manned flight permit, issued by the Police Chief, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and each day or portion thereof such violation is committed, continued or permitted shall be deemed a separate offense, and shall be punishable therefor by imprisonment in the county jail for not more than six months, or by a fine not to exceed $500.00, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (2573-10/82)

 

Chapter 9.08 SMOKING PROHIBITED
9.08.010 Purpose and Findings
The City Council finds there is ample evidence that smoking tobacco in any form is a real danger to the general health and an irritation, inconvenience, and discomfort to persons in enclosed areas. In order to serve the public health, safety and welfare, the declared purpose of this chapter is to promote a policy of nonsmoking and to regulate smoking in any building or establishment frequented by the public, to the extent allowed by state law. (2819-3/86, 3385-3/98)

 

9.08.020 Definitions
Words and phrases used in this chapter shall have the following meanings unless from the context a different meaning is apparent:

“Employee” means any person who performs a service under any appointment or contract of hire or apprenticeship, express or implied, oral or written excepting persons excluded by California Labor Code Section 3352.

“Employer” means any person, partnership, or corporation (including private, nonprofit and governmental) having not fewer than four persons performing services and receiving compensation therefor.

“Places of employment” means any building, structure, or portion thereof, under the control of a private or public employer, where employees are present to perform a service, and members of the public may come to be served.

“Smoking” means and includes inhaling, exhaling, burning, or carrying any lighted smoking equipment for tobacco, or any other noxious weed or plant. (2819-3/86)

 

9.08.030 Elevators—Smoking Prohibited
No person shall smoke in any elevator in any building open to the public including, but not restricted to, elevators in office, hotel, and multifamily buildings. (2819-3/86)

 

9.08.040 Hospitals and Health Care Facilities—Smoking Prohibited
This section will become effective only upon (1) the repeal or invalidation of California Labor Code Section 6404.5; or (2) legislative modification to California Labor Code Section 6404.5 such that local agencies may regulate smoking in places of employment.

A.    No person shall smoke in any area, except those designated and posted for such purpose, of any hospital and health care facility, as defined in California Health and Safety Code Section 1250.

B.     Every publicly or privately-owned hospital and health care facility shall assign patients rooms or wards, according to individual preference, and no nonsmoking patient shall be placed in a room or ward which has been designated for patients who smoke. (2819-3/86, 3385-3/98)

 

9.08.050 Meeting Rooms—Smoking Prohibited
This section will become effective only upon (1) the repeal or invalidation of California Labor Code Section 6404.5; or (2) legislative modification to California Labor Code Section 6404.5 such that local agencies may regulate smoking in places of employment.

No person shall smoke in any hearing room, conference room, chamber or any place where public business is conducted, and to which members of the public are admitted, whether as participants or observers. (2819-3/86, 3385-3/98)

 

9.08.060 Theaters and Auditoriums—Smoking Prohibited
This section will become effective only upon (1) the repeal or invalidation of California Labor Code Section 6404.5; or (2) legislative modification to California Labor Code Section 6404.5 such that local agencies may regulate smoking in places of employment.

No person shall smoke in any publicly or privately-owned theater, auditorium or similar facility, designed and used for motion picture shows and stage productions, including but not restricted to musicals, concerts, recitals, operas, and sporting events, except the lobby, and business or work areas barred to the public. Every person who owns, manages, or has control of a theater, auditorium, or facility used for the purposes stated herein, shall post signs conspicuously in the lobby informing the public that smoking is not permitted inside such theater, auditorium, or facility. In the case of motion picture theaters, such information shall be displayed on the screen for not less than five seconds before the beginning of the feature film. (2819-3/86, 3385-3/98)

 

9.08.070 Public Restrooms—Smoking Prohibited
No person shall smoke in any public restroom. (2819-3/86)

 

9.08.080 Eating Establishments—Smoking Prohibited
This section will become effective only upon (1) the repeal or invalidation of California Labor Code Section 6404.5; or (2) legislative modification to California Labor Code Section 6404.5 such that local agencies may regulate smoking in places of employment.

A.    Any person owning, managing, operating or having control of an eating establishment or restaurant which has an approved occupant load of 25 persons or more shall provide and maintain a nonsmoking section of not less than 75% of the enclosed area for seating patrons which is not part of a patio, outdoor eating area, or that portion of the premises used primarily for the sale of alcoholic beverages. The requirements of this section shall not apply to any room or rooms in a restaurant or eating establishment which may be reserved for private functions. The nonsmoking section referred to herein shall be increased to 100% of the aforesaid enclosed area on January 1, 1995.

B.     Any person owning, managing, operating, or having control of an eating establishment or restaurant which has an approved occupant load of 24 persons or less shall provide and maintain a nonsmoking section of not less than 100% of the enclosed area for seating patrons which is not part of a patio, outdoor eating area, or that portion of the premises used primarily for the sale of alcoholic beverages. The requirements of this section shall not apply to any room or rooms in a restaurant or eating establishment which may be reserved for private functions. (2819-3/86, 3202-9/93, 3385-3/98)

 

9.08.090 Employer Compliance
This section will become effective only upon (1) the repeal or invalidation of California Labor Code Section 6404.5; or (2) legislative modification to California Labor Code Section 6404.5 such that local agencies may regulate smoking in places of employment.

As evidence of good faith compliance, an employer with four or more employees, shall meet the following criteria:

A.    Within 120 days after the effective date of this chapter, an employer shall adopt, implement and maintain a no smoking policy, containing a definition of “immediate work area,” which insofar as practicable, shall make reasonable provisions for nonsmokers and smokers. Such policy shall be posted in appropriate locations throughout the work place, and copies thereof furnished to all employees.

B.     An employee may request, based on the employer’s policy, that his or her immediate work area be designated nonsmoking. Nonsmokers shall be given preference, and may lodge a complaint with the employer with respect to pollution by tobacco smoke of his or her immediate work area. The employer shall, using existing ventilation, walls, temporary separations and partitions, make every effort to resolve any problem between nonsmoking and smoking employees.

C.     If an employer finds that the floor plan for a business does not provide sufficient relief for nonsmoking employees, he or she may, when practicable, reassign such nonsmokers to other locations, enlarge the area in which smoking is prohibited, or take any other reasonable measure to eliminate or reduce the effect of tobacco smoke on nonsmokers. (2819-3/86, 3385-3/98)

 

9.08.100 Exceptions
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any business conducted from a private home, or any private work area occupied exclusively by persons who smoke, except where smoking has been prohibited by the fire marshal pursuant to statute, ordinance or other regulations. (2819-3/86)

 

9.08.110 Sign Requirement
Whenever, under the provisions of this chapter, the posting of a sign is required, the owner, manager or other person in charge or control of a building, room, or other place where smoking is prohibited, shall place or cause to be placed conspicuous “NO SMOKING” signs with capital letters not less than one inch in height on a contrasting background. (2819-3/86)

 

9.08.120 Structural Modification Not Required
A.    All employers shall to the extent possible provide no-smoking areas for nonsmoking personnel, but shall not be required to incur any expense to make alterations or modifications to an existing structure.

B.     No owner, operator, or manager of any theater, hospital, health care facility, business, building, or structure shall be required to incur any expense to alter or modify an existing area or work place for the benefit of nonsmokers. (2819-3/86)

 

9.08.130 Prohibitions
This section will become effective only upon (1) the repeal or invalidation of California Labor Code Section 6404.5; or (2) legislative modification to California Labor Code Section 6404.5 such that local agencies may regulate smoking in places of employment.

A.    No employer, owner, operator, manager, or person in charge or control of any place of business, hospital or health care facility, or theater or place of entertainment shall fail to establish and post a written smoking policy on the premises, or fail to place conspicuous “no smoking” signs in appropriate areas, and insofar as practicable, shall fail to comply with the requirements of this chapter.

B.     It shall be unlawful for any person willfully to destroy or mutilate any sign which prohibits smoking.

C.     It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke in any posted nonsmoking area. (2819-3/86, 3385-3/98)

 

9.08.140 Violation—Penalty
This section will become effective only upon (1) the repeal or invalidation of California Labor Code Section 6404.5; or (2) legislative modification to California Labor Code Section 6404.5 such that local agencies may regulate smoking in places of employment.

Any person who violates or willfully fails to comply with any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction, and upon conviction thereof shall be subject to the following:

A.    For the first offense, a fine not to exceed $50.00;

B.     For the second offense, occurring 90 days after the first offense, a fine not to exceed $100.00;

C.     For the third offense, occurring 90 days after the second offense, a fine not to exceed $100.00;

D.    Thereafter a fine not to exceed $250.00 shall be paid each day, or portion thereof, during which an offense occurs. (2819-3/86, 3385-3/98)

 

9.08.150 Public Nuisance—Civil Remedy
Any violation of the provisions of this chapter may be declared a public nuisance hereunder, and the City Attorney may proceed to abate the same by filing a civil action in a court of competent jurisdiction. (2819-3/86)

 

9.08.160 Tobacco Vending Machines Prohibited
No cigarette or other tobacco product may be sold, offered for sale, or distributed by or from a vending machine or other appliance, or any other device designated or used for vending purposes. (3202-9/93)

 

Chapter 9.20 PROHIBITED PUBLIC CONDUCT
Note
*       Note: § 9.20.010 repealed by Ord. 3778-10/07.

 

9.20.015 Public Nudity
It shall be unlawful for any person over the age of nine years old to appear, bathe, sunbathe, walk or be on any public park, playground, beach, or in the water adjacent thereto, or on any other public land, or on any private property open to public view from any public beach, playground, park, public place, or public right-of-way in such a manner as to knowingly and intentionally expose his or her genitals, pubic hair, perineum, anal region or pubic hair region, or expose the nipples and/or areola of the female breast except as necessary while engaging in breastfeeding. (3773-9/07)

 

9.20.020 Human Waste
No person shall urinate or evacuate his or her bowels on private property in an area exposed to the public view, or on any public street, sidewalk, alley, park, or other public place, except in a public restroom. (2992-4/89)

 

9.20.030 Picketing of Private Residences
A.    In enacting this section, the City Council finds as follows:

1.     Protecting the well-being, tranquility, and privacy of the homes of residents of the City is a significant governmental interest.

2.     A special benefit of the privacy all residents enjoy within their homes is the ability to avoid intrusions and unwanted speech.

3.     Picketing which targets the dwellings of specific residents of the City is an inherent and offensive intrusion on residential privacy.

4.     Picketing before or about dwellings obstructs and interferes with the free and safe use of public sidewalks and public streets.

5.     The purpose of this section is to protect and preserve the well-being, tranquility and privacy of the home by ensuring the residents of the City are free from picketing directed specifically at them.

6.     This section is enacted for the further purpose of protecting the free and safe use of public sidewalks and streets.

B.     It is unlawful for any person to engage in picketing within 300 feet of a residence or dwelling of any individual, where such picketing is focused or targeted against that residence, dwelling or individual.

C.     Violations of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor punishable by fine or imprisonment, or both. No fine imposed pursuant to this section for any single violation thereof shall exceed $500.00, nor shall imprisonment exceed six months for each violation hereof and each day that any such separate violation continues shall constitute a separate violation. (3192-4/93, 3412-3/99)

 

9.20.040 Trespassing on School Grounds
No person shall enter posted school grounds without first obtaining permission from the administrative office of the school or school district, except for the following persons:

A.    Students, currently enrolled at that school.

B.     Teachers, staff members and other employees of the school district.

C.     Service providers and vendors doing business with the school, including counselors.

D.    Volunteers approved by the school.

E.     Parents of students currently enrolled.

F.     Law enforcement and other governmental employees and representatives having business at the school.

G.    Attendees at school events that are open to the public, while those events are open and only in the area open for the event.

H.    Attendees at authorized Civic Center Act functions. (3215-12/93)

 

9.20.050 Nuisance
It shall be deemed a public nuisance for any person to urinate or evacuate his or her bowels on private property in an area exposed to the public view, or on any public street, sidewalk, alley, park or other public place except in a public restroom. (3289-8/95, 3778-10/07)

 

Chapter 9.24 GAMBLING
9.24.010 Anything of Value Defined
“Anything of value” means money, coin, currency, check, chip, allowance, token, credit, merchandise, property or anything representative of value, and includes without limitation any payment for services or for the use of any premises, cards, chips, furniture or other article. “Anything of value” also means any increase or probable increase in business or patronage resulting directly or indirectly from the playing of any game of cards permitted by Section 9.24.050. “Anything of value” also means any rent, remuneration or compensation of any nature received by any person, firm, corporation, club, lodge, association or church for the use or occupancy of any premises where the major, primary or usual use of said premises is for the playing of card games permitted by Section 9.24.050. (713-5/59, 2102-9/76)

 

9.24.020 Premises—Keeping
No person (either as principal, agent, employee or otherwise) shall keep, conduct or maintain in this City any house, room, apartment or place used in whole or in part as a place where any game not mentioned in Section 330 or 330a of the Penal Code of the State of California, is played, conducted, dealt, or carried on, with cards, dice, billiard balls, pool balls, cues or other devices, for money, checks, chips, credit or any other representative of value or for any merchandise or any other thing of value, except that bingo games may be conducted pursuant to Chapter 5.64 of this Code. (536-2/49, 2102-9/76)

 

9.24.030 Permitting Unlawful
No person (either as principal, agent, employee or otherwise) shall knowingly permit any house, room, apartment or place owned by him or her or under his or her charge or control in this City to be used in whole or in part for playing, conducting, dealing or carrying on therein any game not mentioned in Sections 330 and 330a of the Penal Code of the State of California, with cards, dice, billiard balls, pool balls, cues or other devices, for money, checks, chips, credit or any other thing of value, except that bingo games may be conducted pursuant to Chapter 5.64 of this Code. (536-2/49, 2102-9/76)

 

9.24.040 Betting—Limitations
No person shall play or bet at or against any game not mentioned in Sections 330 or 330a of the Penal Code of the State of California, with cards, dice, billiard balls, pool balls, cues or other thing of value, except that bingo games may be conducted pursuant to Chapter 5.64 of this Code. (536-2/49, 2102-9/76)

 

9.24.050 Card Games
Notwithstanding the provisions of Sections 9.24.020 through 9.24.040, any game played with cards, and not mentioned in Section 330 of the Penal Code of the State of California shall not be prohibited unless in violation of one or more of the following sections of this chapter. (713-5/59)

 

9.24.060 Winnings—Accepting
It is unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, lodge, club, association, church or any other group of persons to receive directly or indirectly anything of value from the playing or operation of any game of cards permitted by Section 9.24.050, other than the actual winnings to which a person playing such a game in good faith for him or herself alone may be entitled as the result of such game. (713-5/59)

 

9.24.070 Losses
It is unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, lodge, club, association, church or any other group of persons to give anything of value for being permitted to participate in any game of cards permitted by Section 9.24.050 other than to pay the actual losses sustained by such person playing such game in good faith for him or herself alone. (713-5/59)

 

9.24.080 Betting Valuables of Another
It is unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, lodge, club, association, church or any other group of persons to bet or wager anything of value belonging to another person in any game of cards permitted by Section 9.24.050. (713-5/59)

 

9.24.100 Permitting Unlawful Use of Premises
It is unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, lodge, club, association, church or any other group of persons, either as owner, lessee, agent, employee, mortgagor or otherwise, knowingly to permit any room, building or premises, or any furniture, fixtures, equipment or other article, or anything of value, to be used for or in any game of cards, permitted by Section 9.24.050, in connection with which a violation of Sections 9.24.060 through 9.24.080 occurs. (713-5/59)

 

9.24.110 Seizure of Equipment
In addition to any other remedy provided by law, any furniture, fixtures, equipment or article, or anything of value, used in violation of Section 9.24.100 may be seized by any of the officers designated by Sections 335 and 335a of the Penal Code of the State of California, and in such cases shall be disposed of as provided in Section 335a of said Penal Code; provided, however, that the phrase “machine or device” as used in Section 335a of the Penal Code, shall mean any furniture, fixtures, equipment or article, or anything of value except money, coin or currency. Any or all money, coin or currency used in violation of Section 9.24.100 and seized pursuant to this section shall be deposited in the City general fund. (713-5/59)

 

9.24.120 Card Games—Inspection
When any game of cards is being played which is permitted by Section 9.24.050, it shall at all times be open to inspection by regular full-time police officers of the City while on actual duty. (713-5/59)

 

9.24.130 Hindering Inspection
It is unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, lodge, club, association, church or any other group of persons to hinder, impede, obstruct, prohibit or prevent or to assist in such hindering, impeding, obstructing, prohibiting or preventing any such lawful inspection as provided for in Section 9.24.120. (713-5/59)

 

9.24.140 Construction
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as permitting any game of cards prohibited by Section 330 of the Penal Code of the State of California. (713-5/59)

 

9.24.150 Non-Profit Exemption
The provisions of this chapter do not apply to events held by non-profit organizations which are properly permitted by the state. (3852-1/10)

 

Chapter 9.32 POOL AND BILLIARD HALLS
9.32.010 Permit Required—Application
In addition to complying with Chapters 5.04 through 5.16 of the Huntington Beach Municipal Code, any person, firm or corporation desiring to engage in the business of operating a pool or billiard hall, or other lawful indoor game conducted for profit and open to the public, shall first make an application for a permit in writing to the City Council containing at least the following information:

A.    Name and address of applicant;

B.     Name and address of all financially interested parties of the firm;

C.     If the applicant is a corporation, the names and addresses of all of the officers of the corporation;

D.    Name and address of manager or person to be in charge of premises;

E.     Address or location of the proposed pool or billiard hall or room;

F.     Number of tables to be operated;

G.    Whether or not alcoholic beverages are to be sold on the premises;

H.    List of any and all games and amusement machines and devices to be operated on the premises;

I.      Signature of the applicant. (765-5/60)

 

9.32.020 Applicant—Criminal Investigation
In addition to the written application as herein required, the applicant, manager and persons referred to in subsections A through D of Section 9.32.010, shall personally appear before the Police Chief or his or her authorized representative, prior to the City Council meeting when the application for Council Permit is to be heard, and have his, her or their fingerprints and photographs taken for the purpose of a criminal record investigation. (765-5/60)

 

9.32.030 Permit—Council Grants or Denies
The City Council shall have full power to grant a permit or reject an application. After Council and police investigation, if it shall appear that the person, firm or corporation is a proper person, firm or corporation to be so licensed, that the location and arrangement of the proposed place where the business is to be conducted is satisfactory, the Council may grant the permit and license, otherwise it shall reject and deny the same. (765-5/60)

 

9.32.040 Premises Specifications
For police regulation and proper supervision, all businesses where games of billiards, pool or other indoor games are the primary source of income, shall be open to the public and conducted in a single room without partition. The main entrance or vestibule into said pool or billiard hall or room shall have glass panel doors, and said doors shall at all times be clear, unglazed and unobstructed so that all parts of the room will be open to the public view. At least 50% of the square footage of the building front open to the public shall be clear, clean glass which would make the interior of the game room visible from the public street, or walkway. (765-5/60, 1311-5/67)

 

9.32.050 Minors
No person operating any business regulated by this chapter shall allow any minor under the age of 21 to be or remain in any room accessible from, or in which such business is carried on if any alcoholic beverages are consumed, dispensed or sold on the same premises. (765-5/60, 1311-5/67)

 

9.32.060 Card Games
No card tables or games of cards whether played for pleasure or for chance shall be allowed, permitted or carried on in any room in which any of the above businesses shall be conducted or in any room accessible therefrom. (765-5/60)

 

9.32.070 Prohibited Practices
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation owning, operating or managing any business regulated by this chapter to permit or allow any person or persons to violate any of the provisions of Chapters 9.24, 9.28, 9.36 or 9.60 of the Huntington Beach Municipal Code, or Sections 319 et seq., 330 et seq., and 337.1 of the Penal Code of the State of California while in or on the premises of such business. (765-5/60)

 

9.32.080 Permit—Posting
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to operate or conduct any business regulated by this chapter for any period of time whatsoever without first having a Council Permit and a current and valid City license posted in a prominent and conspicuous place on the premises. (765-5/60)

 

9.32.090 Hours of Business
All billiard and pool room businesses at which alcohol is consumed, dispensed or sold shall be closed between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. All other billiard and pool room businesses shall be closed between the hours of 12:30 a.m. and 6:30 a.m. It shall be a violation of this section for any person except the owner, manager or janitor to be upon the premises during the closed hours. (765-5/60, 1311-5/67)

 

9.32.100 Operated in Conjunction With Other Businesses
Whenever a pool and/or billiard room is operated in conjunction with a bowling center and a part of the bowling center operation, Section 9.32.050 hereof pertaining to minors and Section 9.32.090 hereof pertaining to hours of business shall not apply to such pool and/or billiard room; provided, however, that no person under the age of 18 years shall be permitted to be or allowed to remain in such pool and/or billiard room, unless the minor is accompanied by a parent, guardian or responsible adult. (854-8/61)

 

9.32.110 Permit—Revocation
In addition to the penalties provided for any violation of this chapter, the Council may revoke, or may instruct the Police Chief to revoke, any permit or license issued for the conduct of said business for violations of any of the provisions of this chapter. (765-5/60)

 

9.32.120 Permit—Revocation—Appeal
Subsequent to revocation of a permit or license under the provisions of Section 9.32.100, the permittee or licensee may petition the City Council for a public hearing by filing a written request with the City Clerk within 10 days after revocation. (765-5/60)

 

9.32.130 Definitions
As used in this chapter, the terms “billiard room,” “pool room,” “billiard hall,” and “pool hall” shall mean any place of business with more than four pool or billiard tables. (3238-7/94)

 

Chapter 9.36 INDECENT EXPOSURE OF WAITRESSES AND PERFORMERS
9.36.010 Authority to Regulate
The ordinance codified herein is adopted pursuant to Sections 318.5 and 318.6 of the Penal Code. All words used in this chapter which also are used in Sections 318.5 and 318.6 are used in the same sense and mean the same as the same respective word used in Sections 318.5 and 318.6 of the Penal Code. (1635-3/71)

 

9.36.020 Theater Defined
As used in this chapter and in Sections 318.5 and 318.6 of the Penal Code, “theater” means a building, playhouse, room, hall or other place having a permanent stage upon which movable scenery and theatrical or vaudeville or similar performances are given, permanently affixed seats so arranged that a body of spectators can have an unobstructed view of the stage, whose primary function is to give such performances, and for which a City permit or license for a theater is in full force and effect. This definition does not supersede the provisions of Section 9.36.010 of this Code. (1635-3/71)

 

9.36.030 Bottomless Prohibited
Every person is guilty of a misdemeanor who:

A.    Exposes his or her genitals, vulva, anus, pubic hair or cleft of the buttocks or employs any device or covering which is intended to simulate the genitals, vulva, anus, pubic hair or cleft of the buttocks while participating in any live act, demonstration or exhibition in any public place, place open to the public or place open to public view, or while serving food or drink or both to any customer;

B.     Permits, procures or assists any person to so expose him or herself, or to employ any such device. (1635-3/71)

 

9.46.040 Topless Prohibited
Every female is guilty of a misdemeanor who, while participating in any live act, demonstration or exhibition in any public place, place open to the public or place open to public view, or while serving food or drink or both to any customer:

A.    Exposes the nipple of either breast and/or that portion of either breast which contiguously surrounds the nipple and which is of a different natural pigmentation than the main portion of either breast;

B.     Employs any device or covering which is intended to simulate such portions of the breast; or

C.     Wears any type of clothing so that any portion of such part of the breast may be observed. (1635-3/71)

 

9.36.050 Persons as Accessories
Every person is guilty of a misdemeanor who permits, counsels or assists any person to violate any provision of this chapter. (1635-3/71)

 

9.36.060 Exceptions
This chapter does not apply to:

A.    A theater, concert hall or similar establishment which is primarily devoted to theatrical performances;

B.     Any act authorized or prohibited by any state statute. (1635-3/71)

 

Chapter 9.40 INHALING CERTAIN SUBSTANCES
9.40.010 Prohibited Substances
No person shall inhale, breathe or drink any compound, liquid, chemical or any substance known as glue, adhesive cement, mucilage, dope or any other material or substance or combination thereof with the intent of becoming intoxicated, elated, dazed, paralyzed, irrational or in any other manner changing, distorting or disturbing the eyesight, thinking process, balance or coordination of such person. For the purpose of this chapter, any such condition so induced shall be deemed to be an intoxicated condition. (933-11/62)

 

9.40.020 Prescriptions Excepted
The provisions of Section 9.40.010 shall not be applicable to any person who inhales, breathes or drinks such material or substance pursuant to the direction or prescription of any doctor, physician, surgeon, dentist or podiatrist authorized so to direct or prescribe. (933-11/62)

 

9.40.030 Violation—Penalty
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine of not more than $500.00 or by imprisonment in the City or county jail for a period of not more than six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (933-11/62)

 

9.40.040 Nuisance
It shall be deemed a public nuisance for any person to inhale, breathe, or drink any compound, liquid, chemical or any substance known as glue, adhesive cement, mucilage, dope or any other material substance or combination thereof with the intent of becoming intoxicated, elated, dazed, paralyzed, irrational or in any other manner change, distort or disturb the eyesight, thinking process, balance or coordination. (3290-8/95)

 

Chapter 9.44 INTOXICATED AND DISORDERLY PERSONS
Note
*       Note: § 9.44.040 repealed by Ord. 3363-7/97.

 

9.44.010 Drinking in Public Places
No person shall drink any malt, spirituous or vinous liquor containing more than one-half of one percent of alcohol by volume, upon any public streets, alleys, sidewalks, parkways, playgrounds, parking lots open to the public, public parks, public school grounds, and public recreation areas within this City, unless such person is on any place for which a conditional use permit or special permit has been issued by the City of Huntington Beach permitting alcohol consumption. (72-3/11, 407-2/38, 3363-7/97, 3434-9/99)

 

9.44.020 Disorderly Houses
It is unlawful for any person to keep a riotous house, or permit any riotous or disorderly conduct in any house, yard or premises connected therewith, owned or occupied by such person, or be guilty of any riotous or disorderly conduct in any house, yard or premises whereby the peace, quiet or decency of any person in the neighborhood of such house, may be disturbed. (72-3/11)

 

9.44.030 Complaints—Previous Convictions
Upon the filing of a complaint under this chapter, the person filing same shall ascertain from the Police Department the number of previous convictions and shall add an allegation to said complaint setting forth the number of convictions. (72-3/11, 508-4/47)

 

Chapter 9.52 DAMAGING CITY PROPERTY
9.52.010 Violation—Misdemeanor
Every person who willfully writes upon, paints upon or draws upon, defaces, cuts, displaces, disfigures, removes, or mutilates any building, street, sidewalk, street light, traffic signal, street tree, waste container, fence, block wall, bench, chair, table or other property belonging to this City is guilty of a misdemeanor. (477-11/43, 2519-12/81)

 

Chapter 9.60 HYPNOTISM
Note
*       Repealed by Ord. 3980-7/13.

 

Chapter 9.68 CURFEW
Note
*       Note: §§ 9.68.080 and 9.68.090 repealed by Ord. 3865-3/10.

 

9.68.010 Definitions
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meaning hereafter set forth unless a different meaning is clearly intended from the context in which such word or phrase is used. Any word or phrase not herein defined shall have the meaning attributed to it in ordinary usage.

“Emergency” means an unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state that calls for immediate action. The term includes, but is not limited to, a fire, a natural disaster, an automobile accident, or any situation requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life.

“Establishment” means any privately owned place of business operated for a profit to which the public is invited, including but not limited to any place of amusement or entertainment.

“Guardian” means:

1.     A person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person of a minor; or

2.     A public or private agency with whom the minor has been placed by a court.

“Minor (juvenile)” means any person under the age of 18 years of age.

“Officer” means a police officer, deputy sheriff, or other law enforcement agency officer.

“Operator” means an individual, firm, association, partnership, or corporation operating, managing or conducting any establishment. The term includes the members or partners of an association or partnership and officers of a corporation.

“Parent” means a person who is:

1.     A natural parent, adopting parent, or step-parent of another person; or

2.     A person at least 18 years of age and authorized in writing by a parent or guardian to have the care and custody of a minor.

“Public place” means any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, highways, and common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings, transport facilities, theaters, game rooms, shops, shopping malls or any other place for the sale of merchandise and business.

“Remain” means to:

1.     Linger or stay; or

2.     Fail to leave premises when requested to do so by an officer or the owner, operator, or other person in control of the premises.

“Street” means a way or place, of whatever nature, open to the use of the public as a matter of right for purpose of vehicular travel or in the case of a sidewalk thereof for pedestrian travel. The term “street” includes the legal right-of-way, including, but not limited to, the traffic lanes, curb, sidewalk, whether paved or unpaved, and any grass plots or other grounds found within the legal right-of-way of a street. The term “street” applies irrespective of what the legal right-of-way is formally named or called, whether alley, avenue, court, road or otherwise. (3282-6/95, 3865-3/10)

 

9.68.020 Curfew—Prohibited Conduct
A minor commits a misdemeanor if he or she remains, walks, runs, stands, drives or rides about, in or upon any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the City between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. Pacific Time of the following day. (3282-6/95)

 

9.68.030 Responsibility of Parents
A parent or guardian of a minor commits a misdemeanor if he or she knowingly permits or allows the minor to remain, walk, run, stand, drive or ride about in or upon any public place or on the premises of any establishment open to the general public within the City during curfew hours unaccompanied by parent or guardian. (3282-6/95, 3865-3/10)

 

9.68.040 Responsibility of Establishments
The owner, operator, or any employee of an establishment commits a misdemeanor if he or she knowingly allows a minor to remain, walk, run, stand, drive or ride about in or upon any public place within his or her control or on the premises of any establishment within his or her control within the City during curfew hours. (3282-6/95)

 

9.68.050 Exceptions
A.    The provisions of this chapter do not apply when the minor is:

1.     Accompanied by the minor’s parents or guardian.

2.     In public for a specific purpose at designated times, without detour or stop, with the minor’s parent’s or guardian’s written permission which shall state:

a.     The name, address and telephone number of such child;

b.     The name, address and telephone number of the parent, guardian, or custodian for the child;

c.     The height, weight, sex, color of eyes and hair, and other relevant physical characteristics of such child;

d.     A brief description of the employment, errand or activity for which the minor has permission to engage in and the time of day during which this activity will be conducted; and

e.     The points of origin and destination of the minor.

3.     Engaged in employment activity, or going to or returning home from an employment activity, without any detour or stop.

4.     Is rendering aid in an emergency; is in need of aid due to an emergency or is prevented from movement by an emergency situation. In cases of reasonable necessity and of such urgency that the parent, guardian, custodian, or other responsible person is unable to accompany the minor.

5.     On the sidewalk abutting the minor’s residence.

6.     Attending, or going to or returning home without any detour or stop, from an official school, religious, or other recreational activity supervised by adults or sponsored by the City of Huntington Beach, a civic organization, or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor.

7.     Exercising rights protected by the First Amendment of the United States Constitution.

8.     Married or legally emancipated and can show proof of the same.

B.     The provisions of this chapter do not apply when the owner, operator, or employee of an establishment promptly notifies the Huntington Beach Police Department that a minor is present on the premises of the establishment during curfew hours and refuses to leave.

C.     Before taking any enforcement action under this section, a police officer should ask the apparent offender’s age and reason for being in the public place or on the premises of the establishment during curfew hours. (3282-6/95, 3475-10/00)

 

9.68.060 Enforcement
A.    Every law enforcement officer is authorized and empowered to demand from any person whom he or she has reasonable cause to believe comes within the provisions of this chapter and who remains, walks, runs, stands, drives or rides about in or upon any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the City, without his or her parents or guardian, during curfew hours, that such person give his or her name, address and parents or guardian, names, and furnish proof of his or her age or proof that he or she is upon an emergency errand or legitimate business directed by his or her parents or guardian.

B.     Juveniles who are found to be in violation of the curfew ordinance may be issued a municipal court or administrative citation and/or taken into custody and transported to:

1.     Huntington Beach Police Department;

2.     Juvenile’s residence if it is nearby and a parent or guardian will be available to take custody of the juvenile; or

3.     Release in the field at the officers discretion, if placement or parental contact cannot be made, or parent refuses assistance.

C.     A parent or guardian who knowingly permits a minor over whom he or she has control to violate this chapter, shall be subject to the provisions of Section 272 of the California Penal Code and may be charged with violating the Penal Code provision. (3282-6/95, 3865-3/10)

 

9.68.070 Parents to Take Custody of Minor
If a minor taken into custody is a minor coming within the provisions of this chapter, any such law enforcement officer is authorized and empowered to request the parents, guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of such minor that they take custody of the minor. Refusal on the part of the parent or guardian to accept a minor for whom the parent or guardian is responsible, shall be a misdemeanor. (3282-6/95, 3865-3/10)

 

9.68.100 Remedy Cumulative
The remedies provided in this chapter are in addition to the remedies and penalties available under the Huntington Beach Municipal Code and all other laws of the state. (3282-6/95)

 

9.68.110 Nuisance
It shall be deemed a public nuisance for any minor to remain, walk, run, stand, drive or ride about, in or upon any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the City between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. (3282-6/95)

 

9.68.120 Severability
If any section, subsection, phrase or clause of this section is for any reason held to be invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portion of this section. The City Council declares that it would have adopted this chapter and each section, subsection, phrase or clause thereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, phrases or clauses be declared invalid. (3282-6/95)

 

Chapter 9.70 FIREWORKS
9.70.010 Prohibition Against Possession, Sale or Use of Fireworks
Unless otherwise allowed by the laws of the City of Huntington Beach, no person shall possess, sell, use, display or discharge any safe and sane fireworks, as defined in California Health and Safety Code Section 12529, or any dangerous fireworks as defined in California Health and Safety Code Section 12505, in the City of Huntington Beach. (4025-6/14)

 

Chapter 9.76 DISCHARGING WEAPONS
9.76.010 Prohibited
It is unlawful for any person, or persons, other than a police officer acting in his or her official line of duty, to, or cause to, shoot, fire or discharge within the City any rifle, shotgun, pistol, revolver or other firearm, or any air gun, air pistol, or air rifle, or any other weapon which emits a projectile that may cause bodily harm, with the following exceptions:

A.    When it may be necessary to do so to protect life or property;

B.     Businesses with a permitted land use entitlement and written approval from the Police Chief;

C.     Any training exercise that has received the prior authorization of the Police Chief;

D.    Firearm exhibitions, competitions or similar special events which have first received a permit issued by the Police Chief; or

E.     Children’s toys. (16-6/09, 513-7/47, Ord. 1116-1/65, 1641-4/71, 3598-2/03, 4048-5/15)

 

9.76.020 Nuisance
It shall be deemed a public nuisance for any person, other than a police officer acting in his or her official line of duty, to shoot, fire or discharge or for any person, firm or corporation to cause or permit to be shot, fired or discharged within the City limits any rifle shotgun, pistol, revolver or other firearm, or any air gun, air pistol, or air rifle, or any other weapon which emits a projectile as a result of pressure exerted at the breach. (3292-8/95)

 

Chapter 9.80 CONCEALED WEAPONS
9.80.010 Prohibited
No person, other than a public officer, or person having secured a permit so to do, shall wear or carry concealed on or about his or her person, any pistol, dirk or other dangerous weapon or deadly weapon. (75-5/11)

 

9.80.020 Exceptions
The ordinary penknife, pocketknife or toilet shears are not deemed dangerous or deadly weapons within the provisions of this chapter. (75-5/11)

 

9.80.030 Permits to Carry
The Police Chief is authorized to grant a written permit to any peaceable person, when in his or her judgment he or she may deem it necessary, for such person to carry concealed weapons for his or her own protection. (75-5/11)

 

9.80.040 Nuisance
It shall be deemed a public nuisance for any person, other than a public officer, or person having secured a permit to do so, to wear or carry concealed on or about his or her person, any pistol, dirk or other dangerous weapon or deadly weapon. (75-5/11, 3293-8/95)

 

Chapter 9.84 ALCOHOL USE PERMIT
9.84.010 Purpose
The declared purpose of this chapter is to provide definitions and adopt uniform regulations for the use and consumption of beer and wine and similar alcoholic beverages within public buildings. Specifically excluded from this purpose is the use of distilled spirits. (2043-4/76)

 

9.84.020 Definitions
The following terms used in this chapter shall have the meanings indicated below:

“Alcohol” means ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, or spirits of wine, from whatever source or by whatever process produced.

“Alcoholic beverage” includes alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer, and every liquid or solid containing alcohol, spirits, wines or beer, and which contains one-half of one percent or more of alcohol by volume and which is fit for beverage purposes either alone or when diluted, mixed or combined with other substances.

“Beer” means any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of any infusion or decoction of barley, malt, hops, or any other similar product, or any combination thereof in water, and includes ale, porter, brown, stout, lager beer, small beer and strong beer, but does not include sake, known as Japanese rice wine.

“Distilled spirits” means alcoholic beverage obtained by the distillation of fermented agricultural products, and includes the alcohol for beverage use, spirits of wine, whiskey, rum, brandy, gin, vodka, and including all dilutions and mixture thereof.

“Wine” means the product obtained from normal alcoholic fermentation of the juice of sound ripe grapes, or other agricultural products containing natural or added sugar or any such alcoholic beverage to which is added grape brandy, fruit brandy, or spirits of wine, which is distilled from the particular agricultural products of which the wine is made, and other rectified wine products, and by whatever name and which does not contain more than 15% added flavoring, coloring, and blending material and which contains not more than 24% of alcohol by volume and includes vermouth and sake, known as Japanese rice wine. (2043-4/76)

 

9.84.030 Application
A.    Application for alcohol use permits shall be made to the City Manager, in writing, signed by the applicant if an individual, or by a duly authorized agent thereof, if a club, organization, or corporation, and shall contain the following statements and information:

1.     The name, age and address of the applicant in the case of an individual; in the case of a club, organization, or corporation, the names and addresses of the officers and directors of the club, organization or corporation;

2.     The name of the facility the applicant seeks to occupy;

3.     The date and hours of the occupancy;

4.     The type of function planned for said hours and date;

5.     The number of persons expected to attend such function;

6.     The type of food and beverages expected to be served at such function.

B.     A five-dollar nonrefundable application fee shall accompany each application.

C.     Said application must be made 45 days in advance of the planned activity. Said application may be cancelled 48 hours prior to the scheduled activity without forfeiture of fees collected, except application fee. (2043-4/76)

 

9.84.040 Restriction on Permits
No such permit shall be issued to a person who is not of good character or reputation in the community in which he or she resides. (2043-4/76)

 

9.84.050 Application—Approval
A.    Copies of the application made with the City Manager shall be delivered to the Police Department and the department director in charge of the facility sought to be used. The Police Chief or said department director shall examine the application and shall deliver to the City Manager within 10 days of receipt of the application a report containing any comments, possible schedule conflicts, and any suggestions for additional requirements of the applicant pertaining to the requested use.

B.     The City Manager shall inform the applicant within 20 days of the receipt of the original application of his or her decision either to approve or deny the issuance of a permit. Upon making such decision he or she shall:

1.     In the case of approval, notify the applicant in writing of the approval, inform him or her of any fees that shall be required, and provide him or her with a copy of Sections 9.84.040 and 9.84.070 of this Code.

2.     In the case of denial, notify the applicant in writing of the denial, and provide him or her with a copy of Section 9.84.060 of this Code. (2043-4/76)

 

9.84.060 Application—Denial—Appeal Procedure
The procedure for appeal following the denial of an application is as follows:

A.    Within seven days after the receipt of the notice of denial, the applicant shall file a notice of appeal with the City Clerk, addressed to the City Council, stating the basis of the appeal.

B.     The City Clerk shall schedule a hearing to be held within 15 days of the filing of the notice of appeal. The City Clerk shall cause the applicant to be given notice of the hearing by certified mail at least five days in advance of the date of the hearing. The applicant, or his or her designated representative, may appear before the City Council, and make an oral presentation of the appeal, or he or she may make the appeal through a written statement, or he or she may do both. The City Council shall rule on the appeal within 15 days after it is heard and such ruling shall be final. (2043-4/76)

 

9.84.070 Requirements
The following requirements shall be met and shall be the responsibility of each person securing an alcoholic use permit:

A.    A cleaning deposit in an amount determined by the City Manager shall be deposited with the City Treasurer at least 48 hours prior to the scheduled activity.

B.     A damage deposit, bond, or proof of insurance in an amount determined by the City Manager shall be deposited with the City Treasurer at least 48 hours prior to the scheduled activity.

C.     Proof of an alcoholic beverage control license shall be provided if alcohol is to be sold during the scheduled activity. (2043-4/76, 3984-9/13)

 

9.84.080 Prohibited Activities
The following activities are hereby prohibited in connection with the issuance of any alcoholic use permit:

A.    No beer, wine, or distilled spirits containing more than 24% of alcohol by volume shall be served.

B.     No alcohol or alcoholic beverages shall be served to minors.

C.     All minors must be accompanied by a parent, adult relative or legal guardian.

D.    There shall be no concurrently scheduled youth activities in the same facility.

E.     No alcohol or alcoholic beverages shall be served after 1:00 a.m.

F.     No leftover food or beverages shall be allowed to remain on the premises.

G.    There shall be no structural or electrical alterations to the premises occupied.

H.    There shall be no use of decorations other than those approved by the department director responsible for the premises.

I.      There shall be no removal or relocation of chairs, tables, or other furniture or equipment without written permission of the department director responsible for the premises.

J.      No person except for a cleanup crew shall remain in the premises after 1:30 a.m.

K.    There shall be no use of the premises other than noted in the permit. (2043-4/76)

 

Chapter 9.86 NARCOTIC PARAPHERNALIA
9.86.010 Definitions
Minor. As used in this chapter, the word “minor” shall include all persons under the age of 18 years.

Narcotic Paraphernalia. As used in this chapter, the phrase “narcotic paraphernalia” shall include any instrument or device used, designed for use, or intended for use or preparation of any controlled substance, as defined in the California Health and Safety Code, excluding devices designed and sold for the legal injection of prescription drugs. (2372-6/76)

 

9.86.020 Display and Sale of Paraphernalia
It shall be unlawful for any person to display or sell narcotic paraphernalia to a minor unaccompanied by his or her parent or legal guardian. The display and sale of such paraphernalia shall otherwise be in accordance with this chapter. (2372-6/76)

 

9.86.030 Minors Excluded
Sale or display of narcotic paraphernalia shall be limited to a separate room or enclosure from which minor persons, not accompanied by parents or legal guardians, shall be excluded. (2372-6/76)

 

9.86.040 Entrance Posted
Each entrance of such room or enclosure shall be posted with a sign in reasonably visible and legible words to the effect that narcotic paraphernalia are being offered for sale in such room and minors unless accompanied by their parents or legal guardians are excluded. (2372-6/76)

 

9.86.050 Accompanied by Parent
It shall be unlawful for a minor to enter or remain in any place used for the sale or display for sale of narcotic paraphernalia unless such minor is accompanied by and under the care at all times of his or her parent or legal guardian. (2372-6/76)

 

9.86.060 Public Nuisance
The sale or display of narcotic paraphernalia in any place of business from which minors are not excluded as set forth in this chapter is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and may be abated pursuant to the provisions of Section 731 of the California Code of Civil Procedure. This remedy is in addition to any other remedy provided by law, including the penalty provisions applicable for violation of the terms and provisions of this Code. (2372-6/76)

 

Chapter 9.88 EMPLOYMENT SOLICITATION
9.88.010 Purpose of Chapter
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the time, place and manner of the solicitation of and for employment on streets and highways, and nonresidential parking areas. These regulations are not intended to restrict the right of free speech or alternative channels of communications, but to ensure the protection of the public health, safety and general welfare. (3382-9/98, 3500-9/01)

 

9.88.020 Definitions
“Employment” shall mean any offer or exchange or consideration for labor, industry or other personal services, including part-time or temporary services, for wages or other compensation.

“Nonresidential parking area” means all private property comprising the parking area adjoining nonresidential premises, including but not limited to driveways, setbacks and portions that are landscaped.

“Solicit or hire” means any request, offer, announcement, enticement or other action or gesture which induces another person to reasonably believe that his or her services are being sought or are being made available for hire, whether or not an actual employment relationship is created.

A “solicitation” as defined herein shall be deemed completed when made whether or not an actual employment relationship is created.

“Solicitation” shall also include solicitation for contributions of money or gifts.

“Street or highway,” for the purposes of this chapter only, means all of the area dedicated to public use for public vehicular street purposes and shall include, but not be limited to, roadways, medians, alleys, and other public vehicular rights-of-way, but shall not include sidewalks, parkways, or curbs.

“Vehicle” means a vehicle as defined in California Vehicle Code Section 670 as the same now reads or may hereafter be amended. (3382-9/98, 3451-1/00, 3500-9/01, 3755-12/06)

 

9.88.030 Solicitation of and for Employment on Street or Highway Prohibited
A.    It shall be unlawful for any person, while standing in any portion of the streets or highways, as defined within this chapter only, to solicit, or attempt to solicit, from any person travelling in a vehicle along a public right-of-way, including, but not limited to public streets, highways or driveways.

B.     It shall be unlawful for any person, while the occupant of any vehicle, to solicit, or attempt to solicit, from a person who is in the public streets or highways, as defined within this chapter only. (3451-1/00, 3500-9/01, 3755-12/06)

 

9.88.040 Solicitation Prohibited in Nonresidential Parking Areas
A.    It is unlawful for persons to solicit or offer employment in any nonresidential parking area.

B.     This section shall not be operative unless the owner, the owner’s agent or the person in lawful possession of the nonresidential parking area has caused a notice to be posted in a conspicuous place at each entrance to such nonresidential parking area not less than 18 by 24 inches in size with lettering not less than one inch in height and not to exceed in total area six square feet. The content of such notice shall be in substantially the following form, in both the English and Spanish languages:

 

 

It is a misdemeanor to engage in the solicitation of and for employment in this nonresidential parking area. (H.B.M.C. §9.88.040)

 

(3382-9/98, 3500-9/01, 3755-12/06)

 

9.88.050 Validity
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this chapter is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by the decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. The City Council of the City of Huntington Beach hereby declares that it would have adopted this chapter and these sections, subsections, sentences, clauses, phrases or portions thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses, phrases or portions are declared invalid or unconstitutional. (3382-9/98)

 

9.88.060 Enforcement
Enforcement of this section may be accomplished by:

A.    The owner, the owner’s agent, or the person in lawful possession of the business premises, under the provisions of California Penal Code Section 847 (Arrest by Private Person); or

B.     A peace officer of the Huntington Beach Police Department; or

C.     A code enforcement officer of the City of Huntington Beach; or

D.    The filing of a criminal or civil complaint by the City Attorney. (3382-9/98)

 

Chapter 9.90 DOOR-TO-DOOR SOLICITATION
9.90.010 Definitions
“Private property” shall mean a privately owned building, either a residence or commercial enterprise.

“Soliciting” shall mean, for the purposes of this chapter, offering a good or service, seeking contributions of any kind, for whatever purpose or cause, or soliciting support for or opposition to any person, cause, organization, philosophy or venture.

This shall include, but not be limited to, “commercial solicitors” and “peddlers,” as defined in Chapter 5.04 of this Code. This definition includes persons approaching a residence to solicit or disseminate information of any kind. (3623-12/03)

 

9.90.020 Regulations Applicable to All Soliciting
A.    No person shall engage in solicitation upon any private property after having been asked by the owner or occupant thereof to leave such property.

B.     Unless invited by the legal occupants or owners of a private property, it shall be unlawful for any person to engage in solicitation upon any private premises or residence or business located thereon if such premises or residence is posted against solicitation by means of a notice, prominently displayed upon which is printed:

 

 

SOLICITING AT THIS LOCATION IS A VIOLATION OF LAW

 

        OR

 

 

WARNING

SOLICITING AT THIS LOCATION IS A VIOLATION OF THE LAW

AND IS PUNISHABLE AS A MISDEMEANOR.

HUNTINGTON BEACH MUNICIPAL CODE CHAPTER 9.90

 

For purposes of the preceding sentence, a private property, either residence or business, shall be deemed to be posted against solicitation if there is exhibited, on or near the main entrance to the property or on or near the main door to any structure located thereon, aboveground level, a sign conspicuously posted, which bears either of the above legends.

C.     No person who engages in solicitation shall use any plan, scheme or ruse or make any statement which indicates or implies that the purpose of such person’s solicitation is other than to obtain orders for or to make sales of goods or services.

D.    No person who engages in solicitation shall misrepresent the right of a buyer to rescind or cancel a sale under the provisions of applicable law.

E.     It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in solicitation at any time of day if such time of day is clearly posted on the no soliciting sign posted pursuant to this chapter.

F.     No solicitor shall solicit by shouting or by using any sound device in connection with soliciting, including bells or amplifying systems.

G.    No solicitor shall step onto or over the threshold of a doorway of a residence, unless invited to do so by the occupant or place hands, legs or any portion of the solicitor’s body in the doorway so that it reasonably appears that the door may not be closed, unless allowed to do so by the occupant.

H.    It shall be unlawful to make false statements or misrepresentations about the purpose of the solicitation. (3623-12/03, 3821-2/09)

 

9.90.030 Provisions Nonexclusive
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as to replace or eliminate any of the provisions or requirements of Title 5 of the Huntington Beach Municipal Code requiring business licenses. (3623-12/03)

Title 10 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
Note
*       Note: Ch. 10.88 repealed by Ord. 3605-6/03.

 

Chapter 10.04 DEFINITIONS
10.04.010 Generally
The following words and phrases when used in this title shall for the purpose of this title have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this chapter. (322-1/29, 584-5/52, 1157-9/65)

 

10.04.020 State Provisions Applicable
Whenever any words or phrases used herein are not defined, but are defined in the Vehicle Code of the state and amendments thereto, such definitions shall apply. (322-1/29, 584-5/52, 1157-9/65)

 

10.04.021 Attendant
“Attendant” shall mean any person collecting parking charges for parking in City off-street parking lots. (4148-2/19)

 

10.04.030 Coach
“Coach” means any motor bus, motor coach, trackless trolley or passenger stage used as a common carrier of passengers. (322-1/29, 584-5/52, 1157-9/65)

 

10.04.040 Council
“Council” means the Council of the City of Huntington Beach. (322-1/29, 584-5/52, 1157-9/65)

 

10.04.050 Curb
“Curb” means the lateral boundary of the roadway whether such curb be marked by curbing construction, or not so marked; the word “curb” as herein used shall not include the line dividing the roadway of a street from parking strips in the center of a street, nor from tracks or rights-of-way of public utility companies. (322-1/29, 584-5/52, 1157-9/65)

 

10.04.055 Director of Community Services
The Director of Community Services shall be responsible for administering the on-street parking meter zones and the off-street City parking lots. (4148-2/19)

 

10.04.060 Divisional Island
“Divisional island” means a raised island located in the roadway and separating opposing or conflicting streams of traffic. (322-1/29, 584-5/52, 1157-9/65)

 

10.04.070 Loading Zone
“Loading zone” means the space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or materials. (322-1/29, 584-5/52, 1157-9/65)

 

10.04.080 Official Time Standard
Whenever certain hours are named herein, they shall mean standard time or daylight saving time as may be in current use in this City. (322-1/29, 584-5/52, 1157-9/65)

 

10.04.081 Off-Street City Pay Parking Lots
“Off-street City pay parking lots” shall mean any leased parking lot, structure, facility or area located outside of the public right-of-way that the City operates pursuant to Chapter 10.50 for paid parking of vehicles, regardless of the method of payment, including, but not limited to, parking attendants, meters, or otherwise. (4148-2/19)

 

10.04.082 Off-Street City Non-Pay Parking Lots
“Off-street City non-pay parking lots” shall mean any City owned or leased parking lot, structure, facility or area located outside of the public right-of-way, and maintained or operated by the City for non-pay parking of vehicles. The non-pay parking lots the City owns are typically associated with City-owned buildings, including, but not limited to: City Hall, the Public Works Yard, the Central, Main Street and Banning Street Libraries, the Water Department, and all the City Parks, with the exception of Huntington Central Park Sports Complex. (4148-2/19)

 

10.04.083 Off-Street City Parking Lots
“Off-street City parking lots” shall mean and include both off-street City pay parking lots and off-street City non-pay parking lots. (4148-2/19)

 

10.04.085 On-Street Parking Meter Zones
“On-street parking meter zones” shall mean the on-street parking meter zones established at Chapter 10.60 of this Code. (4148-2/19)

 

10.04.090 Parking Meter
“Parking meter” shall mean any single-space parking meter, multiple space parking meter, pay station, or any other equipment installed by the Director of Community Services for the collection of payment to park in any designated metered parking space either in any off-street City pay parking lot or any on-street parking meter zone. (322-1/29, 584-5/52, 1157-9/65, 3660-9/04, 4148-2/19)

 

10.04.100 Parkway
“Parkway” means that portion of a street other than a roadway or a sidewalk. (322-1/29, 584-5/52, 1157-9/65)

 

10.04.110 Passenger Loading Zone
“Passenger loading zone” means the space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading and unloading of passengers. (322-1/29, 584-5/52, 1157-9/65)

 

10.04.120 Pedestrian
“Pedestrian” means any person afoot. (322-1/29, 584-5/52, 1157-9/65)

 

10.04.130 Police Officer
“Police officer” means every officer of the Police Department of this City or any officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to make arrests for violations of traffic regulations. (322-1/29, 584-5/52, 1157-9/65)

 

10.04.135 Residential District
“Residential district” is an area that is primarily used as the location for single family and multiple family dwellings. In determining whether a street is within a residential district, any street or portion of a street abutting single or multiple family dwellings, except those streets and portions of streets designated as “truck routes” per Section 10.24.010 of this Code, shall be considered within a residential district. (2115-11/76)

 

10.04.140 Stop
“Stop,” when required, means complete cessation of vehicular movement. (322-1/29, 584-5/52, 1157-9/65)

 

10.04.150 Vehicle Code
“Vehicle Code” means the Vehicle Code of the State of California. (322-1/29, 584-5/52, 1157-9/65)

 

Chapter 10.08 ENFORCEMENT
10.08.010 Traffic Direction—Authority
Officers, reserve officers, parking control officers and cadets of the Police Department and marine safety officers and such special officers of the Community Services Department as are assigned by the Police Chief are authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand, audible or other signal in conformance with traffic laws, except that in the event of a fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians, officers of the Police Department or members of the Fire Department may direct traffic as conditions may require, notwithstanding the provisions to the contrary contained in this title or the Vehicle Code. (322-1/29, 1157-9/65, 2124-1/77)

 

10.08.020 Traffic Direction—Persons Prohibited
No person other than an officer of the Police Department or a person authorized by the Police Chief or a person authorized by law shall direct, or attempt to direct traffic by voice, hand or other signal, except that persons may operate, when and as herein provided, any mechanical pushbutton signal erected by order of the Director of Public Works. (322-1/29, 1157-9/65)

 

10.08.030 Traffic Direction—Obedience to Officers
No person shall fail or refuse to comply with or to perform any act, lawful order, signal or direction of a traffic or police officer, or a member of the Fire Department, or a person authorized by the Police Chief or by law. (322-1/29, 1157-9/65)

 

10.08.040 Riders of Bicycles or Animals
Every person riding a bicycle or driving an animal upon a highway has all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle by this title, except those provisions which by their very nature can have no application. (1157-9/65)

 

10.08.050 Obstructing or Interfering With Officers
No person shall interfere with or obstruct in any way any police officer or other officer or employee of this City in their enforcement of the provisions of this title. The removal, obliteration or concealment of any chalk mark or other distinguishing mark used by any police officer or other employee or officer of this City in connection with the enforcement of the parking regulations of this title, constitute such interference or obstruction. (1157-9/65)

 

10.08.060 Public Employees to Obey Regulations
The provisions of this title shall apply to the operator of any vehicle owned by or used in the service of the United States government, this state, any county or city, and it shall be unlawful for any said operator to violate any of the provisions of this title except as otherwise permitted in this title or by the Vehicle Code. (1157-9/65)

 

10.08.070 Exemption of Certain Vehicles
The provisions of this title regulating the operation, parking and standing of vehicles shall not only apply to vehicles operated by the Police or Fire Departments, any public ambulance or any public utility vehicle or any private ambulance, which public utility vehicle or private ambulance has qualified as an authorized emergency vehicle, when any vehicle mentioned in this section is operated in the manner specified by the Vehicle Code in response to an emergency call, or to the operation of bicycles by Police Department personnel while in the course and scope of their official duties. (1157-9/65, 3163-8/92)

 

10.08.080 Exempted Vehicles Must Use Due Care
The foregoing exemptions shall not, however, relieve the operator of any such vehicle from obligation to exercise due care for the safety of others or the consequences of his or her willful disregard of the safety of others. (1157-9/65)

 

10.08.090 Exemptions to Parking or Standing Rules
The provisions of this title regulating the parking or standing of vehicles shall not apply to any vehicle of a City department or public utility while necessarily in use for construction or repair work or any vehicle owned or operated by the United States Post Office Department while in use for the collection, transportation or delivery of United States mail. (1157-9/65)

 

10.08.100 Accident Report—Required When
The operator of a vehicle or the person in charge of any animal involved in any accident resulting in damage to any property publicly owned or owned by a public utility, including but not limited to, any fire hydrant, parking meter, lighting post, telephone pole, electric light or power pole, resulting in damage to any tree, in or along any street, shall within 24 hours after such accident make a written report of such accident to the Police Department of this City. (1157-9/65)

 

10.08.110 Accident Report—Contents
Every such report shall state the time when and the place where the accident took place, the name and address of the person owning and of the person operating or in charge of such vehicle or animal, the license number of every such vehicle, and shall briefly describe the property damage in such accident. (1157-9/65)

 

10.08.120 Accident Report—Injured Parties
The operator of any vehicle involved in an accident shall not be subject to the requirements or penalties of this Code if and during the time he or she is physically incapable of making a report, but in such event he or she shall make a report as required in Section 10.08.100 within 24 hours after regaining ability to make such report. (1157-9/65)

 

10.08.130 Vehicle Removal by Police
Officers, reserve officers, parking control officers and cadets of the Police Department as are assigned by the Police Chief are authorized and may remove or cause to be removed:

A.    Any vehicle that has been parked or left standing upon a street or highway for 72 or more consecutive hours; or which the investigating officer determines has been abandoned pursuant to Vehicle Code Sections 22523 or 22669. Such vehicles may be removed as an abandoned vehicle pursuant to Vehicle Code Section 22651(k).

B.     Any vehicle which is parked or left standing upon a street or highway between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. when such parking or standing is prohibited by ordinance or resolution of this City and signs are posted giving notice of such removal.

C.     Any vehicle which is parked or left standing upon a street or highway where the use of such street or highway or a portion thereof is necessary for the cleaning, repair or construction of the street or highway or for the installation of underground utilities or where the use of the street or highway or any portion thereof is authorized for a purpose other than the normal flow of traffic or where the use of the street or highway or any portion thereof is necessary for the movement of equipment, articles or structures of unusual size, and the parking of such vehicle would prohibit or interfere with such use or movement; provided that signs giving notice that such vehicle may be removed are erected or placed at least 24 hours prior to the removal.

D.    Any vehicle which is parked or left standing in any City-owned or operated parking lot when such parking or standing has been prohibited by ordinance or resolution.

E.     Any vehicle that is over 84 inches high, measured from the surface of the roadway to its highest point, or over 84 inches wide, measured from its widest point, excluding side view mirrors or similar extensions, that is parked on an arterial highway, as described in Section 10.44.070 of the Huntington Beach Municipal Code, between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. (1157-9/65, 2124-1/77, 3337-12/96, 3368-8/97)

 

10.08.140 State Highways Regulated by City—Approval
Any provision of this title which regulates traffic or delegates the regulation of traffic upon state highways in any way for which the approval of the State Department of Public Works is required by state law, shall cease to be operative six months after receipt by the City Council of written notice of withdrawal of approval of the State Department of Public Works. (1157-9/65, 1292-1/67)

 

10.08.150 State Highways Regulated by City—Authority Delegated
Whenever this title delegates authority to a City officer, or authorizes action by the City Council to regulate traffic upon a state highway in any way which, by law, requires the prior approval of the State Department of Public Works, no such officer shall exercise such authority nor shall such action by the City Council be effective with respect to any state highway without the prior approval, in writing, of the State Department of Public Works when and to the extent required by the state Vehicle Code. (1157-9/65, 1292-1/67)

 

Chapter 10.12 SPEED LIMITS
10.12.010 Twenty-Five m.p.h. Prima Facie Speed Limit
Unless stated otherwise, upon the basis of an engineering and traffic survey of the portions of the streets hereinafter set forth, the City Council determines and declares that the prima facie speed limit of 25 miles per hour would facilitate the orderly movement of vehicular traffic and would be reasonable and safe upon said streets and that the prima facie limit of speed on a portion of the following streets as listed in Section 10.12.080 shall be and is 25 miles per hour. (1935-11/74, 1947-12/74, 2066-7/76, 2421-5/80, 2883-12/86, 3133-8/92, 3272-1/95, 3380-12/97)

 

10.12.020 Thirty m.p.h. Prima Facie Speed Limit
Unless stated otherwise, upon the basis of an engineering and traffic survey of the portions of the streets hereinafter set forth, the City Council determines and declares that a speed greater than the prima facie speed limit of 25 miles per hour would facilitate the orderly movement of vehicular traffic and would be reasonable and safe upon said streets; that a prima facie speed limit of 30 miles per hour is the most appropriate to facilitate the orderly movement of traffic and is reasonable and safe; and that the prima facie limit of speed on a portion of the said streets as listed in Section 10.12.080 shall be and is 30 miles per hour. (1935-11/74, 1947-12/74, 1997-9/75, 2066-7/76, 2388-9/79, 2432-6/80, 2527-2/82, 3133-8/92, 3230-4/94, 3272-1/95, 3380-12/97, 3809-9/08, 3908-4/11, 3921-11/11)

 

10.12.030 Thirty-Five m.p.h. Prima Facie Speed Limit
Unless stated otherwise, upon the basis of an engineering and traffic survey of the portions of the streets hereinafter set forth, the City Council determines and declares that a speed greater than the prima facie speed limit of 25 miles per hour would facilitate the orderly movement of vehicular traffic and would be reasonable and safe upon said streets; that a prima facie speed limit of 35 miles per hour is the most appropriate to facilitate the orderly movement of traffic and is reasonable and safe; and that the prima facie limit of speed on a portion of the said streets as listed in Section 10.12.080 shall be and is 35 miles per hour. (1935-11/74, 1947-12/74, 2358-5/79, 2422-3/80, 2527-2/82, 2645-11/83, 2670-1/84, 2715-9/84, 2878-12/86, 3133-8/92, 3230-4/94, 3272-1/95, 3380-12/97, 3809-9/08, 3816-12/08, 3908-4/11)

 

10.12.040 Forty m.p.h. Prima Facie Speed Limit
Unless stated otherwise, upon the basis of an engineering and traffic survey of the portions of the streets hereinafter set forth, the City Council determines and declares that a speed greater than the prima facie speed limit of 25 miles per hour would facilitate the orderly movement of vehicular traffic and would be reasonable and safe upon said streets; that a prima facie speed limit of 40 miles per hour is the most appropriate to facilitate the orderly movement of traffic and is reasonable and safe; and that the prima facie limit of speed on a portion of the said streets as listed in Section 10.12.080 shall be and is 40 miles per hour. (1935-11/74, 1947-12/74, 1997-9/75, 2066-7/76, 2316-10/78, 2358-5/79, 2421-5/80, 2432-6/80, 2527-2/82, 2624-7/83, 2715-9/84, 2878-12/86, 2883-12/86, 3133-8/92, 3230-4/94, 3272-1/95, 3380-12/97, 3809-9/08, 3816-12/08, 3908-4/11)

 

10.12.050 Forty-Five m.p.h. Prima Facie Speed Limit
Unless stated otherwise, upon the basis of an engineering and traffic survey of the portions of streets hereinafter set forth, the City Council determines and declares that a speed greater than the prima facie speed limit of 25 miles per hour would facilitate the orderly movement of vehicular traffic and would be reasonable and safe upon said streets; that a prima facie speed limit of 45 miles per hour is the most appropriate to facilitate the orderly movement of traffic and is reasonable and safe; and that the prima facie limit of speed on a portion of the said streets as listed in Section 10.12.080 shall be and is 45 miles per hour. (1935-11/74, 1947-12/74, 2358-5/79, 2388-9/79, 2422-3/80, 3133-8/92, 3187-3/93, 3188-3/93, 3204-7/93, 3230-4/94, 3272-1/95, 3380-12/97, 3809-9/08, 3908-4/11)

 

10.12.060 Fifty m.p.h. Prima Facie Speed Limit
Unless stated otherwise, upon the basis of an engineering and traffic survey of the portions of the streets hereinafter set forth, the City Council determines and declares that a speed greater than the prima facie speed limit of 25 miles per hour would facilitate the orderly movement of vehicular traffic and would be reasonable and safe upon said streets; that a prima facie speed limit of 50 miles per hour is the most appropriate to facilitate the orderly movement of traffic and is reasonable and safe; and that the prima facie limit of speed on a portion of the said streets as listed in Section 10.12.080 shall be and is 50 miles per hour. (1935-11/74, 1947-12/74, 3133-8/92, 3204-7/93, 3230-4/94, 3380-12/97, 3908-4/11)

 

10.12.065 Fifty-Five m.p.h. Prima Facie Speed Limit
Unless stated otherwise, upon the basis of an engineering and traffic survey of the portions of streets hereinafter set forth, the City Council determines and declares that a speed greater than the prima facie speed limit of 25 miles per hour would facilitate the orderly movement of vehicular traffic and would be reasonable and safe upon said streets; that a prima facie speed limit of 55 miles per hour is the most appropriate to facilitate the orderly movement of traffic and is reasonable and safe; and that the prima facie limit of speed on a portion of the said streets as listed in Section 10.12.080 shall be and is 55 miles per hour. (3133-8/92, 3230-4/94, 3380-12/97)

 

10.12.070 Speed Limits on State Highways
The State of California has established that orderly movement of vehicular traffic requires that a reasonable and safe limit be placed upon said streets and that the prima facie limit of speed on a portion of the following streets shall be and is as listed in Section 10.12.080. (3133-8/92)

 

10.12.080 Speed Limits Enumerated
Streets are listed alphabetically and categorized up (North) and to the right (East).

 

STREET

BETWEEN

SPEED

 

 

 

 

1st

PCH

Atlanta

35

 

 

 

 

17th

PCH

Palm

35

 

Palm

Main

35

 

Huntington

Florida

25

 

 

 

 

Adams

17th

Main

25

 

Main

Lake

25

 

Lake

Beach

40

 

Beach

Magnolia

45

 

Magnolia

Brookhurst

45

 

Brookhurst

East City Limit

45

 

 

 

 

Algonquin

Warner

Heil

35

 

 

 

 

Argosy

Bolsa Chica

Graham

40

 

 

 

 

Atlanta

1st

Delaware

35

 

Delaware

Beach

40

 

Beach

Newland

40

 

Newland

Magnolia

45

 

Magnolia

Brookhurst

45

 

 

 

 

Banning

Magnolia

Brookhurst

35

 

 

 

 

Bolsa

Bolsa Chica

Springdale

45

 

Springdale

Edwards

45

 

Edwards

Goldenwest

40

 

 

 

 

Bolsa Chica

South City Limit

Los Patos

30

 

Los Patos

Warner

35

 

Warner

Edinger

45

 

Edinger

Rancho

50

 

 

 

 

Brightwater

Warner

Bolsa Chica

30

 

 

 

 

Brookhurst

PCH

Banning

50

 

Banning

Atlanta

45

 

Atlanta

Adams

45

 

Adams

Garfield

45

 

 

 

 

Bushard

Brookhurst

Hamilton

40

 

Hamilton

Indianapolis

40

 

Indianapolis

Yorktown

40

 

Yorktown

Garfield

45

 

 

 

 

Center

Gothard

I-405 Fwy

35

 

 

 

 

Channel

Admiralty

Gilbert

30

 

 

 

 

Clay

Main

Beach

30

 

 

 

 

Coldwater

Adams

Yorktown

30

 

 

 

 

Countess

Portofino

Edinger

30

 

 

 

 

Davenport

Edgewater

Algonquin

35

 

 

 

 

Delaware

Atlanta

Adams

35

 

Adams

Garfield

35

 

Garfield

Ellis

35

 

 

 

 

Edinger

West City Limit

Bolsa Chica

45

 

Bolsa Chica

Springdale

40

 

Springdale

Goldenwest

45

 

Goldenwest

Beach

40

 

Beach

Newland

40

 

 

 

 

Edwards

Garfield

Warner

40

 

Warner

Edinger

45

 

Edinger

Bolsa

40

 

Bolsa

North City Limit

40

 

 

 

 

Ellis

Edwards

Gothard

45

 

Gothard

Main

40

 

Beach

Newland

40

 

 

 

 

Florida

Garfield

Main

30

 

 

 

 

Garfield

Seapoint

Goldenwest

45

 

Goldenwest

Main

45

 

Main

Beach

45

 

Beach

Magnolia

45

 

Magnolia

Brookhurst

45

 

Brookhurst

Ward

45

 

 

 

 

Goldenwest

PCH

Yorktown

50

 

Yorktown

Ellis

50

 

Ellis

Slater

50

 

Slater

Heil

45

 

Heil

McFadden

45

 

McFadden

Bolsa

45

 

 

 

 

Gothard

Main

Garfield

40

 

Garfield

Ellis

40

 

Ellis

Slater

40

 

Slater

Warner

40

 

Warner

Heil

40

 

Heil

Center

40

 

Center

McFadden

40

 

 

 

 

Graham

South City Limit

Slater

35

 

Slater

Warner

40

 

Warner

Heil

35

 

Heil

Edinger

40

 

Edinger

Bolsa

45

 

 

 

 

Hamilton

Newland

Magnolia

40

 

Magnolia

East City Limit

45

 

 

 

 

Heil

Saybrook

Bolsa Chica

35

 

Bolsa Chica

Springdale

40

 

Springdale

Goldenwest

40

 

Goldenwest

Beach

45

 

Beach

Newland

40

 

Newland

East City Limit

35

 

 

 

 

Huntington

PCH

Atlanta

30

 

Yorktown

Taylor

25

 

 

 

 

Indianapolis

Lake

Beach

30

 

Beach

Newland

35

 

Newland

Magnolia

40

 

Magnolia

Brookhurst

40

 

 

 

 

Lake

Orange

Indianapolis

30

 

Indianapolis

Adams

35

 

Adams

Yorktown

35

 

 

 

 

Magnolia

PCH

Banning

40

 

Banning

Hamilton

45

 

Hamilton

Atlanta

45

 

Atlanta

Adams

45

 

Adams

Garfield

45

 

Warner

I-405

45

 

 

 

 

Main

PCH

6th

25

 

6th

Adams

30

 

Adams

Yorktown

35

 

Yorktown

Ellis/Beach

45

 

 

 

 

McFadden

Bolsa Chica

Chemical

25

 

Chemical

Graham

35

 

Graham

Edwards

45

 

Edwards

Goldenwest

45

 

Goldenwest

Gothard

45

 

Gothard

East City Limit

40

 

 

 

 

Newland

PCH

Hamilton

35

 

Hamilton

Indianapolis

45

 

Indianapolis

Adams

45

 

Adams

Garfield

45

 

Garfield

Talbert

45

 

Talbert

Warner

45

 

Warner

Heil

45

 

I-405

Edinger

40

 

 

 

 

Orange

1st

17th

30

 

17th

Goldenwest

30

 

 

 

 

Palm

17th

Goldenwest

30

 

Goldenwest

Seapoint

35

 

 

 

 

Parkside

Holt

Edinger

25

 

 

 

 

Peninsula

Summit

Garfield

35

 

 

 

 

Plaza

Warner

Heil

25

 

 

 

 

Promenade

Gothard

Main

35

 

 

 

 

Quarterhorse

Ellis

End

25

 

 

 

 

Rancho

Bolsa Chica

North/East City Limits

40

 

 

 

 

Saybrook

Heil

Edinger

35

 

 

 

 

Seapoint

PCH

Garfield

40

 

 

 

 

Sher

Juliette Low

Edinger

25

 

 

 

 

Slater

Graham

Edwards

45

 

Edwards

Gothard

45

 

Gothard

Beach

40

 

Beach

Newland

40

 

 

 

 

Springdale

South City Limit

Slater

45

 

Slater

Warner

45

 

Warner

Heil

45

 

Heil

Edinger

45

 

Edinger

McFadden

45

 

McFadden

North City Limits

45

 

 

 

 

Skylab

West of Rancho

Springdale

40

 

 

 

 

Summit

Seapoint

Goldenwest

35

 

 

 

 

Talbert

West City Limit

Edwards

40

 

Central Library Driveway

Gothard

35

 

Gothard

Beach

45

 

Beach

Newland

45

 

 

 

 

Varsity

Edwards

Talbert

30

 

 

 

 

Ward

Yorktown

Garfield

45

 

 

 

 

Warner

PCH

Algonquin

45

 

Algonquin

Graham

45

 

Graham

Edwards

45

 

Edwards

Goldenwest

45

 

Goldenwest

Beach

45

 

Beach

Magnolia

45

 

 

 

 

Yorktown

Goldenwest

Lake

35

 

Lake

Beach

35

 

Beach

Newland

40

 

Newland

Bushard

40

 

Bushard

Ward

45

 

 

 

 

(3133-8/92, 3230-4/94, 3328-6/96, 3380-12/97, 3383-3/98, 3448-1/00, 3476-9/00, 3479-12/00, 3555-6/02, 3693-2/05, 3809-9/08, 3816-12/08, 3908-4/11, 4064-8/15, 4139-11/17)

 

Chapter 10.16 CONTROL DEVICES
10.16.010 Installation—Authority
The Director of Public Works shall have the power and duty to place and maintain or cause to be placed and maintained official traffic control devices when and as required to make effective the provisions of this title. (322-1/29, 1157-9/65)

 

10.16.020 Installation—Vehicle Code Compliance
Whenever the Vehicle Code requires, for the effectiveness of any provision thereof, that traffic control devices be installed to give notice to the public of the application of such law the Director of Public Works is authorized to install or cause to be installed the necessary devices subject to any limitations or restrictions set forth in the law applicable thereto. (322-1/29, 1157-9/65)

 

10.16.030 Installation—Director of Public Works Specifies
The Director of Public Works may also place and maintain or cause to be placed and maintained such additional traffic control devices as he or she may deem necessary or proper to regulate traffic or to guide or warn traffic, but he or she shall make such determination only upon the basis of traffic engineering principles and traffic investigations and in accordance with such standards, limitations, and rules as may be set forth in this title or as may be determined by ordinance or resolution of the Council. (322-1/29, 1157-9/65)

 

10.16.040 Required for Enforcement
No provision of the Vehicle Code or of this title for which signs are required shall be enforced against an alleged violator unless appropriate legible signs are in place giving notice of such provisions of the traffic laws. (1157-9/65)

 

10.16.050 Obedience Required
The operator of any vehicle or train shall obey the instructions of any official traffic control device placed in accordance with this title unless otherwise directed by a police officer or other authorized person subject to the exceptions granted the operator of an authorized emergency vehicle when responding to emergency calls. (322-1/29, 1157-9/65)

 

10.16.060 Signals—Installation
The Director of Public Works is directed to install and maintain official traffic signals at those intersections and other places where traffic conditions are such as to require that the flow of traffic be alternately interrupted and released in order to prevent or relieve traffic congestion or to protect life or property from exceptional hazard. (1157-9/65)

 

10.16.070 Signals—Locations Determination
The Director of Public Works shall ascertain and determine the locations where such signals are required by field investigation, traffic counts and other traffic information as may be pertinent and his or her determinations therefrom shall be made in accordance with those traffic engineering and safety standards and instructions set forth in the California Maintenance Manual issued by the Division of Highways of the State Department of Public Works. (1157-9/65)

 

10.16.080 Signals—Street Name Sign Placement
Whenever the Director of Public Works installs and maintains an official signal at any intersection he or she shall likewise erect and maintain at such intersection street name signs clearly visible to traffic approaching from all directions unless such street name signs have previously been placed and are maintained at any such intersection. (1157-9/65)

 

10.16.090 Lane Marking
The Director of Public Works is authorized to mark centerlines and lane lines upon the surface of the roadway to indicate the course to be traveled by vehicles and may place signs temporarily designating lanes to be used by traffic moving in a particular direction, regardless of the centerline of the highway. (1157-9/65)

 

10.16.100 Distinctive Roadway Markings
The Director of Public Works is authorized to place and maintain distinctive roadway markings as described in the Vehicle Code on those streets or parts of streets where the volume of traffic or the vertical or other curvature of the roadway renders it hazardous to drive on the left side of such markings or signs and markings. Such markings, or signs and markings shall have the same effect as similar markings placed by the state Department of Public Works pursuant to provisions of the Vehicle Code. (1157-9/65)

 

10.16.110 Removal, Relocation and Discontinuance
The Director of Public Works is authorized to remove, relocate or discontinue the operation of any traffic control device not specifically required by the Vehicle Code or this title whenever he or she determines in any particular case that the conditions which warranted or required the installation no longer exist or pertain. (1157-9/65)

 

10.16.120 Hours of Operation
The Director of Public Works shall determine the hours and days during which any traffic control device shall be in operation or be in effect except in those cases where such hours or days are specified in this title. (1157-9/65)

 

10.16.130 Unauthorized Painting of Curbs
No person, unless authorized by this City, shall paint any street or curb surface; provided, however, that this section shall not apply to the painting of numbers on a curb surface by any person who has complied with the provisions of any resolution or ordinance of this City pertaining thereto. (1157-9/65)

 

10.16.140 Turning Markers—Placement Authority
The Director of Public Works is authorized to place official traffic control devices within or adjacent to intersections and indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning at such intersections and the Director of Public Works is authorized to locate and indicate more than one lane of traffic from which drivers of vehicles may make right or left-hand turns, and the course to be traveled as so indicated may conform to or be other than as prescribed by law or ordinance. (322-1/29, 1157-9/65)

 

10.16.150 Restricted Turn Signs
The Director of Public Works is authorized to determine those intersections at which drivers of vehicles shall not make a right, left or U turn, and shall place proper signs at such intersections. The making of such turns may be prohibited between certain hours of any day and permitted at other hours, in which event the same shall be plainly indicated on the signs or they may be removed when such turns are permitted. (1157-9/65)

 

10.16.160 Right Turns on Red Light Restricted
A.    No driver of a vehicle shall make a right turn against a red or stop signal at any intersection which is signposted giving notice of such restriction as hereinafter provided in subsection B of this section.

B.     The Director of Public Works shall post appropriate signs giving effect to this section where he or she determines that the making of right turns against traffic signal “stop” indication would seriously interfere with the safe and orderly flow of traffic. (1157-9/65)

 

Chapter 10.20 PROHIBITED PLACES OF OPERATION
Note
*       Note: §§ 10.20.010 and 10.20.030 repealed by Ord. 3099-4/91.

 

10.20.020 Vehicles on Sidewalks
The operator of any vehicle except those vehicles regulated by Chapter 10.88, shall not drive within any sidewalk area except to a permanent or temporary drive. (322-1/29, 1003-10/63)

 

10.20.040 Skateboards and Roller Skates—Definitions
A.    A “business district” is defined for purposes of this section, as any area within the City of Huntington Beach bordering one side of a local street or a highway for a distance of at least 600 feet, or bordering both sides of a local street or a highway for at least 300 feet, where at least 50% of the property is occupied by buildings in use for business.

B.     “Rollerskate” and “rollerblade” shall mean any footwear or device which may be attached to the foot or footwear, to which wheels are attached and such wheels may be used by the wearer in moving.

C.     “Skateboard” shall mean a board of any material, which has wheels attached to and such wheels may be used for moving or propulsion. (3099-4/91)

 

10.20.042 Skateboards and Roller Skates—Prohibited Uses
A.    No person shall use a skateboard, rollerblades, or roller skates in any business district.

B.     No person shall use a skateboard, rollerblades, or roller skates in a manner which creates a nuisance. For purposes of this section “nuisance” is defined as any activity which:

1.     Threatens injury to persons or property;

2.     Creates an obstruction or presents a hazard to the free use of public or private property by pedestrians or motorists; or

3.     Generates loud or unreasonable noise.

C.     The City Council may, from time to time, designate certain areas for skateboard use. Such areas shall be designated by resolution of the City Council and posted with signs which are consistent with the standards for signs utilized by the Department of Public Works. (3099-4/91)

 

10.20.050 Pedestrian Overcrossing—Toy Vehicles Prohibited
It is unlawful for any person to ride a skateboard, coaster, toy vehicle, roller skates or any vehicle of a similar nature over any pedestrian overcrossing within the limits of the City. (1199-5/66, 1784-12/72)

 

Chapter 10.22 CONTROL OF VEHICULAR CRUISING
10.22.010 Cruising Prohibited
The ranking peace officers on duty within any area affected by traffic congestion may, having determined that such area is so affected, establish one or more traffic control points on or near such area to regulate cruising. (3283-6/95)

 

10.22.020 Cruising Defined
“Cruising” is defined to mean the driving of a motor vehicle three or more times within a four-hour period past a traffic control point so established on a portion of any street identified as subject to cruising controls by signs posted at the beginning and end of the controlled roadway, that briefly and clearly state the appropriate provisions of this chapter and Section 21100(k) of the Vehicle Code, and after the operator of the vehicle has been given the notice specified in this chapter. (3283-6/95)

 

10.22.030 Elements of the Offense
No person, having driven a motor vehicle past a traffic control point established pursuant to this chapter twice within any four-hour period, and having received written notice that further driving past the traffic control point will constitute a violation of this chapter, shall drive past that control point within the time period in which cruising controls are in effect. Each successive trip past the traffic control point shall constitute a separate violation of this chapter, and no additional notice shall be required prior to issuance of a second or subsequent citation. (3283-6/95)

 

10.22.040 Exemptions
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to:

A.    Any authorized vehicle as defined in Section 165 of the California Vehicle Code;

B.     Any publicly owned vehicle of any city, county, district, state or federal agency;

C.     Any vehicle licensed for public transportation or vehicles which are normally used for business purposes and are engaged in such business use. (3283-6/95)

 

10.22.050 Designated Streets
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the following locations at which there exist signs which clearly identify the beginning and end of the portion of the street subject to cruising controls and state the appropriate provisions of the California Vehicle Code and this chapter. (3283-6/95)

 

10.22.060 Penalty
It shall be an infraction for any person to violate this chapter, and upon conviction thereof shall be subject to the payment of penalties as provided in Section 42001 of the Vehicle Code and as that section may be amended. (3283-6/95)

 

Chapter 10.24 TRUCK ROUTES
10.24.010 Designated
The City Council designates certain streets or portions of streets as routes the use of which is permitted by any vehicle exceeding a maximum gross weight of five tons. The Director of Public Works is authorized to designate the following streets as “truck routes” by use of appropriate signs where, in his or her opinion, such designation is required. These streets are described as follows:

 

 

Adams

Beach to east City limits

Argosy

Bolsa Chica to Graham

Atlanta

Beach to Newland

Beach (SR 39)

Pacific Coast Highway to north City limits

Bolsa

Bolsa Chica to east City limits

Bolsa Chica

Warner to north City limits

Brookhurst

Pacific Coast Highway to north City limits

Edinger

Bolsa Chica to east City limits

Garfield

Goldenwest to Brookhurst

Goldenwest

Pacific Coast Highway to north City limits

Gothard

Garfield to Edinger

Graham

Edinger to Bolsa

Hamilton

Newland to east City limits

Magnolia

Pacific Coast Highway to north City limits

Main

Garfield to Beach

McFadden

Graham to Springdale

Newland

Pacific Coast Highway to Atlanta

Pacific Coast Highway (SR 1)

Northerly City limits to Santa Ana River

Springdale

Northerly City limits to Warner

Talbert

Gothard to Newland

Warner

Pacific Coast Highway to east City limits

 

(322-1/29, 519-12/47, 532-6/48, 1142-6/65, 2065-7/76, 2529-2/82, 3347-4/97)

 

10.24.020 Streets Prohibited to Trucks
The City Council designates all streets in the City, except those enumerated in Section 10.24.010, as streets on which any commercial vehicles of gross weight over five tons are prohibited. (322-1/29, 519-12/47, 532-6/48, 1142-6/65, 2529-2/82)

 

10.24.030 Excepted Trucks
Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the operator of any vehicle exceeding the maximum gross weight of five tons coming from a truck route having ingress and egress by direct route to and from restricted streets, when:

A.    Necessary for the purpose of making pickups or deliveries of goods, wares and merchandise, from or to any building or structure located on such restricted streets;

B.     Necessary for the purpose of delivering materials to be used in the actual and bona fide repair, alteration, remodeling or construction of any building or structure, for which a building permit has been previously obtained;

C.     Any passenger bus under the jurisdiction of the Public Utilities Commission, or owned by a bus company licensed by this City;

D.    Any vehicle owned by the City while necessarily in use in the construction, installation or repair of a City utility or street. (1142-6/65, 2529-2/82)

 

10.24.040 Sign Erection by Public Works Director
The Director of Public Works may erect and maintain appropriate signs on those streets affected by this chapter where he or she deems the same to be necessary. (1142-6/65, 2529-2/82)

 

Chapter 10.28 ONE-WAY ALLEYS
10.28.010 Designated
The following alleys located within this City are designated as one-way alleys:

A.    Alleys in Blocks 103 and 104. Alleys between Main Street and Third Street, and between Main Street and Fifth Street, and the alleys running from said alleys northeasterly to Walnut Avenue, and located within Blocks 103 and 104, Huntington Beach Tract;

B.     Alleys in Blocks 203 and 204. Alleys located in Blocks 203 and 204, Huntington Beach Tract. (322-1/29, 502-1/47)

 

10.28.020 Entering Alleys in Blocks 103 and 104
All motor vehicles entering the alleys designated and described in Section 10.28.010(A) hereinabove shall enter from Main Street or Walnut Avenue and shall exit as follows:

A.    Those entering the alleys in Block 103 shall exit on Third Street;

B.     Those entering the alley in Block 104 shall exit on Fifth Street. (322-1/29, 502-1/47)

 

10.28.030 Entering Alleys in Blocks 203 and 204
All motor vehicles entering the said alleys designated and described in Section 10.28.010(B) shall enter from Olive Avenue and exit on Walnut Avenue; and all such traffic entering said alleys shall proceed in the direction of the exit. (322-1/29, 502-1/47)

 

10.28.040 Signs—Posting Locations
The Police Chief is authorized and directed to place or cause to be placed signs at:

A.    The entrance of alleys herein designated, reading as follows: “ENTRANCE ONLY. ONE WAY ALLEY”;

B.     At the exit of alleys, signs reading as follows: “DO NOT ENTER, ONE WAY ALLEY”;

C.     At alley intersections, signs reading “RIGHT TURN ONLY” or “LEFT TURN ONLY”; and

To indicate by lines on the pavement at the intersection of the alleys in Block 103 and Block 104 in order to direct the traffic in accordance with this chapter. (322-1/29, 502-1/47)

 

10.28.050 Signs—Violation
No person shall operate any motor vehicle in said alleys in any direction, or enter said alleys, when a sign is posted as herein provided, except as herein provided. (322-1/29, 502-1/47)

 

10.28.060 Alley Parking Restricted to Unloading
A.    It is illegal to park any motor vehicle in any one-way alley except while unloading.

B.     Time Limit. Any such motor vehicle shall not be parked longer than 20 minutes.

C.     Requiring Removal. Any police officer may require any such motor vehicle so parked to be moved in order to allow the free passing of other vehicles lawfully within the alley. (322-1/29, 502-1/47)

 

Chapter 10.32 MOVEMENT OF OVERLOADS
Note
*       Note: § 10.32.210 repealed by Ord. 2082-8/76.

 

10.32.010 Purpose—Application
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate and limit the use of certain public streets and public property within the City by any vehicle defined in this chapter as an overload, in order to prevent damage to street foundations, surfaces or structures, to protect bridges and other public or private property and life from damage or injury resulting from the moving, or having upon a public street an overload, and to promote the general health, welfare and safety of the citizens of this City. (1392-3/68)

 

10.32.020 Governmental Agencies
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the United States, this state, counties, municipal corporations, school districts and to all other governmental bodies, agencies or instrumentalities; provided, however, that if any such governmental agency shall file with the Director of Public Works an agreement in writing to pay all damages, costs or expenses which may be suffered or incurred by this City as a result of the movement of any overload by such agency, then such agency need not pay any permit fee or post any deposit or policy of liability insurance required by this chapter. This exemption shall not apply to any private contractor engaged by any governmental agency, nor to any equipment or vehicle not operated by any employee of the governmental agency moving the overload under the supervision and control of an officer thereof. (1392-3/68)

 

10.32.030 Definitions
The following words and phrases shall have the meanings hereinafter set forth, and if any word or phrase is not hereinafter defined, it shall have the meaning set forth in the California Vehicle Code, provided that if any such word or phrase is not defined in said Vehicle Code, it shall have the meaning attributed to it in ordinary usage:

“City” means the City of Huntington Beach, California.

“Department” means the Department of Public Works of the City.

“Director” means the Director of the Department of Public Works of this City or his or her authorized representative.

“Gross weight” means the combined weight of a vehicle and its load.

“Overload” means and includes any vehicle or combination of vehicles exceeding the limitations set forth in Division 15 of the California Vehicle Code relating to height, width, length, size or weight of a vehicle or load.

“Person” means any person, firm, individual, corporation, partnership, trust or other organization, and shall include an owner, lessee, agent or employee of any person, firm, individual, corporation, partnership, trust or other organization. (1392-3/68, 2082-8/76, 2881-12/86)

 

10.32.040 Permit Required
It is unlawful for any person to move, permit or cause to be moved, any overload upon any public street or place in the City, without first obtaining a permit therefor from the director as required by this chapter. (1392-3/68)

 

10.32.050 Permit—Movement Compliance
It is unlawful for any person to move, or permit or cause to be moved, any overload upon a public street or place in the City contrary to the terms and conditions of the permit issued by the director, in violation of any provision of this chapter, other applicable provisions of this Code, or of the California Vehicle Code, over a route or at a time other than that specified on the permit. This section shall not apply to an overload being moved at the request of an authorized public officer in the event of flood, fire, earthquake or other public disaster or exigency, or for the purposes of national defense. Any permit may be revoked by the director at any time for a violation by permittee of this chapter, or when public health, safety or welfare requires such revocation. (1392-3/68, 2082-8/76)

 

10.32.060 Permit—Types and Their Fees
A.    One-Day Permit. A permit is necessary to move a specified overload on City streets during one day. Any number of trips may be made on the day for which the permit is issued. The fee for such permit shall be set by resolution of the City Council.

B.     Temporary Permit. A permit is necessary to move specified identical overloads on City streets for a period of time not exceeding 30 days. The fee for such permit shall be set by resolution of the City Council.

C.     Annual Permit. A permit is necessary to move specified identical overloads in the City streets for a period not exceeding one year. The fee for such permit shall be set by resolution of the City Council. (1392-3/68, 2082-8/76, 2442-8/80, 2881-12/86)

 

10.32.070 Permit—Application
Application for a permit to move an overload upon the public streets of this City, together with the fee required for the type permits requested shall be submitted to the director. The director may delay issuance of the requested permit for the purpose of processing and/or investigation of route for a period not to exceed three working days after submittal of the application and fee. (1392-3/68, 2082-8/76)

 

10.32.080 Permit—Application—Contents
The application for an overload permit shall be made on a form furnished by the director, and shall contain the following information:

A.    Length of time for which the permit is requested, i.e., for a single trip, or 30 days, or annual;

B.     Except in requests for annual permits, a statement of the street or place over which applicant desires to travel;

C.     A complete description of the vehicle or vehicles to be operated, including the make, license number and weight, and name of the registered owner of the truck;

D.    A description of the type load to be moved, and if the request is for an annual, the number of trips contemplated;

E.     Such other information as the director determines necessary to carry out the provisions of this chapter. (1392-3/68, 2082-8/76, 2881-12/86)

 

10.32.090 Permit—Application—Processing
The applicant for an overload permit shall submit his or her application to the authorized representative of the Public Works Director. After preliminary examination by the Public Works Department, the applicant may hand carry his or her application to the authorized representative of the Police Chief who may cause investigations to be made concerning compliance with state laws and local ordinances regulating vehicle traffic safety and congestion, and the safety of all property, public and private, including any public utility which may be affected by proposed movement of an overload on the City streets. After preliminary examination by the Police Department, the applicant may hand carry his or her application back to the Public Works Department. If an investigation is made, the Police Chief shall report his or her findings to the Director of Public Works. (1392-3/68, 2082-8/76)

 

10.32.100 Permit—Contents
A permit to move any overload shall set forth on its face the period of time for which it is to be effective, the routes over which the overload may be moved. Any permit which fails to contain any of the above information or which purports to grant authority to move any overload contrary to the provisions of this chapter is void, and the City or any City officer or employee is not liable for any damages resulting to applicant due to such permit failing to contain any of such information. (1392-3/68)

 

10.32.110 Permit—Issuance
The director, as he or she deems necessary and reasonable, may issue or refuse to issue an overload permit or may issue a permit on such terms and conditions as he or she deems necessary to protect the public streets or property of any person, including limiting the number of trips, the weight, time of day trips are made, season during which trips are made, and requiring applicant to obtain written approval of any person whose property will be unduly disturbed or endangered by applicant’s moving an overload upon the public streets. (1392-3/68)

 

10.32.120 Permit—Carried in Vehicle or on Operator
Every overload permit shall be carried in the vehicle or with the operator of the vehicle to which it refers and shall be presented upon demand to any peace officer, traffic officer or other authorized agent of the department of the City charged with the care and protection of the City streets. (1392-3/68)

 

10.32.130 Utility Property Displacement
Whenever the moving of any overload requires the removal or displacement of any wire or other property of any public utility it shall be the duty of the applicant to give notice and make such deposits as are required by the affected public utility, and of the public utility to act in an efficient and expeditious manner to remove or displace or cause to be removed or displaced, such wire or other property. (1392-3/68)

 

10.32.140 Time and Route Determined
The director shall determine or approve the times when an overload may be moved, and shall determine or approve the route over which each overload may be moved, in accordance with such movement permitted by underpasses, overhead wires and other obstacles, condition of the streets and other pertinent conditions. Routes shall, whenever possible, be confined to arterial highways and not local streets. Overloads traveling on a route approved by the director are exempt from any truck route regulations. (1392-3/68)

 

10.32.150 Escort—Required When
It is unlawful for any person, unless accompanied by an escort assigned by the director, to move upon any public street or place, any overload which falls within any of the following categories:

A.    Has a gross weight in excess of 50 tons (100,000 pounds);

B.     The load or vehicle exceeds in width one-half the narrowest roadway over which such overload is moved;

C.     The load or vehicle exceeds 18 feet (216 inches) in width, or 16 feet (192 inches) in height;

D.    The load or vehicle exceeds 65 feet overall in length.

If the director determines that such movement of the overload may be made safely without damage to the street or injury to persons, or undue interference with traffic or the use of the streets by the public, he or she may waive the requirements of this section. (1392-3/68)

 

10.32.160 Escort—Deposit for Costs
Every applicant for a permit to move any overload required to be accompanied by an escort shall file with the director a deposit of cash sufficient to cover the costs of the escort at the rate of $20.00 for each half day (four hours) or fraction thereof over four hours, for the length of time the director deems necessary for the performance of such service. The director shall deposit all such escort fees with the City Treasurer. Upon the completion of the moving of such overload, the director shall deduct from such deposit the sum of $20.00 for each half day (four hours) or fraction thereof, or of $40.00 for each full day (eight hours) or fraction thereof over four hours, for the time such escort was used by applicant, and shall authorize the Director of Finance to refund to the applicant any difference between the amount deposited and the amount so deducted. If an amount insufficient to pay the costs of the escort at the above rates were deposited by applicant, he or she shall pay to the director an additional amount of money sufficient to pay for the cost of the escort. (1392-3/68)

 

10.32.170 Escort—Assigned by Director
When any overload is required to be accompanied by an escort and a permit has been issued and the deposit for the escort has been paid to the director, the director shall assign an escort to accompany the overload. It shall be the duty of the mover of any overload to notify the director at least 24 hours in advance of the time the move is to be started and the escort needed. (1392-3/68)

 

10.32.180 Parking Overload Vehicle
When it becomes impossible or impractical to remove an overload from the City and such overload must be parked upon any public place in the City, detour signs and warning lights approved by the director shall be so placed as to make passage of such overload safe for regular traffic on the street. The director and the Police Chief shall be notified immediately that such overload will be parked, and either of such officers may require such overload to be removed to a place he or she deems safe for such overload and other traffic on the street. (1392-3/68)

 

10.32.190 Moving at Night
When any overload must be moved at night and the director has issued a permit therefor, warning lights must be placed upon such overload to indicate the clearance of such overload in the front and on the rear and each side. Such warning lights must be visible from a distance of 500 feet from the front, rear and each side, and there must be at least four such warning lights visible from the front, rear and each side of such overload. In addition, flaggers must be employed to warn approaching traffic of the presence of such overload. The director may require such additional warning lights and signs as he or she deems necessary for the protection of other drivers. (1392-3/68)

 

10.32.200 Public Liability Insurance
The applicant shall furnish evidence of and maintain during the period for which an overload permit is issued, a public liability policy in the following amount or an amount equal to that required by the California Public Utilities Commission:

Combined single limit bodily injury and/or property damage: Combined single limit per occurrence in an amount equal to the amount required by the Public Utilities Commission at the time the application is filed.

(1392-3/68, 1976-5/75, 2082-8/76, 2804-12/85)

 

10.32.220 Damage—Report
Applicant shall report any damage to any property, public or private, as a result of moving or having upon public streets, any overload. Such report shall be presented to the director within 24 hours after such damage is caused. Such report shall include the location, cause and description of any such damages, and the names of any witnesses. (1392-3/68)

 

10.32.230 Damage—Responsibility
The City, the City Council, the director or any City employee shall not be liable for any loss or damage arising out of any violation or failure to comply with this chapter. (1392-3/68)

 

Chapter 10.36 STOPS AND YIELDS
10.36.010 Emerging from Alleys
The operator of a vehicle emerging from an alley, driveway or garage, in the business district, shall stop such vehicle immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or onto the sidewalk area extended across an alleyway. (1138-6/65, 1144-7/65)

 

10.36.020 Through Streets—Map on File
Those streets, and parts of streets, which form the most recent revision of the master plan of arterial streets and highways of the City as adopted by the City Council, are declared to be through streets for the purpose of this chapter. Other streets and parts of streets declared to be through streets by resolution of the City Council are listed in “Schedule A” on file in the office of the Director of Public Works. (1138-6/65, 1144-7/65)

 

10.36.030 Through Streets—Sign Erected
Whenever any resolution of this City designates and describes a through street, it shall be the duty of the Director of Public Works to place and maintain a stop sign, or on the basis of a traffic engineering survey at any intersection, a yield sign, on each and every street intersecting such through street unless traffic at any such intersection is controlled by traffic control signals; provided, however, that at the intersection of two such through streets or at the intersection of a through street and a heavy traffic street not so designated, stop signs shall be erected at the approaches of either of said streets or of both said streets upon the basis of a traffic engineering study. (1138-6/65, 1144-7/65)

 

10.36.040 Signs—Locations Determined
The Director of Public Works is authorized to determine and designate intersections where particular hazard exists upon other than through streets and to determine:

A.    Whether vehicles shall stop at one or more entrances to any such intersection, in which event the Director of Public Works shall cause to be erected a stop sign at every place where a stop is required; or

B.     Whether vehicles shall yield the right-of-way to vehicles on a different street at such intersection in which event he or she shall cause to be erected a yield sign at every place where obedience thereto is required. Stop intersections are designated in “Schedule B.” Yield intersections are designated in “Schedule C.” Schedules B and C are on file in the office of the Director of Public Works. (1138-7/65, 1144-7/65)

 

Chapter 10.40 GENERAL PARKING REGULATIONS
Note
*       Note: § 10.40.070 repealed by Ord. 2692-7/84; §§ 10.40.130 and 10.40.140 repealed by Ord. 3345-2/97.

 

10.40.010 Applicability
The provisions of this title regulating the stopping, standing or parking of a vehicle shall apply at all times or at those times herein specified, except when it is necessary to stop a vehicle to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or official traffic control device. (1155-8/65)

 

10.40.020 More Restrictive Provisions Apply
The provisions of this title imposing a time limit on standing or parking shall not relieve any person from the duty to observe other and more restrictive provisions of the Vehicle Code or the ordinance of this City prohibiting or limiting the standing or parking of vehicles in specified places or at specified times. (1155-8/65)

 

10.40.030 Stopping or Standing in Parkways Prohibited
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle within any parkway. (1155-8/65)

 

10.40.040 Zones and Areas Maintained
A.    The Director of Public Works is authorized to maintain, by appropriate signs or by paint upon the curb surface, all no stopping zones, no parking areas, and restricted parking areas, as defined and described in this title.

B.     When said curb markings or signs are in place, no operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand or park such vehicle adjacent to any such legible curb marking or sign in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter. (322-1/29, 692A-9/58, 1051-5/64)

 

10.40.050 No Parking Areas
No operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand, park or leave standing such vehicle in any of the following places, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the direction of a police officer or other authorized officer, or traffic signal:

A.    On either side of any street between the projected property lines of any public walk, public steps, street or thoroughfare terminating at such street, when such area is indicated by appropriate signs or by red paint upon the curb surface.

B.     Within any divisional island unless authorized and clearly indicated with appropriate signs or markings.

C.     In any area where the Director of Public Works or Director of Community Development determines that the parking or stopping of a vehicle would constitute a traffic hazard or would endanger life or property when such area is indicated by appropriate signs or by red paint upon the curb surface.

D.    In any area established by resolution of the Council as a no parking area, when such area is indicated by appropriate signs or by red paint upon the curb surface.

E.     Upon, along or across any railway track in such manner as to hinder, delay or obstruct the movement of any car traveling upon such track.

F.     In any area where the parking or stopping of any vehicle would constitute a traffic hazard or would endanger life or property.

G.    On any street or highway where the use of such street or highway or a portion thereof is necessary for the cleaning, repair or construction of the street or highway or the installation of underground utilities or where the use of the street or highway or any portion thereof is authorized for a purpose other than the normal flow of traffic or where the use of the street or highway or any portion thereof is necessary for the movement of equipment, articles or structures of unusual size, and the parking of such vehicle would prohibit or interfere with such use or movement; provided that signs giving notice of such no parking are erected or placed at least 24 hours prior to the effective time of such no parking.

H.    At any place within 20 feet of a point on the curb immediately opposite the mid-block end of a safety zone, when such place is indicated by appropriate signs or by red paint upon the curb surface.

I.      At the place within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection when such place is indicated by appropriate signs or by red paint upon the curb surface except that a bus may stop at a designated bus stop.

J.      Within 20 feet of the approach of any traffic signal, stop sign or official electric flashing device, when such place is indicated by appropriate signs or by red paint upon the curb surface.

K.    In any area where the Director of Public Works or the Director of Community Development or any person in lawful possession of an off-street parking area has designated stalls or spaces in an off-street parking facility for the exclusive use of physically-handicapped persons whose vehicles display either one of the distinguishing license plates issued to disabled persons pursuant to Section 22511.5 of the California Vehicle Code and where such space is clearly marked by the painting of a blue curb or by posting immediately adjacent to, and visible from, each stall or space, a sign consisting of a profile view of a wheelchair with occupant in white on a blue background or by both such blue curb and sign. (322-1/29, 505-2/47, 692A-9/58, 1051-5/64, 1155-8/65, 2044-5/76)

 

10.40.060 Storing Vehicles in Street Prohibited
No person who owns or has possession, custody or control of any vehicle shall park, store, stand or leave standing any vehicle upon any street or alley for more than a consecutive period of 72 hours. (632-11/55, 1121-3/65, 1155-8/65, 2177-4/77)

 

10.40.080 Repairing or Greasing in Street
No person shall construct or cause to be constructed, repair or cause to be repaired, grease or cause to be greased, dismantle or cause to be dismantled, any vehicle or any part thereof upon any public street in this City. Temporary emergency repairs may be made upon a public street. (1047-5/64, 1070-8/64, 1155-8/65)

 

10.40.090 Washing or Polishing Vehicles for Charge
No person shall wash or cause to be washed, polish or cause to be polished any vehicle or any part thereof upon any public street in this City, when a charge is made for such service. (1155-8/65)

 

10.40.100 Parking—Adjacent to Schools
A.    The Director of Public Works is authorized to erect signs indicating no parking upon that side of any street adjacent to any school property when such parking would, in his or her opinion, interfere with traffic or create a hazardous situation.

B.     When official signs are erected prohibiting parking upon that side of a street adjacent to any school property, no person shall park a vehicle in any such designated place. (1155-8/65)

 

10.40.110 Parking—Prohibited on Narrow Streets
A.    The Director of Public Works is authorized to place signs or markings indicating no parking upon any street when the width of the roadway does not exceed 20 feet, or upon one side of a street as indicated by such signs or markings when the width of the roadway does not exceed 30 feet.

B.     When official signs or markings prohibiting parking are erected upon narrow streets as authorized herein, no person shall park a vehicle upon any such street in violation of any such sign or marking. (1155-8/65)

 

10.40.115 Fire Lanes, Accessways and Roadways—Parking Prohibited
No person shall park any vehicle or place any object in any fire lane, clearly designated as such by appropriate signs or by red paint upon the curb surface, or park or place any object, obstruction or vehicle in, on or across an established or designated exit, driveway, alleyway, or access road, whether public or private, in such manner as to hamper the movement of any emergency vehicles and equipment in the event of fire or other emergency. This prohibition applies to, but is not limited to, areas in and about any church, hospital, assembly hall, lodge hall, school, hotel, motel, condominium, apartment building, theater, industrial complex, motion picture theater, stadium, shopping center, restaurant, tent, or other place of public assembly, whether open or closed.

Any vehicle parked or any object placed in a fire lane or any of the aforementioned areas shall be subject to immediate removal and storage, pursuant to law. (2520-12/81)

 

10.40.120 Parking—Highway Grade
No person shall park or leave standing any vehicle unattended on a highway when upon any grade exceeding three percent without blocking the wheels of the vehicle by turning them against the curb or by other means. (1155-8/65)

 

10.40.150 Vehicles Used for Property Transportation
No person shall park or stand any vehicle or wagon used or intended to be used in the transportation of property for hire on any street while awaiting patronage for such vehicle or wagon without first obtaining a written permit to do so from the Director of Public Works which shall designate the specific location where such vehicle may stand. (322-1/29, 1155-8/65)

 

10.40.160 Permit—Compliance—Revocation
Whenever any permit is granted under the provisions of this chapter and a particular location to park or stand is specified therein, no person shall park or stand any vehicle, wagon or pushcart on any location other than is designated in such permit. In the event that the holder of any such permit is convicted in any court of competent jurisdiction for violating any of the provisions of this chapter, such permit shall be forthwith revoked by the Director of Public Works upon the filing of the record of such conviction with such officer and no permit shall thereafter be issued to such person until six months have elapsed from the date of such revocation. (322-1/29, 1155-8/65)

 

10.40.170 Emergency Parking Signs
A.    Whenever the Director of Public Works shall determine that an emergency traffic congestion is likely to result from the holding of public or private assemblages, gatherings or functions, or for other reasons, the Director of Public Works shall have the power and authority to order temporary signs to be erected or posted indicating that the operation, parking or standing of vehicles is prohibited on such streets and alleys, as the Director of Public Works shall direct, during the time such temporary signs are in place. Such signs shall remain in place only during the existence of such emergency and the Director of Public Works shall cause such signs to be removed promptly thereafter.

B.     When signs authorized by the provisions of this section are in place giving notice thereof, no person shall operate, park or stand any vehicle contrary to the directions of such signs. (1155-8/65)

 

10.40.180 Disabled Commercial Vehicle—Warning Signals
Every motor truck having an unladen weight of 4,000 pounds or more, and every truck tractor irrespective of weight when operated upon any street or highway during darkness, shall be equipped with and carry at least two flares or two red lanterns or two warning lights or reflectors, which reflectors shall be of a type approved by the California Department of Highway Patrol. When any vehicle above mentioned or any trailer or semitrailer is disabled upon streets or highways outside of any business or residence district within this City, and upon which street or highway there is insufficient street lighting to reveal a vehicle at a distance of 200 feet during darkness, a warning signal of the character indicated above shall be immediately placed at a distance of approximately 100 feet in advance of, and 100 feet to the rear of, such disabled vehicle by the driver thereof. The continuous flashing of at least four approved Class A, Type I turn signal lamps, at least two toward the front and at least two toward the rear of the vehicle, shall be considered to meet the requirements of this section until the devices mentioned above can be placed in the required locations. The warning signals herein mentioned shall be displayed continuously during darkness while such vehicle remains disabled upon such street and highway. (1155-8/65)

 

10.40.190 One-Way Streets—Parallel Parking
A.    Subject to other and more restrictive limitations, a vehicle may be stopped or parked within 18 inches of the left-hand curb facing in the direction of traffic movement upon any one-way street unless signs are in place prohibiting such stopping or standing.

B.     In the event a highway includes two or more separate roadways and traffic is restricted to one direction upon any such roadway, no person shall stand or park a vehicle upon the left-hand side of such one-way roadway unless signs are in place permitting such standing or parking.

C.     The Director of Public Works is authorized to determine when standing or parking shall be prohibited upon the left-hand side of any one-way street or when standing or parking may be permitted upon the left-hand side of any one-way roadway of a highway having two or more separate roadways and shall erect signs giving notice thereof.

 

D.    The requirement of parallel parking imposed by this section shall not apply in the event any commercial vehicle is actually engaged in the process of loading or unloading freight or goods, in which case such vehicle may be backed up to the curb, provided that such vehicle does not extend beyond the centerline of the street and does not block traffic thereby. (1121-3/65, 1155-8/65)

 

10.40.200 Diagonal Parking
A.    On any of the streets or portions of streets established by resolution of the Council as diagonal parking zones, when signs or pavement markings are in place indicating such diagonal parking, it shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to park said vehicle except:

1.     At the angle to the curb indicated by signs or pavement markings allotting space to parked vehicles and entirely within the limits of said allotted space;

2.     With the front wheel nearest the curb within six inches of said curb.

B.     The provisions of this section shall not apply when such vehicle is actually engaged in the process of loading or unloading passengers, freight or goods, in which event the provisions applicable in Section 10.40.190 shall be complied with. (322-1/29, 846-7/61, 1155-8/65)

 

10.40.210 Angle Parking—Minimum Road Width
Angle parking shall not be permitted upon any street where parking would diminish the width of the roadway available for travel to less than 24 feet or upon any street which is a portion of the City’s master plan of arterial streets and highways. (1155-8/65, 1577-6/70)

 

10.40.220 Angle Parking—One Side of Street
The Director of Public Works is authorized to prohibit the parking of vehicles, provided appropriate signs are placed and maintained to give notice thereof, on one side of a street in any block where angle parking is permitted on the opposite side of the street in such block. (322-1/29, 1155-8/65)

 

10.40.230 Parking Space Markings
A.    The Director of Public Works is authorized to install and maintain parking space markings to indicate parking spaces adjacent to curbings where authorized parking is permitted.

B.     No motor vehicle shall occupy more than one such parking space unless the size of the parked vehicle obviates the use of a single space. When the use of any parking space is regulated by a meter, the meter regulating each such utilized space must be in an active and unexpired condition.

C.     No vehicle shall be stopped, left standing or parked in a space which is already occupied by another vehicle, except that several motorcycles, motor-driven cycles, mopeds, or motorized bicycles may occupy a single space, provided that no such vehicle is positioned so that it occupies two adjacent spaces. Where a space is regulated by a parking meter, all vehicles within the space are in violation if parking time has expired. (1155-8/65, 2295-9/78, 2327-2/79)

 

10.40.240 No Stopping Zones
A.    The Director of Public Works shall place and maintain appropriate signs indicating that stopping of vehicles is prohibited and indicating the hours and days when stopping is prohibited when no stopping zones have been established by resolution of the Council.

B.     During the hours and days designated on the signs, it shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to stop the vehicle on any of the streets or parts of streets established as no stopping zones. (1136-5/65, 1155-8/65)

 

10.40.250 Painting of Curbs
No person, unless authorized by this City, shall paint any street or curb surfaces; provided, however, that this section shall not apply to the painting of numbers on a curb surface by any person who has complied with the provisions of any official action of this City pertaining thereto. (1155-8/65)

 

10.40.260 General Parking Regulations—Enforcement
The provisions of this title regulating the stopping, standing or parking of a vehicle shall be enforced by officers, reserve officers, service officers and cadets of the Police Department and marine safety officers and such special officers of the Community Services Department, Community Development Department, and the Department of Public Works as are assigned and authorized by the Police Chief. (632-11/55, 1121-3/65, 1155-8/65, 1510-6/69, 2124-1/77, 2247-1/78, 3340-12/96)

 

10.40.265 Misuse of Disabled Person Placard or License Plate
A.    This section is enacted pursuant to California Vehicle Code Section 22511.57 authorizing local authorities to enforce the misuse of placards and special license plates intended for disabled persons or disabled veterans, as parking violations instead of misdemeanors.

B.     No person shall park or stand a vehicle on a street or highway, or in a parking stall or space in a privately or publicly owned or operated off-street parking facility when the vehicle displays, in order to obtain special parking privileges, a disabled person placard or license plate, and any of the following conditions are met:

1.     The records of the Department of Motor Vehicles for the identification number assigned to the placard or license plate indicate that the placard or license plate has been reported as lost, stolen, surrendered, cancelled, revoked, or expired, or was issued to a person who has been reported as deceased for a period exceeding 60 days; or

2.     The placard or license plate is displayed on a vehicle that is not being used to transport, and is not in the reasonable proximity of the person to whom the license plate or placard was issued or a person who is authorized to be transported in the vehicle displaying the placard or license plate; or

3.     The placard or license plate is counterfeit, forged, altered, or mutilated.

C.     Notwithstanding Section 1.16.010 of the Municipal Code, a violation of this Section is subject to a civil penalty established by Resolution of the City Council, and is not an infraction.

D.    A vehicle parked in violation of this section is not only subject to a civil penalty but, alternatively or in addition to, may be towed pursuant to California Vehicle Code Section 22652.6. Any peace officer or any regularly employed and salaried employee engaged in directing traffic or enforcing parking laws and regulations of the City may initiate the tow of the vehicle. (4192-1/20)

 

10.40.270 Parking Areas on Private Property—Maintenance—Parking Prohibited
A.    The owners of any private property in the City of Huntington Beach, which property has been declared by resolution of the City Council to have areas of traffic congestion and a danger to vehicles and pedestrians and an obstruction of emergency vehicles, shall maintain the designated no parking and restricted parking areas by appropriate signs and/or paint upon the curb surface according to standards established by the Director of Public Works.

B.     When curb markings and/or signs are in place, no operator of any vehicle shall park said vehicle adjacent to any curb marking and/or sign. A violation of this section is an infraction and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $100.00. (2204-8/77)

 

10.40.275 Vacant Real Property—Posting
Vacant real property shall be posted to prohibit littering, dumping of waste materials, parking of motor vehicles, and trespassing in accordance with the following:

A.    Posting Requirement. Every person owning or in possession of vacant real property located in the City within 2,000 feet of the mean high tide line of the Pacific Ocean shall post such real property with at least two signs per parcel, displayed at intervals not more than 100 feet apart, along all exterior boundaries and at all roads and trails entering the property. Such signs shall forbid trespassing, littering, parking motor vehicles, and dumping refuse, as defined in Section 8.20.010(H), on such property.

B.     Applicability. “Vacant real property,” as used in this section, shall include all uncultivated real property within 2,000 feet of the mean high tide line of the Pacific Ocean which is not enclosed by a perimeter fence, and on which there are no permitted structures for residential, commercial, or industrial uses. Property on which there are no structures other than oil wells and outbuildings shall not be exempt from this section.

C.     Exemptions. The following are exempt:

1.     Property enclosed by a perimeter fence at least five feet high, secured by locked gates;

2.     Property occupied by or in possession of a public entity or property dedicated to public use;

3.     Any parcel with an area less than 10,000 square feet shall be exempt from the posting requirement so long as the total area of such parcel, plus the area of all adjoining and contiguous parcels of vacant real property, do not exceed 10,000 square feet.

D.    Signs. The signs shall be at least 12 inches wide and 18 inches high, and shall meet the specifications established by the Director of Community Development and the requirements of California Vehicle Code Section 22658.

E.     No portion of this section shall be construed as restricting a private owner in the lawful use of his or her own property unless the use creates a public health or safety hazard, a public nuisance, or a fire hazard. (2767-5/85)

 

10.40.280 Violation—Penalty
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be guilty of an infraction, and punishable by a fine not to exceed $100.00. (2276-5/78)

 

Chapter 10.42 PERMIT PARKING DISTRICTS
10.42.010 Definitions
“City” means the City of Huntington Beach.

“Commuter Vehicle” means a motor vehicle owned or occupied by a person who is not a Resident of a Permit Parking District and is parked in a Permit Parking District.

“Director” means the Director of Public Works or his or her designee.

“Permit Parking District” means a geographic boundary created by Resolution of the City Council that delineates certain roadways, alleyways, or other conspicuous passageways, where unrestricted parking is not allowed and where vehicles displaying a valid parking permit are exempt from certain parking restrictions.

“Property Unit” means a house, apartment, condominium, or townhouse within the boundaries of a proposed or existing Permit Parking District.

“Resident” means an owner of a Property Unit and/or person(s) leasing a Property Unit. (4051-5/15)

 

10.42.020 Administrative Regulations
The Director at his or her sole discretion may create administrative regulations to implement provisions of this chapter. (4051-5/15)

 

10.42.030 Permit Parking Districts
The City Council at its sole discretion by Resolution may create, expand, amend, or eliminate any Permit Parking District. The Resolution to create a Permit Parking District will be supported by findings and establish geographic boundaries and any additional regulations related to the Permit Parking District. This chapter will not apply to areas within a specific plan area or coastal zone where such Permit Parking Districts are expressly prohibited. Resident parking permits shall not confer any property right or guarantee of a continued Permit Parking District or reserve to the holder an on-street parking space or exempt the vehicle/owner from any Federal, State, or local laws. All applicable California Vehicle Code and Huntington Beach Municipal Code sections shall be observed within any Permit Parking District. (4051-5/15)

 

10.42.040 Resident Requested Permit Parking District
A.    Residents may request that the City create a Permit Parking District by submitting a petition signed by no less than either 20% of the Residents or 25 Residents, whichever is less, to the Director setting forth the proposed Permit Parking District boundaries, the purpose of the Permit Parking District, and any other relevant information. The Director will review the information presented in the petition and within a reasonable time make a preliminary determination if the petition is valid. The Director at his or her sole discretion may investigate the permit and/or proposed Permit Parking District, including contacting Residents to verify their signatures.

B.     The Director at his or her sole discretion may modify the proposed boundaries of the proposed Permit Parking District to include roadways, alleyways, or other conspicuous passageways, or portions thereof, that may be substantially affected by the Permit Parking District. The additional Residents will receive notices and be provided opportunities as applicable as if included in the initial request.

C.     If the Director determines that the concerns expressed by the Residents require further investigation and/or consideration, the Director will send a letter to each Property Unit within the proposed Permit Parking District notifying the Residents of the Proposed Permit Parking District with a description of the boundaries, the purpose, the cost, and any other relevant information.

D.    The letter will contain a ballot with instructions and requirements regarding voting on the creation of the Permit Parking District. Each Property Unit will be allotted one vote. The Property Unit owner, regardless of residency, will have the initial opportunity to cast a vote for the Property Unit. In the absence of the Property Unit owner vote, the vote of a tenant of the Property Unit will be counted. The City will send a reminder letter one week prior to ballot’s due date.

E.     The Director shall determine whether a minimum of 75% of the Property Units are in favor of the proposed Permit Parking District. If a minimum of 75% of the Property Units are in favor, the Director will cause an investigation by the City to be conducted to determine whether facts exist that reasonably establish any of the following unrestricted parking issues:

1.     Unrestricted parking creates a situation in which the subject streets cannot be used for parking by Residents or their guests because Commuter Vehicle parking unreasonably and regularly interferes with the use of the available street parking; or

2.     Unrestricted parking creates a situation where Commuter Vehicles or their occupants produce significant sources of health, safety, or welfare concerns.

3.     If the Director reasonably determines that one or more of the above exist, and the Director reasonably determines that the Permit Parking District will not unduly affect other reasonable uses of on-street parking, including parks and schools, by the public, the Director will present such findings to the City Manager who may at his or her sole discretion place the matter on the City Council agenda for further consideration by the City Council. The Director will send notice to each Property Unit and any property within 500 feet of the proposed Permit Parking District boundaries with the date and time of the City Council meeting. (4051-5/15)

 

10.42.050 Amendments or Repeal of Existing Permit Parking Districts
Future expansion or amendment of an established Permit Parking District by Residents of the Permit Parking District may be accomplished in the same manner as creating a Permit Parking District. Residents may request the elimination of a Permit Parking District by a simple majority vote of the Property Units. The City Manager may at his or her sole discretion place the matter on the City Council agenda for further consideration by the City Council. City Council at its sole discretion by Resolution may create, expand, amend, or eliminate any Permit Parking District. (4051-5/15)

 

10.42.060 Issuance and Display of Permits
After the Permit Parking District is established, the City will begin the process of issuing parking permits. Permits may be valid for up to 60 months. Each application or re-application for a parking permit shall contain information sufficient to identify the applicant, the address of the Property Unit, owned or leased, within a Permit Parking District, the license number(s) of the motor vehicle(s) for which the application is made, and such other information as may be requested by the Director. Permittees shall display the parking permit as required by the Director so that it is plainly visible through the windshield from the exterior of the vehicle while the vehicle is parked. (4051-5/15)

 

10.42.070 Establishment of Initial Charge and Permit Fee
A fee shall be set by Resolution of the City Council for initial creation of the Permit Parking District, the issuance or renewals of permits, and/or the requests for additional permits. The one-time initial fee shall be for each Property Unit and shall be based on costs, including, but not limited to, installation of signs, curb markings, and other devices to define the Permit Parking District. The fee shall not exceed the costs to create the Permit Parking District. The initial fee shall be the same for each Property Unit. Fees for the issuance or renewal of permits and/or the requests for additional permits shall be set forth in the City Fee Resolution and shall not exceed the cost of providing the service. (4051-5/15)

 

10.42.080 Parking Permits Issued
Upon the receipt of the appropriate fees and a completed application, the Director shall issue one parking permit for each Resident vehicle, up to a maximum of four Resident permits per Property Unit. If the vehicle for which a permit has been issued has been sold or otherwise disposed of, and a substitute vehicle acquired, a new permit may be issued provided the required information regarding the substitute vehicle is submitted to the Director. (4051-5/15)

 

10.42.090 Guest Permits
In addition to the regular Resident permits issued for each Property Unit, two guest permits will be issued to the Resident and included in the cost of the permit. These guest permits shall be valid for the same period as the regular Resident permit and shall be reissued in the same manner. A minimum of one Resident permit shall be purchased to obtain the guest permits. Permittees shall display the parking permit as required by the Director so that it is plainly visible through the windshield from the exterior of the vehicle while the vehicle is parked. (4051-5/15)

 

10.42.100 Temporary Parking Permits
In addition to the Resident permits and the guest permits, and upon the receipt of the appropriate fees and a completed application, temporary parking permits may be issued for a one-day special event. Permits may be issued to the Resident if the Resident is on file as a current parking permit holder. Permittees shall display the parking permit as required by the Director so that it is plainly visible through the windshield from the exterior of the vehicle while the vehicle is parked. (4051-5/15)

 

10.42.110 Replacement of Permits Destroyed, Lost, or Stolen
Residential or guest parking permits that have been destroyed, lost, or stolen may be replaced with a new permit only once upon the payment of a replacement fee. Additional replacement permits during the permit period will be considered on a case-by-case basis. Permits reported destroyed, lost, or stolen are void and may no longer be used. (4051-5/15)

 

10.42.120 Posting Permit Parking Districts
Upon adoption by the City Council of a Resolution designating a Permit Parking District, the Department of Public Works shall cause appropriate signs to be installed. (4051-5/15)

 

10.42.130 Exemptions
The following shall be exempt from the parking restrictions in an established Permit Parking District: (1) A vehicle owned by or operated by a public utility or a government agency employee or contractor while parked in the Permit Parking District; (2) A commercial or private vehicle parked in the Permit Parking District while loading or unloading persons or property, or when such vehicle is parked in connection with or in aid of the performance of a service to the Property Unit; (3) Any authorized emergency vehicle; (4) Curb parking areas within the boundaries of any public facility. (4051-5/15)

 

10.42.140 Revocation of Permit
The Director may revoke a Resident’s parking permit if the Resident has made misrepresentations regarding eligibility or furnished false information on an application for a Resident, guest, or temporary parking permit and the Resident may not reapply for a new permit. Any Resident or guest in possession of a counterfeit parking permit will immediately cause the parking permit to be revoked and the Resident may not reapply for a new permit. (4051-5/15)

 

10.42.150 Severability
If any section, sentence, clause, or phrase of this ordinance is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by a decision of any court, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this ordinance. (4051-5/15)

 

Chapter 10.44 PARKING—TIME LIMITS
10.44.010 Green Curb Marking
Green curb marking shall mean no stopping, standing or parking for a designated increment of time not to exceed two hours as authorized by signs or curb stencil. Taxi cabs shall not stand or park at any time where there are green curb markings. (276-11/25, 322-1/29, 533-7/48, 1155-8/65, 3257-11/94, 3922-11/11, 3968-3/13)

 

10.44.020 Time Limitation Parking
When authorized signs or curb stencil have been determined by the Director of Public Works to be necessary and are in place giving notice thereof, no operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand or park any vehicle adjacent to any such legible curb stencil or sign in violation thereof. (276-11/25, 322-1/29, 533-7/48, 1155-8/65, 3968-3/13)

 

10.44.030 One-Hour Parking
When authorized signs or curb stencil have been determined by the Director of Public Works to be necessary and are in place of giving notice thereof, no operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand or park any vehicle adjacent to any such legible curb stencil or sign for a period of time longer than one hour. (255-2/23, 566-11/50, 1155-8/65, 3968-3/13)

 

10.44.040 Two-Hour Parking
When authorized signs or curb stencil have been determined by the Director of Public Works to be necessary and are in place of giving notice thereof, no operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand or park any vehicle adjacent to any such legible curb stencil or sign for a period of time longer than two hours. (322-1/29, 373-7/34, 1155-8/65, 3968-3/13)

 

10.44.050 Penalty—Continuing Violations
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall, upon a conviction thereof, be guilty of an infraction, and punishable by a fine not to exceed $100 for the first violation, $200 for the second violation, and $300 for the third violation in one calendar year; provided further, that each period of time a vehicle is left parked after the initial violation of such provisions shall be deemed a separate offense, equal to the maximum legal parking time for the particular time zone or parking space as designated in sections setting the maximum legal time. (1155-8/65, 2276-5/78, 4155-11/18)

 

10.44.060 Oversized Vehicle Parking Regulations
Except as provided herein, no person shall park or leave standing upon any public highway or alleyway:

A.    Any motor vehicle, over 22 feet long or 84 inches wide, including, but not limited to, buses, motor trucks, trailers, vehicles used or maintained as farm machinery or a special purpose or equipment machine, any non-motorized vehicle such as a semitrailer, recreational vehicle trailer, watercraft trailer, trailer, trailer coach, utility trailer, unattached trailer, motorcycle trailer, two or more axle camper, or one axle camper, over 84 inches wide, measured from the extreme forward/widest point to the extreme rear point. Measurements shall include extensions and/or attachments.

B.     Recreational vehicles of any size are not permitted. The term “recreational vehicle” (RV) shall have the same meaning as set forth in California Health and Safety Code Section 18010 or any successor statute. (1935-11/74, 2115-11/76, 2514-12/81, 2855-12/86, 3699-04/05, 3823-4/09, 4028-8/14, 4155-11/18)

 

10.44.062 Recreational Vehicle Parking in a Residential District—Special Permits
A.    The Police Chief may issue a temporary permit for the overnight parking of a recreational vehicle prohibited by Section 10.44.060 if there is a finding that the vehicle is used on a daily basis and on-premises parking is not reasonably available. A permit issued based on this finding shall not be valid for longer than six months.

B.     The Police Chief may issue a temporary permit to persons who demonstrate by way of written statement from a licensed medical doctor, that the recreational vehicle prohibited by Section 10.44.060 must be kept near a residence for medical reasons. (3699-4/05)

 

10.44.065 Exceptions
Section 10.44.060 shall not apply to the following:

A.    Recreational vehicles or oversized motor vehicles as defined in Section 10.44.060, parked for the purpose of loading, or other short-term use, or unattached trailers provided that a permit has been issued in advance by the Police Chief. The Police Chief, or his or her designee, shall have authority to make and enforce any rules and regulations for or regarding the issuance, administration or enforcement of any permit as set forth in this chapter. A permit may be issued for loading, unloading, or other short-term use not to exceed 24 hours, provided that:

1.     No more than 12 such periods are allowed in a calendar month; and

2.     No more than three days consecutively; and

3.     No more than 144 days in any 12-month period.

Such parking shall be limited to the area in front of the residence from which the loading or unloading will occur, or in reasonable proximity thereto if the front of the residence is not available for parking. Permits are issued to the oversized vehicle as defined in Section 10.44.060 of the Huntington Beach Municipal Code and not the drawing vehicle.

 

B.     Recreation vehicles not more than 20 feet long and 84 inches wide parked in front of and adjacent to the same residence that the vehicle owner either owns or rents, provided that a permit has been issued in advance by the Police Chief. The Police Chief, or designee, shall have authority to approve, deny or condition any permit, and to make and enforce any rules and regulations for or regarding the issuance, administration or enforcement of any permit as set forth in this chapter.

C.     Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to permit sleeping in a vehicle.

D.    A permit may be used for any oversized motor vehicle parking while used in performing or assisting in performing City permitted services or repairs on residential property. The permit will be valid for 45 days and will be renewed only upon proof that the vehicle is continuing to be used in performing the services described herein not to exceed 90 days in any 12-month period.

E.     Oversized vehicles as defined in Section 10.44.060 parked upon any public street or highway in a commercial or industrial district between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. (1935-11/74, 2115-11/76, 2514-12/81, 2855-12/86, 3699-04/05, 3735-5/06, 3742-8/06, 4028-8/14, 4155-11/18, 4223-1/21)

 

10.44.067 Street Sweeping—Compliance
All recreational vehicle permit holders shall comply with the City of Huntington Beach street sweeping parking regulations pursuant to Chapter 10.40 of the Huntington Beach Municipal Code and as thereafter amended. (3735-5/06)

 

Chapter 10.48 LOADING ZONES
10.48.010 Authority to Establish
The Director of Public Works is authorized to mark loading zones and passenger loading zones adjacent to the entrance to any place of business or adjacent to any hall or place used for the purpose of public assembly. (322-1/29, 1155-8/65)

 

10.48.020 Size Limitation
In no event shall more than one-half of the total curb length in any block be reserved for loading zone purposes. (322-1/29, 1155-8/65)

 

10.48.030 Color Identification
Loading zones shall be indicated by yellow paint upon the top of all curbs within such zones. (322-1/29, 1155-8/65)

 

10.48.040 Passenger Zones Identified
Passenger loading zones shall be indicated by white paint upon the top of all curbs in said zones. (322-1/29, 1155-8/65)

 

10.48.050 Curb Marking Placement
The Director of Public Works is authorized, subject to the provisions and limitations of this chapter, to place, and when required herein shall place, the following curb markings to indicate parking or standing regulations and said curb markings shall have the meanings as herein set forth:

 

A.    Red means no stopping, standing or parking at any time except as permitted by the Vehicle Code, and except that a bus may stop in a red zone marked or signaled as a bus stop.

B.     Yellow means no stopping, standing or parking at any time for any purpose other than the loading or unloading of passengers or materials provided that the loading or unloading of passengers shall not consume more than three minutes nor the loading or unloading of materials more than 20 minutes.

C.     White means no stopping, standing or parking at any time for any purpose other than loading or unloading of passengers, or for the purpose of depositing mail in an adjacent mailbox, which shall not exceed three minutes except that when such zone is in front of a theater or church, the restrictions shall not apply when such theater or church is closed.

D.    When the Director of Public Works, as authorized under this chapter, has caused curb markings to be placed, no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle adjacent to any such legible curb markings in violation of any of the provisions of this section.

E.     Blue means no stopping, standing or parking at any time except for physically-handicapped persons whose vehicles display either one of the distinguishing license plates issued to disabled persons pursuant to Section 22511.5 of the California Vehicle Code or to disabled veterans as specified in Section 9105 of the California Vehicle Code. (1155-8/65, 1491-4/69, 2044-5/76, 3257-11/94)

 

10.48.060 Maximum Time—Materials
Permission herein granted to stop or stand a vehicle for purposes of loading or unloading of materials shall not extend beyond the time necessary therefor, and in no event for more than 20 minutes. (1155-8/65)

 

10.48.070 Maximum Time—Passengers
Permission herein granted to stop or park for purposes of loading or unloading passengers shall include the loading or unloading of personal baggage but shall not extend beyond the time necessary therefor and in no event for more than three minutes. (1155-8/65)

 

10.48.080 Maximum Time—Abuse Not Permitted
Within the total time limits above, the provisions of this chapter shall be enforced so as to accommodate necessary and reasonable loading or unloading but without permitting abuse of the privileges hereby granted. (1155-8/65)

 

10.48.090 Yellow Loading Zones
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any yellow loading zone for any purpose other than loading or unloading passengers or material for such times as are permitted in Sections 10.48.060 through 10.48.080. (322-1/29, 1155-8/65)

 

10.48.100 Passenger Loading Zone
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any passenger loading zone for any purpose other than the loading or unloading of passengers for such time as is specified in Sections 10.48.060 through 10.48.080. (322-1/29, 1155-8/65)

 

10.48.105 Student Loading Zones
A.    The Director of Public Works is authorized, subject to the provisions and limitations of this chapter, to erect signs indicating restricted parking upon that side of any street adjacent to or in front of any school property when such parking would, in his or her opinion, interfere with traffic or create a hazardous situation.

B.     When official signs are erected, restricted parking means no stopping, standing or parking at any time for any purpose other than loading or unloading of passengers, or for the purpose of depositing mail in an adjacent mailbox, which shall not exceed three minutes, except that when such zone is in front of a theater or church, the restrictions shall not apply when such theater or church is closed. The restricted parking applies between the hours of 7 a.m. and 4 p.m. on days that school is in session. (3324-4/96)

 

10.48.110 Standing in Alley
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose other than the loading or unloading of persons or materials in any alley. (322-1/29, 1155-8/65)

 

10.48.120 Bus Zones
The Director of Public Works is authorized to establish bus zones opposite curb space for the loading or unloading of buses or common carriers of passengers and to determine the location thereof. (1155-8/65)

 

10.48.130 Morning Parking Restrictions
It is unlawful for any operator of any motor truck to park the same except between the hours of 4:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. on Main Street between Ocean Avenue (PCH) and Olive Avenue in this City, and on Walnut Avenue between Third Street and Fifth Street in this City except at loading zones regularly designated and marked. (422-3/39, 1155-8/65)

 

10.48.140 Loading Permits
The Director of Public Works may issue a special permit to an operator of a motor truck to park on said streets for the purpose of loading and unloading personal property in cases of emergency or necessity, and for the loading and unloading of building material and bulky articles to and from business houses located on said streets and property fronting thereon. No loading zones shall be designated or marked on Main Street between Ocean Avenue (PCH) and Olive Avenue. (1155-8/65)

 

10.48.150 Extended Loading Time Prohibited Where
No person shall park or leave standing any vehicle except for loading purposes as defined in Section 10.04.070 of this Code in any of the following places:

A.    Hospital entrance: at any curb within 25 feet of the entrance of any hospital.

B.     Police station: at any curb within 50 feet of the entrance to any police station.

C.     Fire hydrant: at any curb within 15 feet of a fire hydrant. (322-1/29, 1958-3/75)

 

10.48.160 Violation—Penalty
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be guilty of an infraction, and punishable by a fine not to exceed $100.00. (2276-5/78)

 

Chapter 10.49 PROHIBITION ON REPAIRS AND SALES OF BICYCLE PARTS ON PUBLIC PROPERTY
10.49.010 Repairs and sales on public property prohibited.
Except where otherwise stated in this chapter, no person shall assemble, disassemble, sell, offer to sell, distribute, offer to distribute, or store the following items on any street, sidewalk, alley, or public property within the City:

A.    Three or more bicycles;

B.     A bicycle frame with the gear cables or brake cables cut;

C.     Two or more bicycles with missing parts (the term “parts” shall mean handlebars, wheels, forks, pedals, cranks, seats, or chains); or

D.    Five or more bicycle parts. (4219-11/20)

 

10.49.020 Exceptions.
The prohibition contained in Section 10.49.010 of this chapter shall not apply in any of the following situations:

A.    An individual is operating under a valid City of Huntington Beach license or permit authorizing such activities.

B.     The owner of a bicycle or bicycle part is present during the repair of his or her single bicycle or bicycle part. Supporting evidence for a claim of lawful ownership may include, but is not limited to, video or photographic evidence, a bill of sale, the correct serial number, bicycle registration, and the like. (4219-11/20)

 

10.49.030 Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or word of this Chapter 10.49, or any application thereof to any person or circumstance, is held to be invalid or unconstitutional by a decision of a court of competent jurisdiction, the validity, legality and enforceability of the remaining provisions shall not in any way be affected or impaired thereby and such provision shall be ineffective only to the extent of such invalidity, illegality or unenforceability. (4219-11/20)

 

Chapter 10.50 OFF-STREET CITY PAY PARKING LOTS
10.50.010 Establishment of Off-Street City Pay Parking Lots
The City owns and operates the following off-street City pay parking lots:

A.    Main-Promenade Parking Structure, located at 200 Main Street.

B.     The parking lots on the ocean side of Pacific Coast Highway from Goldenwest Street to a point which is 6,100 feet north-westerly of said Goldenwest Street, commonly known as “Dog Beach Lot” and “Blufftop Lot.”

C.     The parking lots adjacent to the public launching ramps on Warner Avenue, commonly known as “Warner Lot.”

D.    The parking lots located on the ocean side of Pacific Coast Highway between First and Seventh Streets, commonly known as the “Pier Plaza Parking Lots.”

E.     The parking lot within the boundaries of the Huntington Central Park Sports Complex.

F.     The parking lot on the southwest corner of First Street and Atlanta Avenue.

G.    The parking lot located at 101 Walnut Avenue, commonly known as “First/Walnut Lot.”

H.    The parking lots on the ocean side of Pacific Coast Highway from Beach Boulevard to First Street, commonly known as the “South Beach Lots.” (4148-2/19)

 

10.50.020 Payment of Charges Required
A.    The City Council shall establish by Resolution the fees, rates and charges for vehicle parking at all off-street City pay parking lots. Parking meters or attendants may collect the fees, rates, and charges.

B.     No person shall park or leave standing any vehicle upon any off-street City pay parking lot at any time without payment of the fees, rates and charges established for the use of the lot by Resolution of the City Council.

C.     All fees, rates and charges for parking at any off-street City pay parking lot shall be paid in advance in money of the United States of America, except as otherwise provided by validation agreement.

D.    No person shall park or leave standing any vehicle in violation of any properly noticed curfew as established by the City Manager or the Director of Community Services. (4148-2/19, 4218-10/20)

 

10.50.030 Validation Agreement—Authorization
A.    The City Manager or the Director of Community Services may enter into written agreements with any person or legal entity to provide for validation of parking in any off-street City pay parking lot.

 

B.     The charges such person or legal entity pays shall be in accordance with the schedule of fees, rates and charges for non-validated parking established by Resolution of the City Council. (4148-2/19)

 

10.50.040 Vehicles Subject to Removal—Storage Lien
A.    Shall any owner or operator of a vehicle park it in an off-street City pay parking lot for a time in excess of 24 hours after the parking rates paid have expired, then the City or its duly authorized representatives may remove the vehicle from the lot. Pursuant to Vehicle Code Section 22851, the vehicle shall be subject to a possessory lien in favor of the City, for the storage and removal charges and fees, including all accumulated unpaid parking charges at the time of removal, and the actual towing and storage charges.

B.     Any attendant or employee of the City on duty at or upon an off-street City pay parking lot shall not permit or allow the removal from the premises of any vehicle by the owner, operator or person in charge unless and until all charges and fees have been paid and discharged.

C.     Failure on the part of any owner, operator or person in charge of any vehicle so removed from any off-street City pay parking lot to redeem his or her vehicle or vehicles within the time and within the manner provided by law shall be cause for the City to proceed to sell the said vehicle to satisfy the lien and all charges and fees unpaid thereon in the manner as provided by law. (4148-2/19)

 

Chapter 10.52 OFF-STREET CITY PARKING LOT
10.52.010 Regulations Regarding Off-Street City Parking Lots
The following regulations shall apply to off-street City parking lots:

A.    The driver of a motor vehicle shall be permitted to park within designated spaces only.

B.     No person shall obstruct the flow of traffic in any off-street City parking lot.

C.     No person driving, in control of, or in charge of, a motor vehicle shall obstruct any entrance or any right-of-way in any off-street City parking lot.

D.    When signs or curb markings regulating parking have been determined by the Director of Community Services to be necessary and are in place giving notice thereof, no operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand, or park said vehicle in violation thereof.

E.     The Director of Community Services shall have the authority to designate reserved parking areas in off-street City parking lots.

F.     No unauthorized vehicle shall park in a reserved parking area where signs are posted giving notice of such reserved parking.

G.    In the event that a vehicle is parked in violation of this chapter, any regularly employed and salaried city peace officer, as defined in Chapter 4.5 (commencing with Section 830) of Title 3 of Part 2 of the California Penal Code, or any regularly employed and salaried employee of the City who is engaged in directing traffic or enforcing parking laws and regulations, may remove the vehicle in the manner and subject to the requirements of the California Vehicle Code.

H.    No unauthorized vehicle shall park in a stall or space designated for exclusive use by physically handicapped persons whose vehicles display either one of the distinguishing placards issued to a disabled person or veteran pursuant to Section 22511.55 of the California Vehicle Code or to disabled veterans, as specified in Section 9105 of the California Vehicle Code. Such stalls or spaces are designated by a blue painted curb and/or by a sign consisting of a profile view of a wheelchair with occupant in white on a blue background posted immediately adjacent to, or visible from, each stall or space. (1084-10/64, 1425-6/68, 1929-9/74, 2044-5/76, 4148-2/19)

 

10.52.020 Additional Off-Street City Parking Lot Regulations
A.    The Director of Community Services is authorized to establish additional regulations regarding the time, place and manner of parking or stopping of vehicles on any off-street City parking lot.

B.     The Director of Community Services shall not enforce any regulation established pursuant to this chapter in any off-street City parking lot until he or she has posted adequate notice of such regulations in the off-street parking lot.

C.     No person shall park or stop a vehicle in any off-street City parking lot in violation of any properly posted regulation established by the Director of Community Services pursuant to this section.

D.    No person shall park or leave standing any vehicle in violation of any properly noticed curfew as established by the City Manager or the Director of Community Services. (4148-2/19, 4218-10/20)

 

10.52.025 Electric Charging Stalls and Spaces
A.    The Director of Community Services is authorized to designate stalls or spaces in the City’s off-street parking lots for the exclusive purpose of charging and parking a vehicle that is connected for electric charging purposes.

B.     No person shall park in an electric charging stall or space except when connected to an electric charging station.

C.     No person shall obstruct, block, or otherwise bar access to an electric charging station. (4218-10/20)

 

10.52.030 Violation—Penalty
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be guilty of an infraction, and punishable by a fine not to exceed $100.00. (1084-10/64, 1808-2/73, 4148-2/19)

 

Chapter 10.56 PARKING METERS—GENERALLY
10.56.010 Definitions
For the purpose of this chapter, certain words and phrases are defined and certain provisions shall be construed as herein set forth, unless the provisions of the context otherwise require.

“Director” means the Director of the Community Services Department of the City of Huntington Beach.

“Roadway” means that portion of a street between the regularly established curb lines.

“Sidewalk” means that portion of a street between the curb lines and adjacent property lines.

“Street” means every way set apart for public travel except alleyways, bridle paths and footpaths.

“Vehicle” means conveyance propelled by motor power. (496-7/46, 1491-4/69, 1490-5/69, 4148-2/19)

 

10.56.020 Chapter Supplements Other Regulations
This chapter shall be deemed to be in addition and supplementary to, and not in conflict with, nor a repeal of existing ordinances of this City; but shall be an additional provision for the regulation of traffic and parking in the parking meter zones provided for herein. (496-7/46)

 

10.56.030 Collection of Coins From Meters
It shall be the duty of the Director of Finance to designate some person or persons to make regular collections of the money deposited in parking meters, and to deliver the money to the Director of Finance. (496-7/46, 1327-1/68)

 

10.56.040 Coins Placed in Meter Fund
It is the duty of the Director of Finance to count the money and to deliver the money to the City Treasurer who shall place it in a special fund to be known as the “parking meter fund,” which fund shall be used exclusively for the purposes specified in Section 10.56.060. (496-7/46, 1327-1/68)

 

10.56.050 Collector—Bond
Such person or persons making the collections shall be bonded in the sum of $2,000.00 to ensure the faithful performance of his, her or their duties. (496-7/46)

 

10.56.060 Use of Proceeds
The money paid to parking meters in the on-street parking meter zones is levied and assessed as a fee to provide for the proper regulation, control and inspection of traffic upon the public streets, and to cover the cost of supervising, regulating and inspecting the parking of vehicles in the zones, the cost of placing and maintaining lines or markings, designating parking spaces in the zones, the cost of the purchase, supervision, protection, inspection, installation, operation, maintenance, control and use of the parking meters installed hereunder, and the acquisition by purchase or lease, improvement, operation, maintenance, repair and replacement of all parking facilities on streets; and the special fund in which such fees shall be placed shall be devoted exclusively to those purposes. (496-7/46, 609-4/54, 4148-2/19)

 

10.56.070 Account of Violations Kept
It is the duty of the Police Chief, under the direction of the Council, to keep account of all violations of this title. (496-7/46)

 

10.56.080 Record of Violations
The Police Chief shall keep an account of and report the number of each parking meter which indicates that the vehicle occupying the parking space adjacent to such parking meter is or has been parked in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, the date and hour of such violation, the make and state license number of such vehicle, and any other facts a knowledge of which is necessary to a thorough understanding of the circumstances attending such violation. (496-7/46)

 

10.56.090 Violation—Notice Affixed to Vehicle
The Police Chief shall attach to such vehicle a notice stating that it has been parked in violation of this chapter, and instructing the owner or operator to report to the judge of a court of competent jurisdiction in regard to such violation. (496-7/46, 609-4/54)

 

10.56.100 Violation—Penalty
Any person violating any provision of this chapter or any resolution adopted pursuant to this chapter, shall, upon a conviction thereof, be guilty of an infraction, and punishable by a fine not to exceed $100.00. (496-7/46, 1490-5/69, 1491-4/69, 1808-2/73)

 

10.56.110 Exception—Compliance With Notice
The provisions of Section 10.56.100 are subject to the preceding provisions of this chapter. (496-7/46)

 

Chapter 10.60 ON-STREET PARKING METER ZONES
10.60.010 Establishment of On-Street Parking Meter Zones
Pursuant to Section 22508 of the California Vehicle Code, on-street parking meter zones are hereby established within the public right-of-way of the following streets and highways:

A.    Business Zones. The boundaries of the business zones shall be as follows:

1.     Within Main Street right-of-way from Pacific Coast Highway to Palm Avenue, excluding the west side of Main Street from Acacia to Palm Avenue.

2.     Within Walnut Avenue right-of-way from Third to Fifth Streets.

3.     Within Olive Avenue right-of-way from Third to Fifth Streets.

4.     Within Walnut Avenue right-of-way between Fifth and Sixth Streets.

B.     Residential Zones. The boundaries of the residential zones shall be as follows:

1.     Within First Street right-of-way from Pacific Coast Highway to Atlanta Avenue.

2.     Within Second Street right-of-way from Pacific Coast Highway to Orange Avenue.

3.     Within Third Street right-of-way from Walnut to Orange Avenues.

4.     Within Walnut Avenue right-of-way from First to Third Streets.

5.     Within Olive Avenue right-of-way from First to Third Streets.

6.     Within Fifth Street right-of-way from Pacific Coast Highway to Orange Avenue.

7.     Within 22nd Street right-of-way from Pacific Coast Highway to Walnut Avenue.

8.     Within Walnut Avenue right-of-way from 22nd to Goldenwest Streets.

9.     Within Southside Orange Avenue right-of-way from Fifth to Main Street.

10.   Within Orange Avenue right-of-way from First to Second Street.

C.     Recreational Zones. The boundaries of the recreational zones shall be as follows:

1.     ZONE A: On the ocean side of Pacific Coast Highway right-of-way from Beach Boulevard to Goldenwest Street.

2.     ZONE B: On the inland (north) side of Pacific Coast Highway right-of-way from Beach Boulevard to Third Street and from Sixth to Goldenwest Streets.

3.     Zone C: Within Beach Boulevard right-of-way from Pacific Coast Highway to Sunrise Street, including the frontage road from east of Beach Boulevard.

4.     Zone D: Within Pacific View Avenue right-of-way between First Street and Twin Dolphin Drive. (1491-4/69, 1490-5/69, 2255-1/78, 3374-11/97, 3393-5/98, 3660-9/04, 4071-11/15, 4128-3/17, 4148-2/19)

 

10.60.020 Times and Coins or Payment Deposited Prescribed
The parking time and fees will be affixed to the parking meters, as follows:

A.    Business Zones. Parking meters with 120-minute parking limits may be installed in the business zones, in locations determined by the Director of Community Services. The fee for parking shall be $2.00 per hour.

1.     Parking meters with 24-minute parking limits may be installed in the business zone in locations determined by the Director of Community Services. Parking in these parking locations will be limited to 6:00 a.m. to 12:00 a.m. daily, including Saturdays, Sundays, and holidays.

2.     The Director of Community Services may determine that certain recreational zone parking hours may be limited or extended. Notice of limited or extended parking limits shall be posted for the public.

B.     Residential Zones.

1.     Parking meters with 60-minute, 120-minute and 12-hour parking limits may be installed in the residential zones in locations determined by the Director of Community Services. The fee for parking shall be $2.00 per hour.

2.     Parking meters with 60-minute, 120-minute, and 12-hour parking limits may be installed within the residential zone in locations to be determined by the Director of Community Services. These parking locations will be limited to 6:00 a.m. through 12:00 a.m. daily, including Saturdays, Sundays, and holidays.

C.     Recreational Zones.

1.     Parking meters with 12-hour parking limits may be installed within Zones A, B, C, and D in locations determined by the Director of Community Services. The fee for parking shall be $2.00 per hour.

2.     Parking meters or pay stations with 30-minute, 60-minute, 120-minute, and 12-hour parking limits may be installed within recreational zones in locations to be determined by the Director of Community Services. These locations will be limited to parking from 6:00 a.m. through 12:00 a.m. daily, including Saturdays, Sundays, and holidays.

3.     The Director of Community Services may determine that certain recreational zone parking hours may be limited or extended. Notice of limited or extended parking limits shall be posted for the public. (496-8/46, 582-4/52, 1491-4/69, 1490-5/69, 3374-11/97, 3393-5/98, 3414-3/99, 3459-6/00, 3717-7/05, 4071-11/15, 4088-6/16, 4148-2/19)

 

10.60.030 Varied Meter Times
When the City Council designates the parking times allowed following payment as provided in this chapter and more than one parking time is so designated, the Director of Community Services may place the meters in such locations within the zone as he or she shall deem proper and consistent with the intention of the City Council. (1491-4/69, 1490-5/69, 4071-11/15)

 

10.60.040 State Highways Within Zones
The provisions of Chapters 10.56, 10.60, 10.64 and 10.68 of the Huntington Beach Municipal Code shall be ineffective as to any portion of a state highway within the boundary of the parking meter zone as set forth in Section 10.60.030 six months after receipt of notification from the Department of Transportation of the State of California of its rescinding its approval to the ordinance codified in this chapter. (609-5/54)

 

10.60.050 Curfew
In all meter zones, the payment of fees to a parking meter or pay station does not exempt a person or vehicle from receiving a citation for violation of the posted curfew. (4148-2/19)

 

Chapter 10.64 METERS—INSTALLATION
10.64.010 Parking Meters
When directed by the City Council, the Director of Community Services shall cause to be installed upon such streets or portions thereof within the on-street parking meter zones, adjacent to each designated parking space, such parking meters as shall have been approved by the Council. (496-8/46, 582-4/52, 690-6/58, 1491-4/69, 1490-5/69, 4148-2/19)

 

10.64.020 Signs Indicating Meter Type
It is the duty of the Department of Public Works to maintain signs in the various areas within the parking meter zones, indicating the type of meter there installed and the days and hours during which the parking meters are in operation. (1491-4/69, 1490-5/69)

 

10.64.030 Sign Location
Signs as mentioned in Section 10.64.020, may either be on separate posts, painted on the curbs, or fastened to the parking meters, in the discretion of the Department of Public Works. (496-8/46, 1491-4/69)

 

10.64.040 Markings Indicating Meter Space
The Department of Public Works shall have lines or markings painted upon the curbs, streets or area adjacent to each parking meter, designating the parking space for which the meter is to be used. (690-6/58, 1490-5/69, 1491-4/69)

 

10.64.050 Vehicle Position Within Lines
Each vehicle parked adjacent to any parking meter shall be parked within said lines or markings. (496-7/46)

 

10.64.060 Improper Parking
It is unlawful to park any vehicle across any such lines or markings, or to park a vehicle in such a position that it shall not be entirely within the space designated by such lines or markings. (496-7/46)

 

10.64.070 Proper Functioning
Each parking meter shall be so designed that the deposit of a coin or coins will set the mechanism of the meter in motion or permit the mechanism to be set in motion so that the meter will show the unexpired parking time applicable to the parking space adjacent to the meter; and the meter, when parking time has expired, shall so indicate by a visible sign. (496-8/46, 582-4/52)

 

10.64.080 Adjusting Meters
Parking meters when installed and properly operated shall be so adjusted to accept coins to show legal parking time. Rates will be determined by Council resolution. (496-7/46, 690-6/58, 1371-1/67, 3339-12/96)

 

10.64.090 Violation—Penalty
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be guilty of an infraction, and punishable by a fine not to exceed $100.00. (2276-5/78)

 

Chapter 10.68 METERS—USE
Note
*       Note: § 10.68.120 repealed by Ord. 2683-4/84; § 10.68.015 repealed by Ord. 4036-12/14.

 

10.68.010 Coin Deposit Required
No person shall park any vehicle in any parking space (except as otherwise permitted in this chapter) without immediately depositing in the parking meter adjacent, or centrally located, to said space such lawful coin or coins of the United States as are required by such meter and designated by directions on the meter, and when required by directions on the meter, setting in operation the timing mechanism thereof (if applicable), in accordance with said directions, unless the parking meter indicates at the time such vehicle is parked that an unexpired portion remains of the period for which a coin or coins have been previously deposited. (496-7/46, 582-4/52, 3660-9/04)

 

10.68.020 Overtime Parking—Business Zones
No person, except as otherwise provided in this chapter, shall cause, permit, allow or suffer any vehicle registered to or parked or operated by him or her to be or remain parked in any parking space in a parking meter zone, designated by resolution of the City Council as a business zone, during any time when the parking meter adjacent to such parking space indicates that no portion remains of the period of time for which a coin or coins have been deposited, beyond the time parking in such place is otherwise permitted or limited, or without paying the posted fee. (1500-5/69, 3660-9/04)

 

10.68.030 Overtime Parking—Residential Zones
No person, except as otherwise provided in this chapter, shall cause, permit, allow or suffer any vehicle registered to or parked or operated by him or her to be or remain parked in any parking space in a parking meter zone, designated by any resolution of the City Council as a residential zone, during any time when the parking meter adjacent to such parking space indicates that no portion remains of the period of time for which a coin or coins have been deposited, beyond the time parking in such place is otherwise permitted or limited, or without paying the posted fee. (1500-5/69, 3660-9/04)

 

10.68.040 Overtime Parking—Recreational Zones
No person, except as otherwise provided in this chapter, shall cause, permit, allow or suffer any vehicle registered to or parked or operated by him or her to be or remain parked in any parking space in a parking meter zone, designated by resolution of the City Council as a recreational zone, during any time when the parking meter adjacent to such parking space indicates that no portion remains of the period of time for which a coin or coins have been deposited, beyond the time parking in such place is otherwise permitted or limited, or without paying the posted fee. (1500-5/69, 3660-9/04)

 

10.68.050 Coin Deposit—Exception
A vehicle may be parked and remain parked in a parking meter space without the deposit of any coin in the parking meter adjacent thereto during hours other than those designated by resolution of the City Council as hours during which such deposits are required. (496-7/46, 582-4/52)

 

10.68.060 Slugs
It is unlawful to deposit or cause to be deposited in any parking meter any slug, device or metallic substitute for a one-cent or a five-cent or a 25-cent coin of the United States. (496-7/46)

 

10.68.070 Tampering With Meters
It is unlawful for any unauthorized person to open, or for any person to deface, injure, tamper with, or willfully break, destroy or impair the usefulness of any parking meter installed pursuant to this chapter, or to hitch any animals thereto. (496-7/46)

 

10.68.080 Parking Permits
Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code, there is established a system of permit parking subject to the following standards and provisions:

A.    A nontransferable parking permit shall be issued after payment of a fee, set by resolution of the City Council, to cover a calendar year. Such parking permit or decal, when affixed to the front windshield of a vehicle within a seven inch square in the lower corner farthest removed from the driver’s position, shall authorize the parking of said vehicle in posted or metered recreational parking areas in the City, as such recreational parking areas have been, or may be hereinafter, established by resolution of the City Council, without the deposit of coins in a parking meter adjacent to a metered parking space. Such parking permit shall not, however, establish any priority for a parking space.

B.     Parking permits or decals shall be issued for one vehicle only and shall not be transferable to any other person or vehicle except in those cases where the vehicle for which the permit has been issued has been disposed of and a substitute vehicle acquired. Such permit shall be transferable to such substitute vehicle upon presentation of the old permit together with a transfer fee of one dollar.

C.     The Director of Community Services shall establish the necessary procedure for the sale of annual parking permits. Such permits shall be appropriately designed and dated to indicate the appropriate year during which such permit is valid, and the area in which the owner of the permit is entitled to park. (1720-3/72, 2683-4/84)

 

10.68.090 Other Regulations Applicable
No provision of this chapter shall be construed as permitting any violation of any other parking regulation of this Code. (1720-3/72)

 

10.68.130 Hours
The hours of operation of said metered parking zones shall be from 5:00 a.m. to midnight daily. (2256-1/78, 3040-5/90)

 

10.68.140 Violation—Penalty
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be guilty of an infraction, and punishable by a fine not to exceed $100.00. (2276-5/78)

 

Chapter 10.72 DRIVING RULES
10.72.010 Driving Through Funeral Processions
No operator of any vehicle shall drive between the vehicles comprising a funeral procession or a parade, provided that such vehicles are conspicuously so designated. The directing of all vehicles and traffic on any street over which such funeral procession or parade wishes to pass shall be subject to the orders of the Police Department. (322-1/29, 1157-9/65)

 

10.72.020 Clinging to Moving Vehicle
No person shall attach him or herself with his or her hands, or catch on, or hold on with his or her hands or by other means, to any moving vehicle or train for the purpose of receiving motive power therefrom. (322-1/29, 1157-9/65)

 

10.72.030 Commercial Vehicles Using Private Driveways
A.    No person shall operate or drive a commercial vehicle in, on or across any private driveway approach or sidewalk area or the driveway itself without the consent of the owner or occupant of the property, if a sign or markings are in place indicating that the use of such driveway is prohibited.

B.     For the purpose of this section a commercial vehicle means a vehicle having a rated capacity in excess of one-half ton. (1157-9/65)

 

10.72.040 Riding or Driving on a Sidewalk
No person shall ride, drive, propel or cause to be propelled any vehicle or animal across or upon any sidewalk excepting over permanently constructed driveways and excepting when it is necessary for any temporary purpose to drive a loaded vehicle across a sidewalk; provided further, that the sidewalk area be substantially protected by wooden planks two inches thick, and written permission be previously obtained from the Director of Public Works. Such wooden planks shall not be permitted to remain upon such sidewalk area during the hours from 6:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m. (322-1/29, 1157-9/65)

 

10.72.050 New Pavement and Markings
No person shall ride or drive any animal or any vehicle over or across any newly made pavement or freshly painted markings in any street when a barrier sign, cone marker or other warning device is in place warning persons not to drive over or across such pavement or marking, or when any such device is in place indicating that the street or any portion thereof is closed. (1157-9/65)

 

10.72.060 Obedience to Barriers and Signs
No person, public utility or department in the City shall erect or place any barrier or sign on any street unless of a type approved by the Director of Public Works or disobey the instructions, remove, tamper with or destroy any barrier or sign lawfully placed on any street by any person, public utility or by any department of this City. (1157-9/65)

 

10.72.070 Obstructing Intersection Traffic
No operator of any vehicle shall enter any intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the vehicle he or she is operating without obstructing the passage of other vehicles, or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic control signal indication to proceed. (1157-9/65)

 

Chapter 10.76 TRAINS
10.76.010 Railway Gates
No person shall drive any vehicle through, around or under any crossing gate or barrier at a railroad grade crossing while such gate or barrier is closed or is being opened or closed. (1157-9/65)

 

10.76.020 Blocking Crossings
No person shall cause or permit any railway train or railway cars or similar vehicle on rails to stop or stand or to be operated in such a manner as to prevent the use of any street for the purpose of travel for a period of time longer than 10 minutes, except that this provision shall not apply to railway trains, cars or similar vehicles on rails while blocking or obstructing a crossing because of an accident which requires the operator of the train, car or similar vehicle on rails to stop at or near the scene of the accident. (1157-9/65)

 

Chapter 10.80 PEDESTRIAN CROSSWALKS
10.80.010 Crosswalks—Established
The Director of Public Works shall establish, designate and maintain crosswalks at intersections and other places by appropriate devices, marks or lines upon the surface of the roadway as follows:

A.    Crosswalks shall be established and maintained at all intersections within the central traffic district and at such intersections outside such district, and at other places within or outside said district where the Director of Public Works determines that there is particular hazard to pedestrians crossing the roadway subject to the limitation contained in subsection B of this section.

B.     Other than crosswalks at the intersections, no crosswalk shall be established in any block which is less than 400 feet in length and such crosswalk shall be located as nearly as practicable at mid block.

C.     The Director of Public Works may place signs at or adjacent to an intersection in respect to any crosswalk directing that pedestrians shall not cross in the crosswalk so indicated.

D.    The Director of Public Works may place signs adjacent to a roadway, due to traffic hazard, which will prohibit pedestrians from crossing at other than crosswalks. (322-1/29, 1211-7/66)

 

10.80.020 When Use Required
No pedestrians shall cross a roadway other than at a crosswalk in the central traffic district or in any business district. No pedestrian shall cross a roadway other than at a crosswalk when there are official signs posted prohibiting such a movement. (322-1/29, 1211-7/66)

 

Chapter 10.84 BICYCLE REGULATIONS
Note
*       Note: §§ 10.84.010—10.84.020, 10.84.030—10.84.060, 10.84.090—10.84.110, 10.84.140 and 10.84.150 repealed by Ord. 3602-5/03; §§ 10.84.025 and 10.84.070 repealed by Ord. 2148-1/77; §§ 10.84.190 and 10.84.240 repealed by Ord. 2175-3/77.

 

10.84.005 Definitions
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases are defined as follows:

“Bicycle” is a device upon which any person may ride, propelled exclusively by human power through a system of belts, chains, or gears, and having either two or three wheels in a tandem or tricycle arrangement.

“Bicycle lane” is that portion of a roadway, other than state and county highways, set aside by striping for the use of bicycle riders and so designated, as provided in this chapter.

“Bicycle path” is a pathway for bicycle riders that has been physically separated from a roadway.

“Highway” is a way or place of whatever nature, maintained and open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. “Highway” includes street.

“Motorized scooter” shall have the same definition as that of California Vehicle Code Section 407.5(a).

“Police Chief” shall include his or her designated representative.

“Roadway” is that portion of a highway improved, designed, or ordinarily used for vehicular travel. (1913-5/74, 1969-4/75, 2059-6/76, 2148-1/77, 2175-4/77, 3458-5/00)

 

10.84.080 Dealer’s Records
Every person engaged in the business of buying, trading, or selling bicycles in this City shall keep at his or her place of business a record of all bicycles, bought, sold or rented by him or her, giving the date of such transaction, the name and address of the person from whom purchased or traded, or to whom sold or rented, a description of such bicycle by name and make, and the frame or serial number. Such record shall be maintained in a plain, legible handwriting in a bound book, which record shall be available for inspection by members of the Police Department at all reasonable times. Such person shall make a written report to the Police Department, giving the name, address and telephone number of all persons buying, selling or trading bicycles at his or her place of business, and the bicycle manufacturer, type, and frame number. (432-1/40, 1784-12/72, 1969-4/75, 3602-5/03)

 

10.84.120 Impounding—Parked Bicycles
No person shall park or leave a bicycle in the area between Pacific Coast Highway and the mean high tide line of the Pacific Ocean in a manner so as to block or impede any road, vehicle route, walkway or path, or so as to block or impede ingress or egress from any building, stair, pier or bridge. No person shall leave a bicycle locked or unlocked in any public place in excess of 72 hours, or left abandoned as evidenced by signs of disuse or neglect. Any bicycle so parked or left abandoned may be impounded by the Community Services Department or by the Police Department, and may be held until the sum of five dollars has been collected to defray the cost of impound. (1784-12/72, 1913-5/74, 4083-4/16)

 

10.84.130 Impounding—Holding Time Period
Any bicycle which has been so impounded and held for three months without redemption by or on behalf of the lawful owner thereof shall, if saleable, be sold at such time and place and in such manner for the reasonable value thereof, as provided by this Code. (1784-12/72, 1913-5/74, 3602-5/03)

 

10.84.160 Riding on Sidewalk
No person shall ride a bicycle upon a sidewalk within any business district, or upon the sidewalk adjacent to any public school building, church, recreation center, playground or over any pedestrian overcrossing, or within any crosswalk. (22-8/09, 322-1/29, 1784-12/72, 1913-5/74, 2270-3/78)

 

10.84.170 Yielding Right-of-Way
Whenever any person is riding a bicycle upon a sidewalk, such person shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian, and when overtaking and passing a pedestrian shall give an audible signal. A person riding a bicycle off a sidewalk and onto a roadway shall yield to all traffic on the roadway. (22-8/09, 1784-12/72, 1913-5/74)

 

10.84.180 Riding in Group
Persons operating bicycles on a bicycle lane or path shall not ride more than two abreast. (1784-12/72, 1913-5/74)

 

10.84.200 Bicycles on Pier
No person shall ride a bicycle or any similar type vehicle on the municipal pier. Bicycles or similar type vehicles may be walked or pushed on the pier. (344-10/31, 554-12/49, 1784-12/72, 1913-5/74, 3185-5/93)

 

10.84.210 Bicycle Lanes and Paths Established
The City Council establishes those bicycle lanes and paths as designated on the Preliminary Plan; Trails Element to the Master Plan of the City of Huntington Beach, and as such Preliminary Plan; Trails Element to the Master Plan may be amended hereafter from time to time. (1784-12/72, 1913-5/74)

 

10.84.220 Implementing Establishment of Bicycle Lanes and Paths
The City Manager is authorized, empowered and directed to implement the establishment of the bicycle lanes and paths, as designated on the Preliminary Plan; Trails Element to the Master Plan of the City of Huntington Beach, and as such Preliminary Plan; Trails Element to the Master Plan may be amended hereafter from time to time. (1913-5/74)

 

10.84.230 Bicycle Lanes—Markings and Erection of Signs
A.    The Traffic Engineer is authorized to erect or place signs upon any street or adjacent to any street in the City indicating the existence of a bicycle lane or path, and otherwise regulating the operation and use of vehicles and bicycles with respect thereto. When such signs are in place, no person shall disobey same.

B.     The bicycle lane shall be designated on such street by a six-inch wide reflectorized white line. (1913-5/74, 2175-4/77)

 

10.84.250 Direction of Travel
No person shall ride or operate a bicycle within a bicycle lane or path in any direction except that permitted vehicular traffic traveling on the same side of the roadway; provided that bicycles may proceed either way along a lane or path where arrows appear on the surface of the lane designating two-way traffic. (1913-5/74)

 

10.84.260 Walking Bicycles
Bicycles may be walked subject to all provisions of law applicable to pedestrians. (1913-5/74)

 

10.84.270 Vehicular Traffic in Bicycle Lanes or Paths
No person shall park a motor vehicle across or on a bicycle path or lane except to obtain emergency parking where signs are posted prohibiting such parking. No person shall drive a motor vehicle across a bicycle lane except after giving the right-of-way to all bicycles operated within the lane. No motor vehicle, motorized bicycle, motor-driven cycle, or motorcycle may be operated on a bicycle path or sidewalk. (1913-5/74, 2059-6/76, 2148-1/77, 2175-3/77)

 

10.84.275 Motorized Scooter
For the purpose of this chapter, a motorized scooter shall be subject to each and every section that applies to bicycles. (3458-5/00)

 

10.84.280 Penalty
It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to violate or knowingly to permit any other person to violate any of the provisions contained in Sections 10.84.160 through 10.84.270 of this chapter, and any person violating any of the provisions contained in such sections shall be guilty of an infraction and punished upon a first conviction by a fine not exceeding $50.00 and for a second or any subsequent conviction within a period of one year, by a fine not exceeding $100.00. (1913-5/74, 2059-6/76, 2148-1/77)

Title 11 RESERVED

Title 12 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Note
*       Note: Ch. 12.12 repealed by Ord. 3582-11/02 and Ch. 12.48 repealed by Ord. 3782-10/07.

 

Chapter 12.04 DATUM PLANE
12.04.010 Established
The datum plane of this City from which to measure and calculate the elevation for grades of the avenues and streets of this City, and for other purposes, shall be referenced to the latest adjustment of the Orange County Surveyors Vertical Control Network, as published by the Orange County Surveyors Geodetic Unit and clearly represented upon the face of the document prepared by the engineer or land surveyor in which said grades and/or calculations are applicable. (33-12/09, 2022-1/76, 3629-2/04)

 

12.04.020 Benchmark
The official benchmark of this City shall be any benchmark referenced in the latest version of the Orange County Surveyors Vertical Control Network published by the County of Orange, Environmental Management Agency, Public Works Survey Division and shall be referenced on the document prepared by the engineer or land surveyor in which said grades and/or calculations are applicable. A copy of the official benchmark shall be made available upon request. (33-12/09, 2022-1/76, 3629-2/04)

 

Chapter 12.08 HOUSE NUMBERS
12.08.010 Prescribed
All entrances from the public streets or highways of this City to buildings shall be numbered as hereinafter provided and not otherwise. (82-9/11)

 

12.08.020 Location of Numbers
The number of each and every entrance shall be placed upon or immediately above the door or gate closing such entrance. (82-9/11)

 

12.08.030 Size of Numerals
Each figure of said numbers shall be at least two inches in height and of corresponding width. (82-9/11)

 

12.08.040 Designation of Numbers
It shall be the duty of the Department of Community Development to designate the respective numbers for buildings in this City, on request. (82-9/11, 2022-1/76)

 

12.08.050 Determination of Number
The location of the doorway of the building shall determine the number to be used. (82-9/11)

 

12.08.060 Numbers West of Railway
In all parts of the City lying west of the right-of-way of the Southern Pacific Railway Company, buildings shall be numbered as follows:

A.    Even numbers shall be used on the northeast side of avenues and on the southeast side of streets.

B.     Odd numbers shall be used on the southwest side of avenues and on the northwest side of streets. (82-9/11, 124-5/14)

 

12.08.070 Numbers East of Railway
In all parts of the City lying east of the right-of-way of the Southern Pacific Railway Company, buildings shall be numbered as follows:

A.    Even numbers shall be used on the east side of avenues and on the south side of streets.

B.     Odd numbers shall be used on the west side of avenues and on the north side of streets. (82-9/11, 124-5/14)

 

12.08.080 Initial Even Numbers
The even numbers in each block shall begin with a number having two for its unit number and having zero for its ten part. (82-9/11, 124-5/14)

 

12.08.090 Initial Odd Numbers
The odd numbers in each block shall begin with a number having one for its unit number and having zero for its ten part. (82-9/11, 124-5/14)

 

12.08.100 Progression West of Railway
In all parts of the City lying west of the right-of-way of the Southern Pacific Railway Company, numbers shall increase from the southeast toward the northwest on avenues and from the southwest toward the northeast on streets. (82-9/11, 124-5/14)

 

12.08.110 Progression East of Railway
In all parts of the City lying east of the right-of-way of the Southern Pacific Railway Company, numbers shall increase from south toward the north and from west toward the east. (82-9/11, 124-5/14)

 

12.08.120 Ratio of Numbers to Frontage
In all parts of the City, one number shall be allotted to each lot having a frontage of not more than 40 feet. (82-9/11, 124-5/14)

 

12.08.130 Wide Lots
In each lot or parcel of land having a frontage of more than 40 feet, one number shall be allotted to each 25 feet or fraction thereof of such lot or block. (82-9/11, 124-5/14)

 

12.08.140 Determination of Hundreds—East of Railway
The hundred part of each number shall be determined on the east side of the right-of-way of the Southern Pacific Railroad Company as follows:

A.    Avenues and boulevards shall be numbered in hundreds according to the hundred number of the respective block numbers at any designated point.

B.     Streets shall be numbered in hundreds according to the tens and units part of the respective block numbers at any designated point. (82-9/11)

 

12.08.150 Determination of Hundreds—West of Railway
The hundred part of each number shall be determined on the west side of the right-of-way of the Southern Pacific Railroad Company as follows:

A.    Avenues shall be numbered in hundreds according to the tens and units number of the respective block numbers at any designated points.

B.     Streets shall be numbered in hundreds according to the hundreds part of the respective block numbers at any designated point. (82-9/11)

 

12.08.160 Irregular Numbers
In any case not provided for in this chapter, the City engineer shall designate the number to be used. (82-9/11)

 

12.08.170 Violation—Misdemeanor
Any person who shall not obtain from the City engineer the number for any building in this City he or she may own or occupy and place said number as required by this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor. (82-9/11, 124-5/14)

 

Chapter 12.10 STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS FOR PUBLIC WORKS CONSTRUCTION
12.10.010 Adoption of Standards
There is hereby adopted by the City Council certain standard specifications known as the Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction, as most recently published by Building News (“latest edition”) and the whole thereof, including all supplements and amendments, of which standard specifications not less than one copy of the latest edition has been and is now on file in the Office of the City Clerk of the City of Huntington Beach. Such standard specifications are hereby adopted and incorporated pursuant to Government Code Sections 50022.2 et seq. for the purpose of providing just, equitable, objective and practicable standard specifications whereby administrative procedures, construction materials, construction methods and requirements shall be established for all public works construction, and from the date on which this section takes effect, the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the corporate limits of the City of Huntington Beach. (2684-4/84, 2813-2/86, 3122-10/91, 3513-11/01)

 

12.10.020 Administration
The Director of Public Works, or his or her duly appointed representative, is hereby authorized and directed to enforce the standard specifications as herein adopted or as may be amended hereafter from time to time. (2684-4/84)

 

12.10.030 Application
The provisions of the standard specifications, together with adopted standard plans of the Department of Public Works, adopted by resolution of the City Council, shall apply to all existing or new public works construction. Such standard specifications shall also apply whenever there exists, in the opinion of the Director of Public Works, any condition which constitutes an active or immediate hazard to life, limb, health, property, safety or the general welfare of the public. (2684-4/84)

 

Chapter 12.13 STREET WORK GENERALLY
12.13.005 Purpose
The public rights-of-way are unique public resources held in trust by the City for the benefit of the public. Pursuant to the City Charter and applicable state and federal law, the City is empowered to control access to and use of its public rights-of-way, and unless pre-empted by state or federal law, to obtain reasonable and fair compensation for the use of its public rights-of-way. The purpose and intent of this chapter is to provide a uniform and comprehensive set of standards and regulations for use of the public right-of-way. These regulations are intended to protect the public health, safety and welfare that permit the installation of utilities and communication facilities in the public right-of-way in such a manner and at such points so as not to incommode the public use of the public’s right-of-way. (3780-10/07)

 

12.13.010 Definitions
“Applicant” shall mean any owner or duly authorized agent of such owner, who has submitted an application for a permit to excavate.

“City” shall mean the City of Huntington Beach.

“Department” shall mean the Department of Public Works.

“Director” shall mean the Director of the Department of Public Works or his or her designee, and shall include the term “Superintendent of Streets.”

“Excavation” shall mean any opening in the surface or subsurface of the public right-of-way.

“Facility” or “facilities” shall mean any and all cables, wires, cabinets, ducts, conduits, converters, equipment, drains, handholds, manholes, pipes, pipelines, splice boxes, surface location markers, tunnels, utilities, vaults, and other appurtenances or tangible things owned, leased, operated, or licensed by an owner or person, that are located or are proposed to be located in the public right-of-way.

“Franchise” granted by the City of Huntington Beach or the State of California is a contract granting special privileges to use the public right-of-way. It is not intended that this chapter of the Municipal Code impose additional rules or regulations which are inconsistent with the rights or obligations under the franchise or confer authority to the City that conflicts with the State’s Public Utilities Code or the jurisdiction of the California Public Utilities Commission.

“Owner” is defined as that person who is responsible for the project.

“Permit” or “permit to excavate” shall mean an encroachment permit to perform a project as it has been approved or may be amended or renewed by the department.

“Permittee” shall mean the applicant to whom a permit has been granted by the department in accordance with this chapter.

“Person” shall mean any natural person, owner, corporation, partnership, public utility franchise, or any governmental agency, including any agency other than the City of Huntington Beach, department, the State of California, or United States of America.

“Project” for purposes of this chapter shall mean any activity permitted under this chapter, including but not limited to excavation, construction, demolition, obstruction of right-of-way, repair and building.

“Public right-of-way” shall mean the area across, along, beneath, in, on, over, under, upon, and within the dedicated public alleys, boulevards, courts, lanes, places, roads, sidewalks, streets, ways and City-owned properties within the City, as they now exist or hereafter will exist and which are or will be under the permitting jurisdiction of the Department of Public Works. (3582-11/02, 3780-10/07)

 

12.13.020 Erecting Utility Structures—Authority
A.    It is unlawful for any person, without a City franchise and/or City encroachment permit, or other authority from the director, to erect any telegraph, telephone, electric light or, transmission poles, or facilities on or in any walk, street, alley or public place in this City, or to stretch any wires or cables along or across said streets; or to lay any gas, oil or water pipes, or other pipelines along or across any streets in the City.

B.     As of March 17, 2007, the California Supreme Court, in the case entitled Sprint Technology PCS v. County of San Diego, will determine whether California Public Utilities Code Section 7901 grants a state-wide franchise to use the public rights-of-way for the purpose of installation of wireless communication facilities. Pending resolution of this legal question, any applicant seeking to use the public right-of-way must enter into a City franchise to install wireless communication facilities. The franchise shall provide that the franchise fee payments shall be refunded to the applicant and the franchise become null and void if and when the California Supreme Court establishes that the provider has a state-wide franchise to install a wireless communication facility in the public right-of-way. (3582-11/02, 3780-10/07)

 

12.13.030 Emergency Situations
Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to prevent any person from taking any action necessary for the preservation of life or property when such necessity arises during days or times when the department is closed. In the event that any person undertakes any project, as defined herein, in the public right-of-way made necessary by an immediate threat to health, safety, life or property, such person shall apply for an emergency permit within four hours after the department’s offices are first opened. The applicant for an emergency permit shall submit a written statement of the basis of the emergency action and describe the work performed. (3582-11/02, 3780-10/07)

 

12.13.035 Underground Facilities
All facilities constructed within the public right-of-way shall be undergrounded except for antennae and those exempt from undergrounding pursuant to Section 17.64.050. (3780-10/07)

 

12.13.040 Obstructing or Construction Within Public Way—Permit Required
It is unlawful for any person to construct, repair, use, or obstruct any street, alley, sidewalk or public property within this City by placing thereon or therein any utility, building, stand, counter, fence, lunch wagon, storage container, bandstand, structure, building material or tools, gravel, dirt, excavation or obstruction of any kind whatsoever or performing any demolition, without a permit having first been issued therefor as hereinafter provided. (3582-11/02)

 

12.13.050 Duration and Validity
A.    Permits shall be void if the project, including restoration, has not been completed within 60 days; provided, however, that the director, in his or her discretion for good cause shown, may issue one 30-day extension to the start date and one 30-day extension to the duration of a permit upon written request from the permittee and payment of any applicable fees. The director may issue additional extensions as may be deemed appropriate in his or her discretion.

B.     Permits are not transferable without proof of current business license issued by the City of Huntington Beach for the assignee and any subcontractors who will be providing service under the permit and evidence of insurance as specified by resolution of the City Council, and the written consent of the permittee and the director. (3582-11/02, 3780-10/07)

 

12.13.060 Penalty for Exceeding Time Restrictions
A penalty shall be imposed upon any person who does not complete work requiring road or lane closures within the established time frame. The penalty shall be in an amount set by resolution of the City Council and shall be based upon estimated costs to the traveling public due to delays and additional travel distance around roadway closures. (3582-11/02)

 

12.13.070 Permit—Fees
The director shall not issue any permit except upon the payment of plan check, inspection and permit fees, set by resolution of the City Council. The State of California and the County of Orange, including entities such as special districts organized under state law, are fee exempt. At the discretion of the director, and upon proven City history of prompt payment and company fiscal integrity, the director may request and make arrangements for alternative methods of collecting payment such as monthly billings. (3582-11/02)

 

12.13.080 Required Information for Permit
Before any project mentioned in this chapter may be commenced, the person doing such work must provide the following information:

A.    Applications for permits shall be submitted in the format and manner specified by the director and shall contain:

1.     The name, address, telephone, and facsimile number of the applicant. Where an applicant is not the owner of the facility to be installed or maintained in the public right-of-way, the application also shall include the name, address, telephone, and facsimile number of the owner. If the application is submitted by an authorized agent of the applicant or owner, written authorization from the applicant or owner of facility shall be provided.

2.     A description of the location, purpose or use, method of construction, and surface and subsurface area of any proposed project.

3.     Engineering plans, specifications and a network map of the facilities to be located within the public right-of-way, including a map in electronic and/or other form required by the City. The plans and specifications shall show:

a.     The location of all existing and proposed facilities in the public right-of-way along proposed route including the type and location of existing and proposed pedestals and other above-ground facilities.

b.     Facility Information. Photographs or artist renderings of all proposed facilities for the work area as well as their locations, dimensions, and color. Any modifications to plans and specifications must be reviewed and approved by the director before modifications can be implemented by applicant. In addition, applicant shall provide the director with engineering base maps identifying applicant’s existing underground and aerial utility facilities, poles, trench routes, and locations for above-ground equipment in the work area in both electronic form (digital or otherwise as specified by the director) to the extent available and hard-copy form.

c.     Hours of Construction. All construction shall be accomplished and maintained between the hours specified by the director. Construction shall not interfere with the existing or known future services of the City or private or public third parties.

d.     Telephone Contact. Applicant shall provide the director with a telephone contact number, answered 24 hours a day during the construction period, to enable the director to report any concerns regarding construction of the facilities. After business hours such calls will be routed to an on-call supervisor. In the event that the director reports any concerns to applicant, applicant shall respond in a timely manner. Applicant shall immediately correct any adverse impact to the City’s use or operations or the use or operations of a third party caused by applicant’s construction activities in the public right-of-way at no cost to the City. Safety violations will be cause for immediate project shut-down.

e.     The specific trees, structures, improvements, facilities and obstructions, if any, that applicant proposes to temporarily or permanently remove or relocate.

4.     Information regarding any excess capacity that will exist in such ducts or conduits after installation of applicant’s facilities.

5.     A traffic control plan in accordance with such guidelines established by the City.

6.     The proposed start date of project.

7.     The proposed duration of the project, which shall include the duration of restoration of the public right-of-way physically disturbed by the project.

8.     A current business license issued by the City of Huntington Beach for the applicant and any subcontractors who will be providing services under the permit.

9.     Evidence of insurance for the applicant and owner as specified by resolution of the City Council.

10.   Companies may also be required by the director to provide reasonable advance notice to the public via a public notification plan of the proposed quantity, precise dimensions, design, color, type, potential noise and location of above-ground facilities pursuant to guidelines promulgated by the director. The plan is subject to the prior approval of the director. The guidelines shall take into account the area covered and impacts of the above-ground facilities.

11.   Certifications. Upon request, applicant shall provide copies of certifications, licenses, permits, franchises or other applicable approvals to construct and operate the facilities and to offer or provide the services. Applicant shall also provide a certification that the applicant will comply with all applicable local state and federal requirements in the installation, operation, maintenance, or removal of its facilities.

12.   Any other information that may reasonably be required by the department.

B.     Action on Applications for Permits as Provided in This Chapter.

1.     After receipt of an application for a permit, the department shall determine whether an application is complete. If the application is deemed to be incomplete, the department shall advise the applicant in writing of the reasons for rejecting the application as incomplete.

2.     If the application is deemed to be complete, the department, in its discretion, shall deny, approve, or conditionally approve the application. In order to preserve and maintain the public health, safety, welfare, and convenience, the department may condition a permit with specified requirements including, but not limited to, those that limit or modify the facilities to be installed or maintained, the location of the facilities to be installed or maintained, and the time, place, and manner of work to be performed.

3.     If the application is denied, the department shall advise the applicant in writing of the basis for denial.

4.     If the application is approved or conditionally approved, the department shall issue a permit to the applicant.

5.     It is unlawful for any permittee to make, to cause, or permit to be made, any project in the public right-of-way outside the boundaries, times, and description set forth in the permit. (3582-11/02, 3780-10/07)

 

12.13.090 Permit Denial
The determination to grant or deny a permit shall be based upon the criteria set forth in this section. The director shall consider the following:

A.    The capacity of the public right-of-way to accommodate applicant’s proposed facilities and facilities known to be needed in the future.

B.     The capacity of the public right-of-way to accommodate known additional facilities if the permit is granted.

C.     The damage or disruption, if any, to the public right-of-way or any public or private facilities, improvements, aesthetics, services, pedestrian or vehicle travel or landscaping if the permit is granted.

D.    Visibility or sight distance impacts to other users of the public right-of-way.

E.     The proposed facilities impact the design and construction of public streets, as well as intersections between City streets and roadways to ensure, to the maximum extent feasible, that streets and intersections are designed and constructed in a manner that will not adversely impact the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the City of Huntington Beach and others. (3780-10/07)

 

12.13.091 Construction Work—Permit Denial—Appeal in General
In the event the director refuses for any reason to issue a permit, the applicant may petition the Public Works Commission, in writing, for a hearing to consider said request. Any decision of the commission, including but not limited to decisions to grant or deny permits, is appealable to the City Council who will consider the application de novo. (3582-11/02, 3780-10/07)

 

12.13.100 Orders, Regulations, and Rules of City Departments
All work in the public right-of-way pursuant to this chapter shall be performed in accordance with the standard plans and specifications of the department, the design manual, and any department orders, regulations, or rules, except where the director grants, for good cause shown, prior written approval to deviate from such standard plans and specifications, the design manual, orders, regulations, or rules. (3582-11/02, 3780-10/07)

 

12.13.110 Construction Work—Licensed Contractor Required
No construction work of any kind shall be done or performed upon any public right-of-way, in the City unless done according to City orders, regulations, rules of standard plans and by a contractor licensed by the State of California to perform that class of work. (3582-11/02)

 

12.13.120 Street Excavation Moratorium—No Permit Shall Be Issued
In order to preserve the ride quality, structural integrity and appearance of newly constructed or renovated streets, permission to excavate in newly constructed or renovated streets will not be granted for three years after completion of street renovation as shown by the filing of a Notice of Completion. Applicants shall determine alternate methods of installing utilities or making necessary repairs to avoid excavating in newly renovated streets. Exceptions to the above are as follows:

A.    Emergency which endangers life or property.

B.     Interruption of essential utility service.

C.     Work that is mandated by legislation applicable to the City or person performing the excavation or ordered by any court or governmental entity with jurisdiction over the City of Huntington Beach.

D.    Service lateral for buildings or facility where the applicant has no other means of providing service exists.

E.     Other situations deemed by the City’s Public Works Commission to be in the best interest of the general public.

All permits which are issued under subsections A through E of this section shall be in accordance with the specified enhanced standards, details and specifications established by and on file in the department, unless otherwise approved by the director. (3582-11/02, 3780-10/07)

 

12.13.130 Underground Service Alert
Any person excavating in the public right-of-way shall comply with the requirements of the underground service alert regarding notification of excavation and marking of subsurface facilities. It shall be the responsibility of applicant to mark its facilities with search wire if possible and to locate and mark or otherwise visibly indicate and alert others to the location of its underground facilities before employees, agents, of independent contractors of any entity perform work in the marked-off area. Applicant shall participate in and adhere to the practices of Underground Services Alert (“USA”) or its successor notification system and provide at least 48 hours prior notice to USA prior to any excavation. (3582-11/02, 3780-10/07)

 

12.13.140 Stop Work Order, Permit Modification, and Permit Revocation
When the director has determined a person has violated this chapter, or any condition of the permit, or that an excavation poses a hazardous situation or constitutes a public nuisance, public emergency, or other threat to the public health, safety, or welfare, or when the director determines there is a paramount public purpose, the director is authorized to issue a stop work order, to impose new conditions upon a permit, or to suspend or revoke a permit by notifying the permittee of such action in writing. (3582-11/02)

 

12.13.150 Restoration
A.    Like New Restoration. For all projects for which any permit under this chapter has been issued, the permittee shall restore or cause to be restored any area upon which work has been performed to like new condition. Such restoration shall be done in the manner prescribed by the standard plans and specifications, the design manual, orders, regulations, and rules of the department.

B.     Modification to Requirements. Upon written request from the permittee, the director, in his or her discretion and for good cause shown, may approve in writing modifications to the requirements of this section. (3582-11/02, 3780-10/07)

 

12.13.160 Repair by the Department
A.    In the event any person(s) fails, neglects, or refuses to repair or restore any condition pursuant to the director’s notice as set forth in this chapter, the director shall repair or restore, or cause to be repaired or restored, such condition in such manner as the director deems expedient and appropriate. The person(s) identified by the director as the responsible party shall compensate the department for any costs associated with the administration, construction, consultants, equipment, inspection, notification, remediation, repair, restoration, or any other actual costs incurred by the department or other departments or agencies of the City made necessary by reason of the repair or restoration undertaken by the department.

B.     Repair or restoration by the department in accordance with this chapter shall not relieve the person(s) from any and all liability at the site of the repair or restoration, including, but not limited to, future failures for any portions of work completed by permittee. (3582-11/02, 3780-10/07)

 

12.13.170 Emergency Remediation by the Department
A.    If, in the judgment of the director, the site of an excavation is considered hazardous, constitutes a public nuisance, public emergency, or other imminent threat to the public health, safety, or welfare that requires immediate action, the director shall order the condition remedied by written, oral, telephonic or facsimile communication to the owner, applicant, or any agent thereof and shall designate the owner or applicant as the responsible party.

B.     If the responsible party is inaccessible or fails, neglects, or refuses to take immediate action to remedy the condition as specified in said communication, the director shall remedy the condition or cause the condition to be remedied in such manner as the director deems expedient and appropriate. The person(s) identified by the director as the responsible party shall compensate the department for any reasonable costs associated with the administration, construction, consultants, equipment, inspection, notification, remediation, repair, restoration, or any other actual costs incurred by the department or other departments or agencies of the City made necessary by reason of the emergency remediation undertaken by the department. (3582-11/02, 3780-10/07)

 

12.13.180 Suspension of Applications and Permits
No person subject to any outstanding violation of this chapter shall apply for nor be issued any permit hereunder. (3582-11/02)

 

12.13.190 Identification of Visible Facilities
All facilities installed pursuant to a permit that are visible from the surface of the public right-of-way shall be clearly identified with the name of the current owner of the facilities. Upon demand of the director, within six months of change in ownership of a facility(ies), the identification required by this section shall indicate the new owner. (3582-11/02)

 

12.13.200 City Repaving Plan
The Director of Public Works shall prepare a two year repaving plan showing the street surfacing planned by the City for the next two years. The two year repaving plan will be made available to utilities at all times to assist them. (3582-11/02)

 

12.13.210 Coordination With City
A.    Prior to designing facilities and applying for an excavation permit in the City’s public rights-of-way, applicants shall review other utilities’ master plans and the City’s two year repaving plan on file with the director. The applicant shall coordinate, to the extent practicable, with other planned utility and street work shown on such plans to minimize damage to, and avoid undue disruption and interference with the public use of such public rights-of-way.

B.     To avoid future excavations and to reduce the number of street excavations, telecommunication companies shall be requested, when practical, to install spare conduits.

C.     Permit Available On-Site. The permit or a photo duplicate shall be available for review at the site of the excavation for the duration of the excavation and shall be shown, upon request, to any police officer or any employee of a City agency, board, commission, or department with jurisdictional responsibility over activities in the public right-of-way. (3582-11/02, 3780-10/07)

 

12.13.220 Blanket Permits
The director may issue a blanket permit to an applicant to make excavations for utility service connections, for the location of trouble in utility conduits or pipes and for making repairs thereto, or for emergency purposes. Blanket permits shall be issued on a yearly basis only, and shall authorize only excavations referred to in this section and shall comply with all requirements of this chapter not inconsistent with this section and all fees set by resolution of the City Council shall be paid. (3780-10/07)

 

12.13.230 Construction Status Report
A.    During construction, applicant shall, at the request of the director, submit to the director regular progress reports describing in detail the status of construction in relation to the plans and specifications. The first report shall be submitted within seven days after commencement of construction and shall be updated every seven days thereafter, as may be required by the permit. Work plans shall be provided in advance to the director for review and approval.

B.     Notification. Applicant shall provide written notification to the director of any construction and/or maintenance activities undertaken in public right-of-way, whether undertaken pursuant to permit or otherwise, within five business days of commencement of such activities unless the activities have been previously reported to the director. (3780-10/07)

 

12.13.240 Conditions of Use of Public Right-of-Way
A.    All facilities of applicant shall be so located, constructed, installed and maintained so as not to endanger, interfere with or limit the usual and customary use and/or traffic and travel upon the public right-of-way as well as adjacent private property pursuant to a traffic control plan to be approved by the director.

B.     In the event applicant creates a hazardous or unsafe condition or an unreasonable interference with property, such applicant shall remove or modify that part of the facility to eliminate such condition from the subject property.

C.     Applicant shall not place equipment where it will interfere with existing and known future City uses of the public right-of-way, with the rights of private property owners as determined by the director, with gas, electric, cable, telephone fixtures, water, sewer and storm drain lines and appurtenances, fire hydrants, traffic signal facilities, street light facilities, or any wastewater stations, with any traffic control system, or any other City facility.

D.    Applicant, at its own expense and pursuant to a timeline approved by the director, shall protect the public right-of-way and support or temporarily disconnect or relocate any of applicant’s facilities when necessitated by reason of:

1.     Traffic conditions;

2.     Public safety;

3.     Temporary or permanent street closure not for the benefit of a private party;

4.     Street construction or resurfacing;

5.     A change or establishment of street grade; and

6.     Installation of sewers, water and storm drain lines and appurtenances, lift stations, street light facilities, traffic signal facilities, tracks, or any other public use of the right-of-way. (3780-10/07)

 

12.13.250 Excavations
A.    Applicability. Each excavation in the public right-of-way pursuant to this chapter shall be performed in accordance with this chapter and with the standard plans and specifications of the department and any department orders, regulations or rules, except where the director, at his or her discretion, grants prior written approval to deviate from the standard plans and specifications, orders, or regulations. The director shall develop guidelines to implement the granting of waivers authorized pursuant to this chapter.

B.     Notices. The director may require reasonable notice from applicant if applicant excavates or causes an excavation in the public right-of-way in a manner that, due to duration or location of the excavation, has the potential to disrupt traffic flow or adjacent properties. All notices are subject to the prior review of the director and shall include:

1.     Post and Maintain Notice at the Site of the Excavation. The notice shall include the name, telephone number, and address of applicant, a description of the excavation to be performed and the duration of the excavation. The notice shall be posted along any street where the excavation is to take place at least 72 hours prior to commencement of the excavation.

2.     At least 10 calendar days prior to commencement of the excavation, applicant shall provide written notice delivered by United States mail to each property owner on the street affected by the excavation and each affected neighborhood and merchant organization that is listed in the latest Assessor’s roll for names and addresses of property owners shall be used for the mailed notice. This notice shall include the same information that is required for the posted notice pursuant to this subsection (B)(1) and the name, address, and 24-hour telephone number of a person who will be available to provide information to and receive complaints from any member of the public concerning the excavation.

3.     At least 10 calendar days prior to commencement of the excavation, applicant shall also deliver a written notice to each dwelling unit on the block(s) affected by the excavation. This written notice shall include the same information that is required for the written notice pursuant to subsection (B)(2) of this section.

C.     Notice for Emergency Excavation. For emergency excavation, applicant shall post and maintain notice at the site of the excavation during the construction period. The notice shall include the name, telephone number, and address of applicant, a description of the excavation to be performed, and the duration of the excavation. The notice shall be posted along any street where the excavation is to take place.

D.    Marking of Subsurface Facilities. If applicant excavates in the public right-of-way, it shall comply with the requirements of the underground service location regarding notification of excavation and marking of subsurface facilities. Applicant shall provide underground service location with the assigned number of the permit to excavate or other information as may be necessary to properly identify the proposed excavation. (3780-10/07)

 

Chapter 12.16 REPAVING STREETS
12.16.010 Payment to Replace Surface
A.    Each person, firm, or corporation having authority from the Council to cut, remove, excavate in, upon or along any pavement or improved street, alley, sidewalk, curb or other public place in this City and/or to cut, remove or excavate in, upon or along any unimproved dirt or oiled street, lane or alley or other unimproved public place in the City shall, upon and at the time of making application to the Director of Public Works for permit so to cut in, upon, across or along, or remove, excavate or obstruct any such paved or improved street, curb, sidewalk, alley or other improved public place, pay in lawful money of the United States to this City a sum for each and every square foot and fraction thereof of all such paving, street, curb, sidewalk, alley or other improved public place and/or for each square foot of any unimproved dirt or oiled street, lane, alley or other unimproved public place proposed to be cut or removed as contained in the statement thereof set forth in said application, for the purpose of repairing the damage to said paving, curb, sidewalk or other public places, as herein provided.

B.     Said sum of money shall be calculated according to a schedule set by resolution of the City Council. (19-7/09, 577-2/52, 1903-4/74, 2308-10/78, 2442-8/80)

 

12.16.040 Deposit Fee—Persons Who Conform
The above schedule shall apply to all persons, firms or corporations alike who make application to obstruct, cut, remove or excavate in, upon, across or along any improved or paved street, alley, sidewalk, curb or other public place within this City and/or any unimproved dirt or oiled street, lane, alley or other public place within the City. (19-7/09, 577-2/52)

 

12.16.050 Deposit Fee—Disposition of Proceeds
All money so paid shall be deposited by the Council in such fund as the Council may direct. (19-7/09, 577-2/52)

 

12.16.060 Diligent Completion and Restoration Required
Any such person, firm or corporation obtaining such permit for the purpose of moving, constructing a building, digging or excavating, or making repairs, shall proceed with the moving, constructing, excavating or digging, or other work for which the building material, dirt or other obstruction or excavation is required, with all due diligence, and when completed, restore said street, alley, sidewalk or public place to its former condition. (19-7/09, 577-2/52)

 

12.16.070 Public Liability Insurance
The applicant shall furnish to the City and maintain during the period for which the permit is issued, a public liability insurance policy in which the City, City Council, elective and appointive officers, employees, boards and commissions of the City shall be named as additional insureds when acting within the scope of their official duties, against all claims arising out of or in connection with the activities for which the permit was obtained. Such public liability insurance policy shall indemnify, defend and hold harmless said additional insureds. The policy shall provide for not less than the following amounts:

Combined single limit bodily injury and/or property damage including products liability: $300,000.00 combined single limit per occurrence. (2121-12/76)

 

Chapter 12.20 UTILITY STRUCTURES
12.20.010 Compliance With Provisions
All sewer, water mains, gas mains, electric conduits, and any other pipe or conduit lines or manholes are hereby required to be laid in accordance with the following sections. (103-11/12)

 

12.20.020 Alley Use
Alleys shall be used for all pipes, conduits, mains and manholes, where possible. (103-11/12)

 

12.20.030 Plans, Profiles Must Be Filed and Approved
Plans and profiles for the utility structures mentioned in this chapter, showing location, depth and size, shall be furnished to the City Engineer for filing in the office of the City Clerk, and approved by the Council before work is commenced. (103-11/12)

 

12.20.040 Supervision by City Engineer
All of the work shall be constructed and built under the supervision and direction of, and to the satisfaction of, the City Engineer. (103-11/12)

 

12.20.050 Water Mains and Laterals
Water mains and laterals shall be laid with their centerlines in the centerlines of alleys or streets. (103-11/12)

 

12.20.060 Laying Sewers
Sewers shall be laid with their centerlines three feet southwest in northwest streets and alleys, and three feet northwest in northeast streets and alleys, and three feet south in east and west streets and alleys, and three feet west in north and south streets and alleys. (103-11/12)

 

12.20.070 Gas Mains and Laterals
Gas mains and laterals shall be laid with their centerlines three feet from the centerlines of streets and alleys on the opposite side from sewers. (103-11/12)

 

12.20.080 Electric Conduits
Electric conduits shall be laid with their centerlines five feet from the centerlines of streets and alleys, and on the same side as sewers. (103-11/12)

 

12.20.090 Laying Other Conduit or Pipe
Any other conduit or pipe shall be laid so that the centerline will be five feet from the centerline of the street or alley, and on the same side as the gas mains and laterals. (103-11/12)

 

12.20.100 Mains in Streets
Where mains must be run in streets on account of there being no alleys available, special locations for the lines on either or both sides thereof, or in the parking strip of the sidewalk, may be made by permission of the City Engineer and the Council. (103-11/12)

 

12.20.110 Violation—Cancellation of Franchise
Any person holding a franchise in this City for the purpose of conducting any public utility, who shall be guilty of the violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, shall, in addition to other penalties, be subject to have any such franchise cancelled and annulled by the Council. (103-11/12)

 

12.20.120 Public Liability Insurance
The applicant shall furnish to the City and maintain during the period for which the permit is issued, a public liability insurance policy in which the City, City Council, elective and appointive officers, employees, boards and commissions of the City shall be named as additional insureds when acting within the scope of their official duties, against all claims arising out of or in connection with the activities for which the permit was obtained. Such public liability insurance policy shall indemnify, defend and hold harmless said additional insureds. The policy shall provide for not less than the following amounts:

Combined single limit bodily injury and/or property damage including products liability: $300,000.00 combined single limit per occurrence. (2121-12/76)

 

Chapter 12.24 WARNING LIGHTS—BARRICADES
12.24.010 Required
It shall be the duty of every person, firm or corporation placing or causing to be placed any building, stand, counter, lunch wagon, wagon stand, bandstand, structure, building material, gravel, dirt, excavation or other obstruction on any street, alley or sidewalk to erect and maintain barriers, warning flags and signs at all times at each end and at intermediate points of such excavation or fill and at such places as may be necessary as adjudged by the Director of Public Works along the excavation or fill, walkways and vehicle or pedestrian ways to prevent accident, and also to place and maintain lights at each end of such excavation or fill and at distances of not more than 50 feet along the line thereof from sunset each day to sunrise of the next day, until such obstruction is removed. In case of neglect or refusal of such person to do so, the Director of Public Works shall have such necessary barriers and lights placed along the line of said obstruction. In such event, the expense of such precautionary action shall be charged to, and collected from, the permittee or contractor according to a fee schedule set by resolution of the City Council. (1362-12/67, 2528-2/82)

 

12.24.020 City Erects—Fees Owed to City
All fees charged shall become a debt in favor of the City and every person liable shall be amenable to action therefor in any court of competent jurisdiction. No action by the City shall be construed as relieving the person responsible for the existence of any obstruction from any of his or her obligations under this section. (1362-12/67)

 

Chapter 12.28 SIDEWALKS—MAINTENANCE
12.28.010 Sidewalk Defined
In this chapter, “sidewalk” means the strip of land between the curb line of the street and the inside property line, whether covered with a cement walk or not. (38-1/10)

 

12.28.020 Property Owner Abutting
All persons owning or occupying any real property in this City fronting upon any public street, lane or alley of this City, are required to keep the sidewalks immediately in front of said property free from weeds and all vegetation growing thereon, except such as may be sown or planted for purposes of ornamentation, and free from dirt, filth, garbage or rubbish, other than the natural soil of the same, and to keep said sidewalk and said space free from any hole or holes, or any obstructions dangerous to life or limb. (38-1/10)

 

12.28.030 Excavating Permitted
Nothing herein contained shall prevent excavating through or across any sidewalk where such excavating is done in accordance with the terms and provisions of any other ordinance of this City, and in accordance with the regulations therein contained covering the excavation. (38-1/10)

 

12.28.040 Rubbish and Weeds—Declared Nuisance
Any such weeds or rubbish on any such sidewalk is declared to be a nuisance. (38-1/10)

 

12.28.050 Rubbish and Weeds—Notice to Remove
It shall be the duty of the superintendent of streets to notify the occupants and owners of any premises in this City to remove, within 10 days from the receipt of such notice, all such weeds and rubbish from the sidewalks in front thereof, and that upon a failure to do so within said 10 days, the Council will cause the weeds and rubbish to be removed at the expense of the owner or occupant. (38-1/10)

 

12.28.060 Rubbish and Weeds—Notice Service
Such notice shall be given in writing, by serving personally upon the occupant (if there be any occupant) and upon the owner, each copy of such notice, directed to the occupant (if any) and the owner. (38-1/10)

 

12.28.070 Rubbish and Weeds—Notice to Nonresident Owner
If the owner is a nonresident of this City, notice shall be given by serving the occupant personally and by mailing, by mail, a like copy in writing to the owner at his or her last known address as shown by the last assessment roll of this City. (38-1/10)

 

12.28.080 Rubbish and Weeds—Posting Notice on Premises
If there be no occupant, notice shall be given by posting a copy of the notice in a conspicuous place upon the premises, and serving a copy upon the owner as hereinbefore provided. (38-1/10)

 

12.28.090 Rubbish and Weeds—Failure to Comply
If at the expiration of 10 days from the sending or service of the notice, the weeds and other rubbish are not removed from the sidewalk, the superintendent of streets shall thereupon report the delinquency to the Council, with an estimate of the probable cost of doing the work. (38-1/10)

 

12.28.100 Rubbish and Weeds—City Clears Area
The Council must then order the superintendent of streets to do the work at the expense of the owner and occupant of the property, and provide for the temporary payment of the same with City funds. (38-1/10)

 

12.28.110 Rubbish and Weeds—Clearance—Extension of Time
The Council may, in its discretion, extend the time within which the work must be done. (38-1/10)

 

12.28.120 Rubbish and Weeds—Removal by City—Statement
At the completion of the work, the superintendent of streets must prepare a statement of the proceedings, reciting the existence of the nuisance, the description of the property, the names of the owners and occupants, the giving of the notice, the hearing by the Council, the making of the order by the Council, the doing of the work and the cost thereof, and the manner of making the demand; which statement must be signed and verified by the oath of the superintendent of streets. (38-1/10)

 

12.28.130 Rubbish and Weeds—Removal by City—Collection
The superintendent of streets shall then collect the said amount from the owner and occupant (if any) who shall be jointly and severally liable. (38-1/10)

 

12.28.140 Rubbish and Weeds—Claim Filed With Recorder
If the claim is not paid within 30 days from demand by the Council, the Council may order the statement to be recorded in the Office of the County Recorder of Orange County, California. (38-1/10)

 

12.28.150 Rubbish and Weeds—Mailing of Statement to Owner
If the owner is a nonresident of this City, it shall be a sufficient demand, for the purposes of this chapter, for the superintendent of streets to mail a copy of the statement to the owner. (38-1/10)

 

12.28.160 Rubbish and Weeds—Claims Becomes Lien—Foreclosure
The statement, when recorded in the Office of the County Recorder of Orange County, shall be a lien upon the property described therein, which may be foreclosed by the City in like manner as liens are foreclosed under the provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure of the State of California. (38-1/10)

 

12.28.170 Violation—Misdemeanor
Failure to keep the sidewalks clear or clean as provided in Section 12.28.020 shall be a violation of this chapter; and for every lot whose sidewalk frontage is so obstructed with rubbish or trash, or overgrown with weeds as set forth in Section 12.28.020 there shall be counted a separate violation of this chapter, and that or any other violation of this chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor. (38-1/10)

 

Chapter 12.32 SIDEWALKS—OBSTRUCTING
Note
*       Prior ordinance history: Ords. 69, 1516, 1625, 1784, 3228, 3294 and 3695.

 

12.32.010 Definitions
The following words and phrases when used in Chapter 12.32, and any other chapter or section where these definitions are incorporated by reference, mean as follows:

A.    “Aggressive” means approaching, speaking to, or following a person in a nonconsensual, hostile, or forceful manner as would cause a reasonable person to fear harm or criminal conduct; or

1.     Touching another person without such person’s consent in the course of asking, begging or soliciting alms; or

2.     Continuing to ask, beg, or solicit alms from a person after such person has made a negative response or otherwise indicated a desire not to contribute; or

3.     Intentionally blocking or interfering with the safe or free passage of the person solicited by any means, including causing such person to take evasive action to avoid physical contact or preventing such person from departing the location of the solicitation; or

4.     Intentionally following the person solicited, without such person’s consent, for the purpose of continuing to ask, beg or solicit alms after such person has made a negative response or indicated a desire not to contribute; or

5.     Making any statement, gesture, or other communication which a reasonable person in the situation of the person solicited would perceive to be a threat of bodily harm; or

6.     Rendering any service to a motor vehicle, including, but not limited to, any cleaning, washing, protecting, guarding or repairing of said vehicle or any portion thereof, without the prior consent of the owner, operator or occupant of such vehicle, and thereafter asking, begging or soliciting alms or payment for the performance of such service, regardless of whether such vehicle is stopped, standing or parked on a public street or upon other public or private property; or

7.     Intentionally blocking, preventing, impeding or interfering with the free and unobstructed ability of the person solicited to enter into or emerge from any vehicle during the course of asking, begging or soliciting alms or following a negative response by the person solicited to any such solicitation; or

8.     Intentionally blocking, preventing, impeding or interfering with the operation or movement of any vehicle operated or occupied by the person solicited, during the course of asking, begging or soliciting alms or following a negative response by the person solicited to any such solicitation.

B.     “Ask, beg, or solicit alms” includes the spoken, written, or printed word or such other act conducted for the purpose of obtaining an immediate donation of money or thing of value, whether for personal use, or as a charitable contribution to any individual or organization, or for any other purpose.

C.     “Beach” includes that strip of land owned and/or operated by the City of Huntington Beach, south of Warner Avenue, lying between Pacific Coast Highway and the mean high tide line of the Pacific Ocean. “Beach” also includes that portion of the State Beach (Bolsa Chica) which the City operates pursuant to an operating agreement with the State of California. “Beach” also includes that strip of land owned, controlled and/or operated by the City of Huntington Beach lying from and including Anderson Street to the north, Warner Avenue to the south, the mean high tide line of the Pacific Ocean and the west legal property line of adjoining residential properties which are on South Pacific Avenue, excluding the street appendages that extend west of South Pacific Avenue.

D.    “Beach Parking Lot” means roads, driveways or parking area to service the Beach, Pier or Pier Plaza, excluding those areas located on a street or highway.

E.     “Beach Service Road” means the paved roadway on the Beach that extends from Beach Boulevard to Seapoint Avenue running parallel to Pacific Coast Highway nearest to the shoreline of the Pacific Ocean.

F.     “City building” means any building which is owned or occupied by the City of Huntington Beach or any of its Departments and which is used for public purposes.

G.    “Civic Center” means the area in the City of Huntington Beach, County of Orange bounded by Lake Street on the east, Yorktown Avenue to the north, Main Street on the west, Utica Avenue on the south, and Park Street on the east and south between Utica Avenue and Lake Street.

H.    “Downtown Huntington Beach” means Districts 1, 2, and 3 of the Huntington Beach Downtown Specific Plan, which are depicted below:







I.      “Enclosed Area” means an area which is substantially surrounded by a fence, ditch, wall or other barrier so as to limit access to a relatively few points around the area.

J.      “Pier” means the appurtenance beginning at the intersection of Pacific Coast Highway and Main Street on the Beach, which is a platform extending into the Pacific Ocean and supported by piles or pillars.

K.    “Pier Plaza” means the developed area on the Beach immediately north and south adjacent to the Pier bounded by Pacific Coast Highway and the Beach Parking Lots adjacent thereto.

L.     “Public Place” means any of the following:

1.     Any area inside a City or School District Building;

2.     Any enclosed area outdoors which is owned or occupied by the City of Huntington Beach and used for public purposes, or which is owned or occupied by a public school district;

3.     Any unenclosed area outdoors, whether such area is publicly or privately owned or occupied, to which the general public has access and to which, by right or by express or implied invitation, the general public may resort for business, pleasure, or other lawful purpose; this category includes, but is not limited to, publicly owned open areas such as streets, sidewalks, parks, beaches, and open areas that may be either public or privately owned, such as entrance ways, alcoves, yards, and parking lots;

4.     Any privately owned walkway, whether enclosed or unenclosed, which is open to the general public and which, among its principal purposes, serves to allow pedestrians to pass through or over the premises, without regard to the pedestrian’s destination;

5.     Outdoor parking lots, whether publicly or privately owned, which are adjacent to streets, sidewalks or other public places open to the general public.

M.    “Public Way” means any public place or portion of a public place which serves primarily for the movement of pedestrian, vehicular, or bicycle traffic from one area to another; “Public Way” includes, but is not limited to, streets, sidewalks, bicycle paths, covered or enclosed walkways for pedestrians, and the portions of the Pier and Pier Plaza set aside for pedestrian or vehicular traffic.

N.    “School district building” means any building which is owned or occupied by a public school district and which is used for public purposes.

O.    “Sidewalk” means that portion of a highway, other than the roadway, set apart by curbs, barriers, markings or other delineation for pedestrian travel.

P.     “Street” means a way or place of whatever nature, publicly maintained and open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. Street includes highway. (4117-5/17)

 

12.32.020 Loitering, Obstructing Free Passage, and Sitting or Lying Upon the Public Way
Except as provided in Section 12.32.025 no person, after first being warned by a law enforcement officer, or where a sign or signs have been posted in accordance with this chapter, shall loiter, stand, sit or lie in or upon any Public Way, including any sidewalk, street, curb, crosswalk, walkway area, mall or that portion of public or private property utilized for public use; neither shall any person block nor obstruct, nor prevent the free access to the entrance to any building open to the public. (4117-5/17)

 

12.32.025 Fourth of July Parade Viewing
A.    No person shall place on any Public Way or Public Place, public property, furniture, stakes, rope, ribbon, signs or any other item used to reserve areas for parade viewing before 7:00 a.m. on July 3rd.

B.     No materials used to reserve areas of Public Way or Public Place shall block or interfere with pedestrian or vehicular traffic, or block those portions of sidewalks and streets used for the same prior to 6:00 a.m. on July 4th.

C.     Adhesive material, including adhesive tape, is prohibited for use in reserving space for parade viewing. This prohibition includes, but is not limited to, the use of tape or other adhesives on trees, poles and signs.

D.    No person shall sell, lease, or rent any seat or space of the Public Way.

E.     No person may use any area of the Public Way so as to interfere with any person’s viewing of the parade from a City authorized and approved grandstand.

F.     All materials used to designate a private viewing area as described in this Section shall be removed by 3:00 p.m. on July 4th. (4117-5/17)

 

12.32.030 Animals or Vehicles
No person, after first being warned by a law enforcement officer, or where a sign or signs have been posted in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, shall ride, operate, walk or park any motorcycle, horse or other similar object or animal, in or upon any public or quasi-public sidewalk, street, curb, crosswalk, walkway area, mall or that portion of private property utilized for public use, so as to hinder or to obstruct the free passage of pedestrians thereon, or to create any hazardous condition thereon. (4117-5/17)

 

12.32.040 Signs
Signs posted as provided in this chapter shall conform to the following requirements:

A.    Each sign shall not be less than 22 by 30 inches;

B.     Colors of such signs shall be optional;

C.     All signs shall be clearly visible to persons in restricted locations;

D.    Signs shall have the word “WARNING” two inches in height, and all other lettering shall be at least 5/8 inches in height;

E.     Signs shall be posted every 100 feet;

F.     The following wording shall appear on each sign:

WARNING

Obstruction of pedestrian traffic in this area by persons loitering, standing, sitting, lying or by riding, operating, walking or parking any motorcycle, bicycle, horse or similar objects or animals is prohibited and punishable as a MISDEMEANOR.

(4117-5/17)

 

12.32.050 Driving Over Unprotected Sidewalk
No person shall drive any wagon or other vehicle over, along or across any cement or other improved sidewalk or curb unless planking is laid thereon in such manner as to protect such sidewalk or curb. (4117-5/17)

 

12.32.060 Paved Sidewalk Crossing Excepted
The provisions of Section 12.32.050 shall not apply to the driving of vehicles over sidewalks or curbs at places where cement or asphalt crossings are constructed across such sidewalks and curbs. (4117-5/17)

 

12.32.110 Conduct on Public Property, Monuments, Fountains and Lawns
No person, after having been notified by a law enforcement officer or private security officer that he or she is in violation of the prohibition in this section, shall:

A.    Walk, stand, sit or lie upon any monument, vase, decorative fountain, drinking fountain, bike rack, trash receptacle, median, fire hydrant, street-tree planter, berm, utility cabinet, railing, fence, planter, or upon any other public property not designed or customarily used for such purposes;

B.     Walk, stand, sit or lie upon any public lawn or planted area which is posted with signs that forbid such conduct; or

C.     Walk, stand, lie or skateboard upon any public bench.

D.    No person shall bathe or wade in, swim, enter into, be present in, or remain in, any public fountain or fountain open to the public. No person shall willfully or knowingly permit any animal in his or her custody to bathe or wade in, enter into, be present in, or remain in any fountain. No person shall utilize the fountain water for cleaning of objects, belongings, or personal items.

 

E.     In Downtown Huntington Beach from 100 Main to 500 Main, no person shall intentionally throw, discharge, launch or spill any solid object (including, but not limited to, footballs, hacky sacks, baseballs, beach balls, Frisbees, or other similar devices) or liquid substance or otherwise cause any object or substance to be thrown, discharged, launched, spilled or to become airborne or otherwise risk touching, hitting or causing non-consensual contact with another person or persons property or to otherwise creating a situation that would risk adversely affecting public safety. (4117-5/17)

 

12.32.120 Begging and Solicitation
No person shall ask, beg, or solicit alms in an aggressive manner in any Public Place or Public Way, or other place open to the general public, whether publicly or privately owned, including, but not limited to, any sidewalks, streets, alleys, driveways, parking lots, parks, plazas, buildings, doorways and entrances to buildings, gasoline service stations, and the grounds around or enclosed by buildings. (4117-5/17)

 

12.32.130 Nuisance
It shall be deemed a public nuisance for any person, after first being warned by a law enforcement officer, or where a sign has been posted in accordance with this Chapter, to loiter, stand, sit or lie in or upon the Pier, Pier Plaza, the Civic Center, any Public Place or Public Way, or any public or quasi-public sidewalk, street, curb, crosswalk, walkway area, mall or that portion of private property utilized for public use, so as to hinder or obstruct the free passage of pedestrians thereon. It shall be a public nuisance for any person to block or obstruct, or prevent the free access to the entrance to any building open to the public. (4117-5/17)

 

12.32.140 No Restriction on Free Speech
This chapter is not intended to restrict the exercise of any free speech protected by the United States Constitution or the Constitution of the State of California. (4117-5/17)

 

12.32.150 Severability
The City Council of the City of Huntington Beach hereby declares that should any section, paragraph, sentence or word of this chapter of the code, hereby adopted, be declared for any reason to be invalid, it is the intent of the Council that it would have passed all other portions of this chapter independent of the elimination herefrom of any such portion as may be declared invalid. (4117-5/17)

 

Chapter 12.36 BENCHES, TELEPHONE BOOTHS, AND OTHER PUBLIC SERVICE ITEMS
12.36.010 Definitions
In this chapter, unless from the context a different meaning is intended, or unless a different meaning is specifically defined and more particularly directed to the use of such words:

“Bench” means a seat located upon public property, along any public way, for the accommodation of passersby or persons awaiting transportation.

“Street” means any public thoroughfare or way including the sidewalk, the parkway and any other public property bordering upon a public way. (581-4/52, 2935-4/88)

 

12.36.020 Franchise/Agreement
A.    No person shall install or maintain any bench, transit shelter, telephone booth or other public service item which incorporates advertising panels on any street unless installed in accordance with a franchise agreement granted by the City Council. The provisions of this section shall not be construed to prohibit the installation and maintenance of benches, transit shelters, telephone booths or other public service items without advertising panels on any street, provided that a permit for each item has been obtained pursuant to this title.

B.     Any bench which is in violation of the provisions of this section at the time of adoption of this chapter shall be removed within 30 days of the effective date of this chapter. (581-4/52, 2292-8/78, 2574-10/82, 2935-4/88)

 

12.36.030 Limitations on Advertising in Public Rights-of-Way
The following regulations shall limit advertising copy panels which are placed within the public right-of-way in accordance with this chapter:

A.    Advertising shall be limited to product or service identification and to businesses which are not located on adjacent properties. Copy which includes arrows or directions to a location shall be prohibited.

B.     No advertising for cigarettes or alcoholic beverages shall be permitted.

C.     The maximum allowable advertising copy shall be two, 24-square-foot panels for bus benches/shelters. For telephone booths or structures, the maximum shall be two, eight-square-foot panels.

D.    In conformance with the City’s Coastal Element, public service items located within the Coastal Zone shall not contain advertising for private businesses or services.

E.     In conformance with the City’s Downtown Design Guidelines, public service items located within the Downtown Specific Plan area shall not contain advertising for private businesses or services. (2935-4/88)

 

12.36.040 Locational Criteria—Telephone Booths
Prior to installation of any telephone booth or structure which incorporates advertising panels, a master plan of locations shall be approved by the Planning Commission. Minor amendments to an approved master plan may be subject to approval by the Director of Community Development. All locations shall conform with the following criteria:

A.    The City and the vendor shall jointly decide upon the number and location of structures. If a dispute arises, both the City and the vendor retain the authority to direct that a location be deleted.

B.     The minimum distance between telephone structures with advertising panels shall be 500 feet except at four corner intersections, where there may be a total of two such structures facing different directions.

C.     Telephone structures shall be located to provide for adequate clearance in the sidewalk area. Specific locations shall be subject to the approval of the Public Works Department for safety, access, and circulation issues. (2935-4/88)

 

Chapter 12.37 NEWSRACKS
Note
*       Note: § 12.37.080 repealed by Ord. 3837-8/09.

 

12.37.010 Definitions
Definitions as used in this section:

“Newsracks” shall mean any self-service or coin-operated box, container, storage unit or other dispenser, including the pedestal, installed, used, or maintained for the display and sale of newspapers or new periodicals.

“Parkway” shall mean that area between the sidewalks and the curb of any street, and where there is no sidewalk, that area between the edge of the roadway and the property line adjacent thereto. Parkway shall also include any area within a roadway which is not open to vehicular travel.

“Roadway” shall mean that portion of a street improved, designed, or ordinarily used for vehicular travel.

“Sidewalk” shall mean any surface provided for the primary use of pedestrians.

“Street” shall mean all that area dedicated to public use for public street purposes and shall include, but not be limited to, roadways, parkways, alleys and sidewalks. (3015-9/89, 3837-8/09)

 

12.37.020 Prohibitions
A.    No person shall install, use or maintain any newsrack or other structure which projects onto, into or over any part of the roadway of any public street, or which rests, wholly or in part, upon, along or over any portion of the roadway of any public street.

B.     No person shall install, use or maintain any newsrack which in whole or in part rests upon, in or over any public sidewalk or parkway, when such installation, use or maintenance endangers the safety of persons or property, or when such site or location is used for public utility purposes, public transportation purposes or other governmental use, or when such newsrack unreasonably interferes with or impedes the flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic, including any legally parked or stopped vehicle, the ingress into or egress from any residence or place of business, or the use of poles, posts, traffic signs or signals, hydrants, mailboxes, or other objects permitted at or near said location, or when such newsrack interferes with the cleaning of any sidewalk by the use of mechanical sidewalk cleaning machinery. (3015-9/89)

 

12.37.030 Registration of Location
A.    No person shall install or maintain any newsrack which in whole or in part rests upon, in or over any public sidewalk or parkway without first obtaining a permit from the Director of Planning or his or her designated representative after providing the following:

1.     The location of each newsrack to be installed or maintained in the City by the application; and

2.     The name, address and telephone number of the applicant.

B.     No more than one notification shall be required per applicant, regardless of the number of newsracks the applicant maintains in the City.

C.     From the above information the Director of Planning or his or her designated representative shall designate locations and shall be guided therein solely by the standards and criteria set forth in Section 12.37.040 of this chapter. Such application may be granted either in whole or in part when more than one location is proposed by the applicant, and in any event, when denial is solely as to location, it shall be without prejudice to amend such application to state a different location or locations. (3015-9/89, 3837-8/09)

 

12.37.040 Standards for Installation, Maintenance and Operation
Except as otherwise provided in Section 12.37.045, any newsrack which in whole or in part rests upon, in or over any public sidewalk or parkway shall comply with the following standards:

A.    No newsrack shall exceed 48 inches in height, 30 inches in width, or two feet in thickness.

B.     There shall be no more than four newsracks in a row and no more than a total of eight in one location. There shall be a three-foot distance between newsrack locations with more than four newsracks.

C.     All newsracks shall be a single metal pedestal newsrack with tray, Model K-Jack 100 Mini-view or similar type, and shall use no more than two of the solid colors of exterior powder coating as approved by resolution of the City Council.

D.    The single metal pedestal base shall be 16 inches in height with a three-inch square post and a 10-inch square plate mount. Mounts shall be bolted in place on the sidewalk using half-inch metal drop-in anchor bolts.

E.     Newsracks shall only be placed pursuant to approval by the Director of Planning or his or her designated representative near a curb or adjacent to the wall of a building. Newsracks placed near the curb shall be placed no less than 18 inches nor more than 24 inches from the edge of the curb. Newsracks placed adjacent to the wall of a building shall be placed parallel to such wall and not more than six inches from the wall. No newsrack shall be placed or maintained on the sidewalk or parkway opposite a newsstand or another newsrack.

F.     No newsrack shall be chained, or otherwise attached to any property not owned by the owner of the newsrack or to any permanently fixed object.

G.    Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection B of Section 12.37.020, no newsrack shall be placed, installed, used or maintained:

1.     Within five feet of any marked crosswalk;

2.     Within 15 feet of the curb return of any unmarked crosswalk;

3.     Within five feet of any fire hydrant, fire call box, police call box or other emergency facility;

4.     Within five feet of any driveway;

5.     Within five feet ahead of, and 25 feet to the rear of any sign marking a designated bus stop;

6.     Within six feet of any bus bench;

7.     At any location whereby the clear space for the passageway of pedestrians is impeded;

8.     Within 50 feet of any other newsrack containing the same publication.

H.    Newsracks shall carry no advertising except the name of the newspaper or periodical being dispensed on the bottom of the plastic hood and rack cards contained in card pans, which are attached to and located on the front of the newsrack, shall be limited to 15 inches in height, 22 inches in length and shall be limited to the display, sale, or purchase of the newspaper or periodical being dispensed.

I.      Each newsrack shall be maintained in a clean, neat and attractive condition and in good repair at all times.

J.      Pay the annual permit fee as determined by resolution of the City Council. Permit to be renewed on an annual basis.

K.    No more than eight newsracks shall be located on any public right-of-way within a space of 200 feet in any direction within the same block of the same street; provided, however, that no more than 16 newsracks shall be allowed on any one block. As used herein, “block” shall mean one side of a street between two consecutive intersecting streets.

1.     In determining which newsracks shall be permitted to remain, the Director of Planning, or his or her designated representative, shall be guided solely by the following criteria:

a.     First priority shall be given to newsracks used for the sale of daily publications (those published on five or more days in a calendar week).

b.     Second priority shall be given to newsracks used for the sale of weekly publications (those published on at least one but less than five days in a calendar week).

2.     In the event that there is a conflict between newspapers within the same priority seeking the same location, and there are insufficient newsrack spaces remaining to accommodate the conflicting newspapers after first filling as many spaces as possible by utilizing the criteria set forth above, then the Director of Planning or his or her designated representative shall assign the space or spaces at random by placing the names of all applicants for the remaining spaces at a location into a container from which the names shall be drawn, one at a time until the particular location’s remaining number of unfilled newsracks has been filled. Such drawing shall be open to the public at a time and date designated by the Director of Planning or his or her designated representative.

L.     No person shall display or exhibit in any public newsrack or other display device, any material which is defined by California Penal Code Section 313 as harmful to minors unless such material is:

1.     Displayed in an area from which minors are excluded and,

2.     Is covered by a device, commonly known as a “blinder rack,” such that the lower two-thirds of the material is not exposed to view.

M.    No person shall display or exhibit in any public newsrack or other display device, other than in locations from which minors are excluded, material which exposes or exhibits to public view, any depiction of human genitalia, the pubic or anal region, or the breast of a female person other than a child under the age of puberty, or any description, pictorial or otherwise, of explicit sexual acts, sexual organs or excrement where such depiction or description has as its purpose or effect sexual arousal or affront. (3015-9/89, 3837-8/09)

 

12.37.045 Downtown Newsracks
A.    In addition to all other requirements of this chapter, the following regulations shall also apply to all newsracks in the Downtown Specific Plan Boundary as described and defined in the Zoning and Subdivision Ordinance.

B.     The City Council may from time to time adopt a resolution designating the number and locations of newsracks in the Downtown Specific Plan Boundary.

C.     Any newsracks in the Downtown Specific Plan Boundary shall, in addition to all other requirements of this chapter, comply with the following:

1.     Newsracks shall only be at the locations and in the numbers specified by resolution of the City Council.

2.     There shall be no more than four newsracks in a row and no more than a total of eight in one designated location. There shall be a three-foot distance between newsrack locations with more than four newsracks.

3.     All newsracks shall be a single metal pedestal newsrack with tray, Model K-Jack 100 Mini-view or similar type, with a triangular top, four and three-fourths inches high and 14 inches deep.

4.     All newsracks including the triangular top, newsrack, tray, pedestal and pedestal base shall use the RAL 6006 Code color exterior powder coating.

5.     The single metal pedestal base shall be 16 inches in height with a three inch square post and a 10-inch-square plate mount. Mounts shall be bolted in place on the sidewalk using half-inch metal drop-in anchor bolts.

6.     Newsracks shall not exceed 30 inches in height, 27 inches in width, and 18 inches in depth (single deck only).

7.     Newsracks shall carry no advertising except the name of the newspaper or periodical being dispensed on the bottom of the plastic hood and racks. Cards contained in card pans, which are attached to and located on the front of the newsrack, shall be limited to 15 inches in height and 22 inches in length and shall be limited to the display, sale or purchase of the newspaper or periodical being dispensed.

8.     Pay the annual permit fee as determined by resolution of the City Council. Permit to be renewed on an annual basis.

9.     First priority will be given to current newsrack permit holders in existing locations and then priority will be given in accordance with the provisions of the chapter. (3813-1/09)

 

12.37.050 Newsracks Identification Required
Every person or other entity which places or maintains a newsrack on the streets of the City of Huntington Beach shall have his, her or its name, address and telephone number affixed thereto in a place where such information may be easily seen. Prior to the designation of a location by the Director of Planning or his or her designated representative, the applicant shall present evidence of compliance with this section. (3015-9/89, 3837-8/09)

 

12.37.060 Newsrack Violations
A.    Any newsrack installed, used or maintained in violation of the provisions of this article shall be tagged with a “notice of violation” stating the violation, date of tagging, notice of intention to remove the newsrack if the violation is not corrected within 10 days, and procedure for obtaining a hearing before the Director of Planning or his or her designated representative, if desired.

B.     Notwithstanding subsection A of this section, in the case of violations of this article relative to restrictions upon attachments of newsracks to property other than that owned by the owner of the newsrack, to fixed objects, or to each other, and upon location of newsracks, the Director of Planning or his or her designated representative may, as an alternative to tagging such newsrack, move, align, remove such attachment, or otherwise move such rack or racks in order to restore them to a legal condition.

C.     Any newsrack which has been tagged and remains in violation of the provisions stated on the tag past the 10-day correction period, and no hearing has been requested, said newsrack shall be removed by the Director of Planning or his or her designated representative and stored in any convenient place. The Director of Planning or his or her designated representative shall notify the owner thereof by mailing a “notice of removal” to the last known address of the owner. Such notice shall state the date the newsrack was removed, the reasons therefor, the location and procedure for claiming the newsrack, and the procedure for obtaining a post-removal hearing before the Director of Planning or his or her designated representative, if desired. Any such newsrack removed and stored pursuant to these provisions shall be released to the owner thereof if claimed within 45 days after such removal and upon the payment of reasonable charges of removal and storage therefor. Upon failure of the owner to claim such newsrack and pay the reasonable charges within 45 days after the mailing of written notice of removal, such newsrack shall be deemed to be unclaimed property in possession of the Department of Planning and may be disposed of pursuant to the provisions of this Code.

D.    Any newsrack in violation of the provisions of this article, which violation creates an immediate danger to the health, safety or welfare of the public, which violation cannot be corrected by moving or otherwise reposition of the newsrack, said newsrack may be summarily removed and stored in a convenient location so as to eliminate the danger to the health, safety and welfare of the public. The Director of Planning or his or her designated representative shall notify the owner thereof by mailing a “notice of removal” to the last known address of the owner. Such notice shall state the date the newsrack was removed, the reasons therefor, the location and procedure for claiming the newsrack, and the procedure for obtaining a post-removal hearing before the Director of Planning or his or her designated representative, if desired. Any such newsrack removed and stored pursuant to this subsection shall be released to the owner thereof if claimed within 45 days after the mailing of written notice of removal and upon the payment of reasonable charges of removal and storage. (3015-9/89, 3837-8/09)

 

12.37.070 Applicability
A.    Except as otherwise provided for in Section 12.37.045, the provisions of this chapter shall apply to all newsracks, whether installed and maintained prior to or after the effective date of any of the provisions herein. Those newsracks installed prior to the effective date of any provision enacted hereunder shall be brought into compliance with said provisions as follows:

1.     All newsracks on Beach Boulevard by September 30, 2009;

2.     All newsracks on Warner and/or Edinger by December 31, 2009;

3.     All remaining newsracks by March 31, 2010.

B.     Any newsrack not brought into compliance within the aforementioned time period shall be deemed to be in violation of this article. (3015-9/89, 3837-8/09)

 

12.37.090 Hold Harmless
Every person or other entity which places or maintains a newsrack on a public sidewalk or parkway in the City of Huntington Beach shall file a written statement with the Director of Planning or his or her designated representative which complies with the current City policy, rules and/or regulations on hold harmless clauses. (3015-9/89, 3837-8/09)

 

12.37.100 Insurance
The City requires every person or other entity which places or maintains a newsrack on a public sidewalk or parkway in the City of Huntington Beach to provide insurance as required by current City policy, rule and/or regulations. (3015-9/89)

 

Chapter 12.38 ENCROACHMENTS
Note
*       Note: § 12.38.050 repealed by Ord. 3781-10/07.

 

12.38.010 Encroachment Permit Required
In addition to any agreement, license, permit or franchise required by this Code or the Zoning and Subdivision Ordinance or any permit or entitlement required by state and federal law, the following uses may temporarily encroach into the public right-of-way subject to the issuance of an encroachment permit by the Department of Public Works and the payment of all applicable fees as set by resolution of the City Council:

A.    Structural elements.

B.     Signs.

C.     Lighting.

D.    Parkway modification including surfacing, tree or shrub removal and/or planting.

E.     Unusual architectural treatment, appendages, or fixtures, such as awnings.

F.     Shrub planting and removal. (3016-10/89, 3781-10/07)

 

12.38.020 Permit Not Required
Private encroachments not requiring a permit:

A.    Parkway lawn and ground cover.

B.     Parkway sprinkling systems.

C.     Use of public streets and projections over public property which are covered by the Uniform Building Code under a valid building permit issued by the City. (3016-10/89)

 

12.38.030 Prohibited Encroachments
A.    Parkway surface of loose rock or gravel.

B.     Private dwellings and appendages, except as provided for in the Uniform Building Code. (3016-10/89)

 

12.38.040 Application Procedure
Application for any permit as required by this policy shall be filed with the Public Works Department on a form provided by the City and shall show the proposed planting or work and the nature thereof. Drawings for encroachment permits requiring Public Works review shall be prepared to scale. Plan and elevation drawings shall accurately depict location, height, and extent of the proposed encroachments. (3016-10/89)

 

12.38.045 Duration and Validity
A.    Permits shall be void if the project, including restoration, has not been completed within 60 days; provided, however, that the director, in his or her discretion for good cause shown, may issue one 30-day extension to the start date and one 30-day extension to the duration of a permit upon written request from the permittee and payment of any applicable fees. The director may issue additional extensions as may be appropriate in his or her discretion.

B.     Permits are not transferable without proof of current business license issued by the City of Huntington Beach for the assignee and any subcontractors who will be providing service under the permit and evidence of insurance as specified by resolution of the City Council, and the written consent of the permittee and the Director. (3781-10/07)

 

12.38.060 Hold Harmless
Every person or other entity which encroaches on a public right-of-way shall enter into written agreement with the City and approved as to form by the City Attorney, whereby the person or entity agrees to indemnify and hold harmless the City, in compliance with the current requirements of the City. A permittee will be required to supply the City, prior to construction, proof of insurance in compliance with the City’s current requirements. (3016-10/89)

 

Chapter 12.40 SHARED PERSONAL MOBILITY DEVICES
12.40.010 Purpose
The purpose of this chapter is to prohibit shared personal mobility devices and ensure that the use of the public right-of-way, at all times, promotes the public health, safety and welfare and allows for adequate pedestrian circulation and safety. (4165-12/18)

 

12.40.020 Definitions
A.    “Public right-of-way” shall mean the area across, along, beneath, in, on, over, under, upon, and within the dedicated public alleys, boulevards, courts, lanes, places, roads, sidewalks, streets, ways and City-owned properties within the City, as they exist now or in the future.

B.     “Shared personal mobility devices” shall mean any wheeled personal transportation device that is designed to be:

1.     Powered by an electric motor or other power source, or by human propulsion;

2.     Accessed via an on-demand portal, whether through a smart-phone, access code, personal identification card, or similar method; and

3.     Operated by a private entity that owns, manages, maintains and insures devices for shared use by members, which are available to members in unstaffed, self-service locations.

Shared personal mobility device does not include any device vended or made available for rent from a building, a device operated by the Orange County Transportation Authority, or any other device excluded pursuant to the Administrative Regulations adopted by the City Manager.

C.     “Shared personal mobility device operator” shall mean an individual or a public, private, or non-profit entity that leases or manages shared personal mobility devices. (4165-12/18)

 

12.40.030 Prohibition on Shared Personal Mobility Devices and Operators
A.    It shall be unlawful to provide, place or offer for use a shared personal mobility device, or to operate as a shared personal mobility device operator in any public right-of-way within the City.

B.     The Huntington Beach Police Department and any persons authorized by the City and having the duty to enforce this chapter are hereby authorized to impound the shared personal mobility device violating the provisions of this chapter. The impound shall be subject to an impound fee established by City Council resolution.

C.     The Police Chief may promulgate regulations for notification to the operator and return of the devices to the operator, and as may otherwise be necessary to implement the purpose of this chapter. (4165-12/18)

 

12.40.040 Violations
Any person who violates or willfully fails to comply with any provision of this chapter is guilty of an infraction. Where the violation is of a continuing nature, each day or portion thereof wherein the violation continues constitutes a separate and distinct violation. Any person convicted of an infraction under the provisions of this Code shall be punishable by: (1) a fine not exceeding $100.00, for the first offense; (2) a fine not exceeding $200.00 for the second offense; (3) a fine not exceeding $500.00 for each additional offense within one year. (4165-12/18)

Title 13 PUBLIC PROPERTY
Note
*       Note: Chs. 13.04 and 13.12 through 13.24 repealed by Ord. 3606-6/03.

 

Chapter 13.08 BEACH REGULATIONS
Note
*       Note: §§ 13.08.010, 13.08.040, 13.08.050, 13.08.250 and 13.08.320 repealed by Ord. 3606-6/03.

 

13.08.005 Definitions
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the respective meanings set forth herein, unless the context in which they are used clearly indicates to the contrary:

“Adjacent Beach Area” includes that strip of land owned and/or operated by the City of Huntington Beach, south of Anderson St., lying between Pacific Coast Highway and the mean high tide line of the Pacific Ocean. “Beach” also includes that portion of the State Beach (Bolsa Chica) which the City operates pursuant to an operating agreement with the State of California. The “Adjacent Beach Area” includes the Beach Service Road, the Pier, the Pier Plaza, walkways, guardrails, hills, raised banks, structures and Beach Parking Lots. The “Adjacent Beach Area” extends from the mean high tide line of the Pacific Ocean to the west curb line of Pacific Coast Highway from Warner Avenue to the Santa Ana River and the mean high tide line of the Pacific Ocean to the west residential property lines of South Pacific Avenue from Warner Avenue to Anderson Street. Unless otherwise specifically referenced, this definition shall only apply to this section of the Huntington Beach Municipal Code.

“Alcoholic Beverage” includes alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer and every liquid or solid containing alcohol, spirits, wine or beer and which contains one-half of one percent or more of alcohol by volume and which is fit for beverage purposes either alone or when diluted, mixed, or combined with other substances.

“Beach” includes that strip of land owned and/or operated by the City of Huntington Beach, south of Warner Avenue, lying between Pacific Coast Highway and the mean high tide line of the Pacific Ocean. “Beach” also includes that portion of the State Beach (Bolsa Chica) which the City operates pursuant to an operating agreement with the State of California. “Beach” also includes that strip of land owned, controlled and/or operated by the City of Huntington Beach lying from and including Anderson Street to the north, Warner Avenue to the south, the mean high tide line of the Pacific Ocean and the west legal property line of adjoining residential properties which are on South Pacific Avenue, excluding the street appendages that extend west of South Pacific Avenue.

“Beach Parking Lot” means roads, driveways or parking area to service the Beach, Pier or Pier Plaza, excluding those areas located on a street or highway.

“Beach Service Road” means the paved roadway on the Beach that extends from Beach Boulevard to Seapoint Avenue running parallel to Pacific Coast Highway nearest to the shoreline of the Pacific Ocean.

“Director” refers to the Director of the Community Services Department and/or his or her designee.

“Occupied” means used for the purpose of protecting human beings from wind, sun, rain or public view.

“Pacific Ocean” includes all waters of the Pacific Ocean to a point three miles out from the mean high tide line, parallel to the three miles out from the Beach whether or not the lands lying under said tidal waters are privately owned or publicly owned including but not limited to the Water Activity Zone.

“Person” means any individual, firm, copartnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, corporation or any other group or combination, acting as a unit.

“Pier” means the appurtenance beginning at the intersection of Pacific Coast Highway and Main Street on the Beach, which is a platform extending into the Pacific Ocean and supported by piles or pillars.

“Pier Plaza” means the developed area on the Beach immediately north and south adjacent to the Pier bounded by Pacific Coast Highway and the Beach Parking Lots adjacent thereto.

“Smoke or Smoking” means the carrying or holding of a lighted pipe, cigar, cigarette, e-cigarette, or any other lighted smoking product or equipment used to burn any tobacco products, weed, plant, or any other combustible substance. Smoking includes emitting or exhaling the fumes of any pipe, cigar, cigarette, e-cigarette or any other lighted smoking equipment used for burning or vaporizing any tobacco or nicotine product, weed, plant, or any other combustible substance.

“Water Activity Zone” means the area that extends 1,000 feet seaward into the Pacific Ocean from the mean high tide line.

“Wheeled Conveyance” shall include, but not be limited to, automobiles, bicycles, skateboards, rollerblades, rollerskates, and strollers. (3606-6/03, 3656-8/04, 3667-10/04, 3930-2/12, 4118-5/17)

 

13.08.020 Defacing and/or Destroying Public Property
No Person shall cut, carve, hack, remove, deface or otherwise injure any fence, post, toilet, lavatory, restroom, building, sign or other structure, at or on the Beach, Adjacent Beach Area, Pier or Pier Plaza, or to place writing upon the interior or exterior of any fence, post, toilet, lavatory, restroom, building, sign or other structure therein, any initial, name writing, printing, drawing or vulgar, profane or obscene word or picture. (769-7/60, 3606-6/03, 4118-5/17)

 

13.08.025 Structures/Furniture
No Persons shall temporarily or permanently, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move or convert any structure or place any furniture on the Pier, Pier Plaza, Beach Service Road and Beach Parking Lot area, except by permit issued by the Director. (3606-6/03, 3615-10/03, 4118-5/17)

 

13.08.030 Littering
No Person shall deposit or discard or leave any handbill, bottle, can or rubbish or trash or debris on the Beach or Adjacent Beach Area, other than in those receptacles provided for such purpose, or to deposit in any commode or urinal in any public toilet any newspaper, rag, part of clothing or any item likely to clog said commode or urinal. This section shall not be interpreted to prohibit distribution of any constitutionally protected material. (80-8/11, 769-7/60, 1306-3/67, 3606-6/03, 4118-5/17)

 

13.08.051 Tents and Canopies
A.    No Person shall erect, maintain or occupy any canopy in excess of 100 square feet, or any tent without at least two sides completely open to public view, on the Beach or Adjacent Beach Area, as described in Section 13.08.005(B), except by permit issued by the Director.

B.     No Person shall erect, maintain or occupy any canopy or tent on the Beach Parking Lot, Beach Service Road, Pier or Pier Plaza except by permit issued by the Director. (3606-6/03, 3963-12/12, 4118-5/17)

 

13.08.060 Fires
No person shall light, kindle, set or maintain fires or coals thereon, except in the City-provided fire rings or No Person shall light, kindle, set or maintain fires or coals thereon, except in the City-provided fire rings or in self-contained BBQs kept within six feet of a City-provided fire ring, except by permit issued by the Director. Disposable heating BBQ materials shall not be deposited anywhere except within the inside perimeter of the City-provided fire ring. The heating element of self-contained BBQs must be raised at least 18 inches above the surface of the sand. (769-7/60, 1306-3/67, 3606-6/03, 3930-2/12, 4118-5/17)

 

13.08.070 Dogs and Other Animals
A.    No Person having the care, charge or control of any animal, domesticated or wild, shall permit or allow said animal to be, under any circumstances or conditions, on the Pier or on or upon that Beach or Adjacent Beach Area bounded by the Beach Service Road and the Pacific Ocean, including the Water Activity Zone, unless it is a guide dog, signal dog or service dog as defined in Penal Code Section 365.5, except that upon those Adjacent Beach Areas, and the Water Activity Zone, located north of the line created by extending the northern curb line of 22nd Street to the Pacific Ocean to Seapoint Avenue, wherein dogs constrained by a leash no longer than six feet in length are permitted.

B.     No Person shall permit any animal, domesticated or wild, to be left unattended on the Beach or Adjacent Beach Area. (344-10/31, 554-12/49, 769-7/60, 2907-8/87, 3355-7/97, 3606-6/03, 3930-2/12, 4118-5/17)

 

13.08.080 Soliciting
No Person shall engage in the business of soliciting, distributing, selling or peddling any liquids or edibles for human consumption, or to hawk, peddle or vend any goods, wares or merchandise on the Beach or Adjacent Beach Area, except pursuant to a permit issued by the Director. No Person shall give, set up or maintain any exhibition, show performance, concert, lecture, entertainment or similar activity on the Beach or Adjacent Beach Area without written permission to do so from the Director. No Person shall for profit offer sports camps, sports lessons or other similar activity on the Beach, Adjacent Beach Area, or in the Water Activity Zone without the written permission of the Director. (769-7/60, 3606-6/03, 3930-2/12, 4118-5/17)

 

13.08.090 Alcoholic Beverages—Consumption
Except as hereinafter provided, no Person shall, on or upon the Beach or Adjacent Beach Area, consume or sell, any Alcoholic Beverage, except pursuant to a permit issued by City Council. (769-7/60, 1306-3/67, 1588-8/70, 3606-6/03, 4118-5/17)

 

13.08.100 Alcoholic Beverages—Permits—Terms
A.    The Director may grant permits for the sale and consumption of Alcoholic Beverages under the following terms and conditions:

1.     The kind or kinds of permitted Alcoholic Beverages shall be identified in the permit.

2.     Each permit shall require that all Alcoholic Beverages be sold and consumed on permittee’s premises, the location and area of permittee’s premises to be set forth in said permit.

3.     That there be compliance with all other City, county and state laws and regulations.

4.     Such other terms and conditions as are reasonably required to protect the peace, health, welfare or safety of the public.

5.     The permit shall not be transferable and shall be valid only on dates specified.

B.     Nothing herein contained shall be construed as permitting the sale, purchase, distribution, or consumption of any Alcoholic Beverage on the Beach or Adjacent Beach Area, except pursuant to and as limited by a permit, as above set forth. (769-7/60, 1306-3/67, 1588-8/70, 3603-6/03, 4118-5/17)

 

13.08.110 Alcoholic Beverages—Permits—Revocation or Suspension
Permits are subject to suspension or to revocation by the City Council after notice to permittee and public hearing, on any of the following grounds:

A.    Permittee has made a substantial misrepresentation in his or her application for permit.

B.     Permittee or any of his or her employees has violated any laws or regulations concerning the operation of the business, or any terms or conditions of the permit.

C.     Permittee or any of his or her employees has been convicted of any crime involving moral turpitude.

D.    Permittee or any of his or her employees has knowingly permitted use of narcotics or dangerous drugs without reporting such incidents to the Police Department without unnecessary delay or not more than 24 hours after the commission thereof.

E.     Permittee or any of his or her employees has caused or permitted any breach of the peace on such premises, or has performed or permitted any act against the peace, health, welfare or safety of the public. (769-7/60, 1306-3/67, 1588-8/70, 4118-5/17)

 

13.08.115 Smoking Boundaries
No Person shall Smoke on the Beach or Adjacent Beach Area, Pier or Pier Plaza unless the Director has designated a specific signed smoking area. (3656-8/04, 4118-5/17)

 

13.08.120 Hazardous Water Sports
The following regulations shall apply to water sports:

A.    In order to protect the public health, safety and welfare, the Director shall set the hours and areas during which no Person within the Water Activity Zone, based on prevailing weather, water conditions, density of use and/or other hazard inducing conditions, shall use or have in his or her possession any surfboard, wind surfboard, paddleboard, bodyboard, skimboard, canoe, boat or any similar object made entirely or partially of wood, metal, hard plastic or any other hard substance, or which exceeds four feet in any dimension.

B.     The Director shall give notice of the time and area during which hazardous water sports, as defined by Section 13.08.120(A), are prohibited. Such prohibition shall be effective when a yellow flag or sign having a solid black circle in the center, commonly known as a “black ball” flag or sign is prominently displayed from a lifeguard tower, station, Pier or similar structure.

C.     During the times the “black ball” flag or sign is displayed, only swimming and bathing shall be permitted in the Water Activity Zone within 200 yards of the point of the display of the “black ball” flag or sign.

D.    No Person shall fail, refuse or neglect to leave the Water Activity Zone when such restriction and prohibition, as set out in this section, are in force.

E.     Notwithstanding any provision of this section, the Director or his or her authorized agent, may from time to time designate by permit, certain areas to be used exclusively for an event. Such designation may be revoked at any time and the area covered by such designation may be enlarged or reduced at any time. No Person shall enter in such area so designated except while participating in the permitted special or specific event. (769-7/60, 831-4/61, 1306-3/67, 1743-5/72, 1776-9/72, 1856-8/73, 3606-6/03, 3930-2/12, 4118-5/17)

 

13.08.130 Hazardous Articles
No Person shall use any surfboard, paddleboard, skimboard, bodyboard, wind surfboard, rubber life raft, canoe, boat, or any similar object made entirely or partially of wood, metal, glass, hard plastic or any other hard substance at any time, on the Beach, Adjacent Beach Area, or in the Water Activity Zone in a manner that constitutes a hazard to any other Person. (769-7/60, 1306-3/67, 3606-6/03, 4118-5/17)

 

13.08.135 Motorized Vessels
No Person shall operate or cause to operate any motorized vessel, boat, or personal watercraft in the Water Activity Zone unless authorized by the Director. (3606-6/03, 4118-5/17)

 

13.08.140 Beach Games and Practices
No Person shall use on the Beach, Adjacent Beach Area, or in Water Activity Zone any athletic apparatus, object or game in a manner that constitutes a hazard to any Person or conduct or participate in any sport or game that constitutes a hazard to any Person. (769-7/60, 1306-3/67, 3606-6/03, 4118-5/17)

 

13.08.150 Digging
No Person shall dig or cause the digging of any hole in the sand exceeding a depth of two feet. Any Person who digs, or causes to be dug, any hole upon the Beach or Adjacent Beach Area shall fill the hole before leaving the Beach or Adjacent Beach Area. (769-7/60, 3606-6/03, 4118-5/17)

 

13.08.160 Spear Guns
No Person shall have any spear gun or similar underwater device in his or her possession on the shore of the Beach or Adjacent Beach Area unless the point of such device is covered by a sheath, cork or other protective device. No spear gun or similar weapon or instrument shall be kept cocked, loaded or otherwise prepared so as to be capable of being discharged while on the Beach or Adjacent Beach Area. (769-7/60, 1306-3/67, 3606-6/03, 4118-5/17)

 

13.08.170 Jumping From the Pier and Public Bridges
No Person shall dive, jump or enter the water from the Pier or public bridge or any part thereof; provided, however, that this section shall not apply to the regularly employed lifeguard personnel of the City who are engaged in lifeguard training or in emergency jumps from the Pier or bridges for the purpose of saving lives and/or property. (769-7/60, 911-7/62, 3606-6/03, 4118-5/17)

 

13.08.180 Climbing on Rails of the Pier or Bridges
No Person shall sit, walk or balance on the rails of the Pier or public bridges or walkways or climb upon, over or under such rails, or sit, walk, balance or climb upon or over any cement walls which may be adjacent to such rails. (769-7/60, 911-7/62, 1935-11/74, 3606-6/03, 4118-5/17)

 

13.08.190 Climbing on Lifeguard Stations
No unauthorized Person shall climb, sit, stand or cause someone else to climb, sit or stand on any lifeguard station or ladder on the Beach, Adjacent Beach Area, or Pier unless told to do so by an official employee of the City. (769-7/60, 1306-3/67, 3606-6/03, 4118-5/17)

 

13.08.195 Tampering With Lifesaving Equipment
No Person shall tamper with lifesaving equipment, structures or buoys on the Beach, Adjacent Beach Area, or on the Pier. (3606-6/03, 4118-5/17)

 

13.08.200 Leaving Objects
No Person shall lay, store, hang or cause to be laid, stored, or cause to be hung any object on, against, or upon any lifeguard station or municipal structure except by permit issued by the Director. (1306-3/67, 3606-6/03, 4118-5/17)

 

13.08.210 False Alarms
No Person shall cause a false rescue or call for help when it is not needed, or to cause a lifeguard to enter the water upon a false rescue, or to leave his or her tower or to have his or her attention drawn to a false alarm. (769-7/60, 1306-3/67, 4118-5/17)

 

13.08.220 Interfering With Lifeguard
No Person shall willfully resist, delay or obstruct any lifeguard in the discharge or attempt to discharge any duty of his or her position. (1306-3/67, 4118-5/17)

 

13.08.225 Interfering With Park Ranger
No Person shall willfully resist, delay or obstruct any park ranger in the discharge or attempt to discharge any duty of his or her position. (1306-3/67, 4118-5/17)

 

13.08.230 Causing Object to Reflect
No Person shall use a mirror, glass or any similar object to cause the sun to reflect thereon so as to interfere with the vision of any lifeguard or other Person(s). (1306-3/67, 1535-11/69, 1743-5/72, 4118-5/17)

 

13.08.240 Curfew
A.    Except as otherwise specified, no Person shall be on the Beach or the Adjacent Beach Area bounded by the Beach Service Road and the Pacific Ocean including the Water Activity Zone between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. except upon official business of the City or by permit issued by the Director. In the event of special circumstances so warranting, the Director, in his or her judgment, is authorized and empowered to modify temporarily the hours during which the Beaches are closed. Said modification is to be filed with the City Manager at least 10 days prior to the requested date and posted conspicuously.

B.     Pier and Pier Plaza Curfew. No Person shall remain on or upon the Pier or Pier Plaza between the hours of midnight and 5:00 a.m. except by permit issued by the Director. (769-7/60, 861-9/61, 1306-3/67, 3606-6/03, 3930-2/12, 4118-5/17)

 

13.08.260 Electrical Systems
No Person shall use any electrical outlets on the Beach or Adjacent Beach Area without first obtaining written consent from the Director and paying such fees as may be prescribed. (1306-3/67, 1509-7/69, 3606-6/03, 4118-5/17)

 

13.08.270 Noise
No Person shall play, use or operate, or permit to be played, used or operated, any instrument, machine or device, for producing or reproducing sound upon the Beach or Adjacent Beach Area, at such a volume as unreasonably to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of Persons who are not voluntary listeners thereto, after having been warned. (1306-3/67, 1743-5/72, 1935-11/74, 3606-6/03, 4118-5/17)

 

13.08.280 Vehicle and Parking Regulation—Beach
A.    No Person shall operate or possess any motor-driven cycle, motor-driven bicycle, motorcycle, automobile, motor truck or other motorized vehicle or conveyance (regardless of power source or size) on the Beach or Adjacent Beach Area other than for law enforcement, lifesaving or emergency purposes, or for Beach maintenance purposes, except by permit issued by the Director; nor on any roads on which signs are posted prohibiting such activity, nor in any manner or direction prohibited by posted signs, nor on any Beach or Adjacent Beach Area other than on the roads, drives or parking areas designed for such purposes.

B.     No Person shall operate any Wheeled Conveyance on the Beach Service Road if said Wheeled Conveyance has been prohibited by the Director and said prohibition has been properly posted.

C.     Exceeding Speed Limit.

1.     No Person shall operate any Wheeled Conveyance of any type on the Beach, Adjacent Beach Area, or Beach Service Road at a speed in excess of 10 miles per hour unless a greater speed is posted. The maximum speed limit when pedestrians are present shall be five miles per hour.

2.     No Person shall operate any Wheeled Conveyance of any type on the Beach Service Road at a walking speed in excess of two and one-half miles per hour, between designated points, when the yellow lights are flashing.

D.    Delivering Concessions. During the period of June 15th to September 15th, any and all commercial motor vehicles of any type, must make their deliveries to Beach concessions between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 11:00 a.m., except by permit from the Director. During all other times of the year, deliveries must take place during Beach non-curfew hours.

E.     Parking. No Person shall park any vehicle except in designated parking areas; provided, however, that the Director is authorized to permit parking in non-designated areas when, in his or her opinion, such parking will not interfere with Adjacent Beach Area operations.

F.     Traffic Control Signs. The Director is authorized and directed to erect and maintain signs at locations he or she deems appropriate, indicating the speed limits established by the City Council for the Beaches, along roadways and streets herein. The Director is also authorized to designate parking areas and traffic patterns and to erect and maintain signs indicating such areas and patterns. (1306-3/67, 2138-1/77, 2768-5/85, 2851-8/86, 3123-11/91, 3329-5/96, 3606-6/03, 4118-5/17)

 

13.08.285 Motor Vehicle Permits
Any Person desiring to access the Beach, Adjacent Beach Area, or Pier with a vehicle for delivery, maintenance, transportation or any other service must obtain a permit from the Director. (3329-5/96, 3606-6/03, 4118-5/17)

 

13.08.290 Vehicle and Parking Regulation—Pier and Pier Plaza
Pursuant to Section 13.08.280 of this chapter, the following shall apply:

A.    Speed Limit. No Person shall operate any Wheeled Conveyance upon the Pier or Pier Plaza in excess of five miles per hour.

B.     Heavy Vehicles. No Person shall drive or permit to be driven any vehicle of any kind or character whatsoever, upon the Pier or Pier Plaza of a gross weight in excess of 20,000 pounds.

C.     Roller Skates, In-Line Skates, Skateboards and Scooters on the Pier or Pier Plaza. No Person shall use any roller skates, in-line skates, skateboards or scooters on the Pier or Pier Plaza at any time. These items must be carried if brought on the Pier or Pier Plaza.

D.    Parking. No Person shall park a vehicle on the Pier or Pier Plaza, unless he or she possesses a written permit from the Director allowing him or her to do so. No Person shall leave a vehicle standing or unattended on the Pier or Pier Plaza at any time.

E.     Unauthorized Vehicles Prohibited. No Person shall push or operate any automobile, motorcycle, truck, or any other motor driven vehicle or conveyance upon the Pier or Pier Plaza, except by permit issued by the Director.

F.     Bicycles on Pier. No Person shall ride a bicycle or any similar type vehicle on the Pier or Pier Plaza, except by permit issued by the Director. Bicycles or similar type vehicles may be walked or pushed on the Pier or Pier Plaza. No bicycle or similar type vehicle shall be chained, cabled or locked by any means to the railings on the Pier, ramps, stairs, or parking lot except to the bicycle racks provided therefor.

G.    Delivering Concessions. Vendors or their agents shall not make deliveries by vehicles to concessionaires on the Pier except between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 11:00 a.m. during the dates of June 15th to September 15th. During all other times, deliveries must be made during non-curfew hours. (3606-6/03, 4118-5/17)

 

13.08.300 Beach Parking Lot Regulations
The following regulations will apply to parking in any of the City-owned and operated Beach Parking Lots:

A.    Parking is allowed within designated spaces only.

B.     There shall be no parking between 10:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. except by permit issued by the Director.

C.     Any deviation from this section will be by permission of the Director and shall be conspicuously posted.

D.    No loitering or obstructing of flow of traffic will be allowed in the parking lot by any Person or Persons.

E.     No Person shall obstruct or cause to be obstructed any entrance or exit in the parking lot.

F.     No trailers or similar vehicles will be allowed in the parking lot except by permit issued by the Director.

G.    Fees for parking shall be established by resolution of the City Council.

H.    Any vehicle leaving the parking lot and returning will be required to pay on re-entering.

I.      Number of parking permits per concession owner will be determined by the Director.

J.      The Director shall have the authority to designate reserved parking areas in City-owned and/or operated Beach Parking Lots.

K.    No unauthorized vehicle shall park in a reserved parking area where signs are posted giving notice of such reserved parking. (3606-6/03, 4118-5/17)

 

13.08.310 Fishing From the Pier
Fishing is allowed from the Pier, but the following acts are prohibited:

A.    Overhead Casting. Cast a fishing line, either with or without a fishing pole, over the top railing of the Pier.

B.     Negligent Casting. No Person shall cast in the water adjacent to the Pier or on the Pier, a fishing line, lobster trap, crab trap, any mussel hook, or any other such device in such a manner as to create a hazard to any other person.

C.     Extra Lines. No Person shall have more than two fishing lines in the water under or near the Pier at one time.

D.    Projecting Poles. No Person shall allow or permit any fishing pole to extend inward from the Pier rail to a distance of more than four feet.

E.     Cleaning of Fish or Mussel. No Person shall place, cut or clean any fish, mussel or bait, or any other marine life directly upon any bench or seat placed upon the Pier or upon the floor or railings of the Pier except in the areas provided therefor.

F.     Lobster Traps. No Person shall have more than two traps in the water under or near the Pier at any one time. A Person shall attend said traps at all times.

G.    Feeding Wildlife. No Person shall provide food, bait or other material in a manner as to feed wildlife upon the Pier.

H.    Fishing from Closed Area. No Person shall set up or cast a fishing line in areas on the Pier that have been closed to fishing.

I.      No Person shall use the Pier railing for leverage to pull fishing line, lobster trap, any mussel hook, or other such device in such a manner as to create a hazard to any other Person or cause damage to the Pier railing. (3606-6/03, 4118-5/17)

 

13.08.330 Removal of Sand
No Person shall remove, or cause to be removed from the Beach, Adjacent Beach Area, or Pacific Ocean, any sand without written permission from the Director. (1306-3/67, 3606-6/03, 4118-5/17)

 

13.08.340 Glass Containers on the Beach
No Person shall have, possess or use any dangerous article or container such as a bottle, glass, crockery or similar object upon the Beach, Adjacent Beach Area, or in the Water Activity Zone. (2882-12/86, 3606-6/03, 4118-5/17)

 

13.08.350 Beach and Ocean Closure—Authority
A.    The Director shall have the authority to close any Beach, Adjacent Beach Area, harbor, or ocean waters of the Pacific Ocean in order to protect the public health, safety, and welfare. Such closure shall be effective when notice of closure is given through any of the following methods:

1.     Signs stating that the Beach is closed or that swimming is prohibited, or depicting a swimmer and a red circle with a slash through the circle, or otherwise advising of closure;

2.     Public address announcements;

3.     Oral or written notice from the Director, any marine safety officer, lifeguard, or other authorized agent; or

4.     Any other device or announcement reasonably communicating such closure.

B.     No Person shall enter, remain in, or fail or refuse to leave a closed area of the Beach, Adjacent Beach Area, harbor, or the Pacific Ocean while such restriction is in effect. (3101-5/91, 3606-6/03, 4118-5/17)

 

13.08.360 Enforcing Officer
This chapter shall be enforced by the Director, as well as by peace officers having jurisdiction of any area in which a violation of any provision of this title takes place. (3606-6/03, 4118-5/17)

 

13.08.370 Violation—Penalty
Any Person violating any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor, and subject to a fine of not more than $500.00 or be imprisoned for a period not to exceed six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (3606-6/03, 4118-5/17)

 

13.08.380 Violation—Alternative Remedies
Any violation of any provisions of this chapter shall subject the violator to ejection from the premises of the area in which the violation occurs. (3606-6/03, 4118-5/17)

 

Chapter 13.10 CAMPING
13.10.010 Purpose.
The streets and public areas within the City should be readily accessible and available to residents and the public at large. The use of these areas for camping purposes or storage of personal property interferes with the rights of others to use the areas for which they were intended. Such activity can constitute a public health and safety hazard which adversely impacts neighborhoods and commercial areas. Camping on private property without the consent of the owner, proper sanitary measures and for other than a minimal duration adversely affects private property rights as well as public health, safety, and welfare of the City. The purpose of this chapter is to maintain streets, parks and other public and private areas within the City in a clean, sanitary and accessible condition and to adequately protect the health, safety and public welfare of the community, while recognizing that, subject to reasonable conditions, camping and camp facilities associated with special events can be beneficial to the cultural and educational climate in the City. Nothing in this chapter is intended to interfere with otherwise lawful and ordinary uses of public or private property. (3964-12/12, 4119-5/17)

 

13.10.020 Definitions.
Unless the particular provisions or the context otherwise requires, the definitions contained in this section shall govern the construction, meaning, and application of words and phrases used in this chapter.

“Camp” means to place, pitch or occupy camp facilities; to live temporarily in a camp facility or outdoors; to use camp paraphernalia.

“Camp facilities” include, but are not limited to, tents, huts, vehicles, vehicle camping outfits or temporary shelter.

“Camp paraphernalia” includes, but is not limited to, bedrolls, tarpaulins, cots, beds, sleeping bags, hammocks or cooking facilities and similar equipment.

“City Manager” means the City Manager or designee.

“Establish” means setting up or moving equipment, supplies or materials on to public or private property to “camp” or operate camp facilities.

“Maintain” means keeping or permitting equipment, supplies or materials to remain on public or private property in order to camp or operate camp facilities.

“Operate” means participating or assisting in establishing or maintaining a camp or camp facility.

“Park” means the same as defined in Section 12.72.010 of this title.

“Private property” means all private property including, but not limited to, streets, sidewalks, alleys, and improved or unimproved land.

“Public property” means all public property including, but not limited to, streets, sidewalks, alleys, improved or unimproved land and parks.

“Store” means to put aside or accumulate for use when needed, to put aside for safekeeping, to place or leave in a location.

“Street” means the same as defined in Section 12.16.180 of this title. (3964-12/12, 4119-5/17)

 

13.10.030 Unlawful Camping
It is unlawful and a public nuisance for any person to camp, occupy camp facilities, or use camp paraphernalia in the following areas:

A.    Any public property; or

B.     Any private property.

1.     It is not intended by this chapter to prohibit overnight camping on private residential property by friends or family of the property owner, so long as the owner consents and the overnight camping is limited to not more than one consecutive night. In addition, it is not intended by this chapter to prohibit overnight camping on public property as required by State or Federal law.

2.     Nothing in this chapter is intended to prohibit or make unlawful, activities of an owner of private property or other lawful user of private property that are normally associated with and incidental to the lawful and authorized use of private property for residential or other purposes; and provided further, nothing is intended to prohibit or make unlawful, activities of a property owner or other lawful user if such activities are expressly authorized by the Huntington Beach Municipal Code or other laws, ordinances and regulations.

3.     The City Manager may, as provided in Section 13.10.050 of this chapter, issue a temporary permit to allow camping on public or private property in connection with a special event. (3964-12/12, 4119-5/17)

 

13.10.040 Storage of Personal Property on Public and Private Property
It is unlawful and a public nuisance for any person to store personal property, including camp paraphernalia, in the following areas, except as otherwise provided by resolution of the City Council:

A.    Any public property; or

B.     Any private property without the written consent of the owner. (3964-12/12, 4119-5/17)

 

13.10.050 Permit for Special Events Required
The City Manager may, in his or her discretion, issue a permit to establish, maintain and operate a camp or a camp facility in connection with a special event. A special event is intended to include, but not be limited to, programs operated by the departments of the City, youth or school events, marathons or other sporting events and scouting activities. The City Manager may consult with various City departments, the health officer and the public prior to issuing any temporary permit. Each department or person consulted may provide comments regarding any health, safety or public welfare concerns and provide recommendations pertaining to the issuance, denial or conditioning of the permit. A reasonable fee, to be set by the City Council shall be paid, in advance, by the applicant. The fee shall be returned if the application is denied. In exercising his or her discretion to issue a temporary permit, the City Manager may consider any facts or evidence bearing on the sanitary, health, safety and welfare conditions on or surrounding the area or tract of land upon which the proposed temporary camp or camp facility is to be located. (4119-5/17)

 

13.10.060 Posting Copy of Permit
It is unlawful for any person to establish, maintain, conduct or carry on any camp or camp facility unless there shall be at all times posted in a conspicuous place upon the area or tract of land upon which the camp or camp facility is located a permit obtained from the City Manager in accordance with the provisions of Section 13.10.050 of this chapter. (4119-5/17)

 

13.10.070 Power of the City Manager to Make Rules and Regulations
The City Manager is further empowered to ascertain that the operation or maintenance of any camp or camp facilities to which a temporary permit shall apply will in no way jeopardize the public health, safety or welfare and for this purpose may make additional rules and regulations pertaining to their establishment, operation or conduct. The City Manager may also impose conditions on the establishment, maintenance and operation of the camp or camp facility, including, but not limited to, security, sanitation facilities, the number of occupants, posting of bonds or deposits, insurance, quiet hours, duration of the permit, and permitted activities on the premises. When the City Manager shall issue any permit under the terms of Section 13.10.050 of this chapter, the same may be revoked at any time thereafter by the City Manager if the City Manager becomes satisfied that the maintenance or continuing operation of the camp or camp facilities is adverse to the public health, safety and welfare. (4119-5/17)

 

13.10.080 Current Ordinance provisions
Neither the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter nor the repeal hereby of any ordinance shall in any manner affect the prosecution for violation of ordinances, which violations were committed prior to the effective date hereof, nor be construed as affecting any of the provisions of such ordinance relating to the collection of any such license or penalty or the penal provision applicable to any violation thereof, nor to affect the validity of any bond or cash deposit in lieu thereof, required to be posted, filed or deposited pursuant to any ordinance, and all rights and obligations thereunder appertaining shall continue in full force and effect. (4119-5/17)

 

13.10.090 Violations—Penalty
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be punishable as provided in the Huntington Beach Municipal Code. In addition to the remedies set forth in Penal Code Section 370, the City Attorney may institute civil actions to abate a public nuisance under this chapter. (3964-12/12, 4119-5/17)

 

13.10.100 Severability
If any provision of this chapter is rendered illegal or invalid or unenforceable, all other parts of this chapter shall remain in full force and effect. (4119-5/17)

 

Chapter 13.28 CAMPER FACILITIES
Note
*       Note: §§ 13.28.100, 13.28.170, 13.28.190, 13.28.260 and 13.28.290 repealed by Ord. 3607-6/03.

 

13.28.005 Definitions
For the purpose of this chapter the following terms shall have the respective meanings set forth herein, unless the context in which they are used clearly indicates to the contrary:

“Alcoholic beverage” includes alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer and every liquid or solid containing alcohol, spirits, wine or beer and which contains one-half of one percent or more of alcohol by volume and which is fit for beverage purposes either alone or when diluted, mixed, or combined with other substances.

“Director” refers to the Director of the Community Services Department and/or his or her designee.

“Occupied” means used for the purpose of protecting human beings from wind, sun, rain or public view.

“Person” means any individual, firm, copartnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, corporation or any other group or combination, acting as a unit. (3607-6/03)

 

13.28.010 Established—Availability
There is established a City camper facility, open for term parking generally from September until May of each year and for en route camping generally from June to September of each year, unless otherwise authorized by the director for reasons of public safety, current parking conditions or construction projects. Said facility will be located within the beach parking lot between First and Huntington Streets. (1827-5/73, 2611-4/83, 2891-3/87, 3607-6/03)

 

13.28.020 Fees and Rules Adopted
Fees for and rules governing the use of the City camper facility shall be determined by resolution of the City Council. (1827-5/73, 3607-6/03)

 

13.28.030 Reservations—Deposit
A.    Reservations for campsites may be made by applying to the director not more than one calendar month prior to the time of desired occupancy.

B.     Applications for reservation shall be accompanied by a deposit in the amount of the daily fee as set by resolution, refundable when reservation has not been confirmed or accommodation is not available. (1827-5/73, 2611-4/83, 3607-6/03)

 

13.28.040 Fee Payment Before Facility Use
No person shall use or occupy facilities in the City camper facility unless the fee, established by resolution of the City Council, has first been paid. (1827-5/73)

 

13.28.050 Occupancy
A campsite shall be considered occupied or reserved for camping purposes upon payment of the appropriate fee within the time limit specified in this chapter. No person shall take possession of any campsite after notification by a City employee that such site is already occupied or reserved. (1827-5/73, 3607-6/03)

 

13.28.060 Number Occupying Campsite
The number of vehicles and persons occupying any campsite shall not exceed two vehicles and eight persons except that the director may authorize a greater or lesser number when conditions so warrant. (1827-5/73)

 

13.28.070 Time Limit
In order to afford the general public the greatest possible use of the City camper facility, continuous occupancy by the same person or group of persons of any campsite shall be limited to 14 days maximum within any calendar month during the established term parking period, and to one consecutive night only during en-route camping periods. (1827-5/73, 2611-5/83, 2891-3/87, 2994-5/89, 3607-6/03)

 

13.28.080 Checking Out
Occupants shall remove all personal property and vacate campsites prior to 12:00 p.m. on the last day of reservation during term parking and at 8:00 a.m. during en route camping periods. Campsites shall be left in a neat, orderly condition. (1827-5/73, 2611-5/83, 3607-6/03)

 

13.28.090 Vehicle Restrictions
Any camper, trailer or motor home over 25 feet in length shall park in assigned areas designated for that purpose only. (1827-5/73, 3607-6/03)

 

13.28.110 Overnight Camping in Daytime Areas
When authorized by the director, overnight camping may be permitted from time to time in portions of the City camper facility designated as daytime areas. Use of such daytime areas for overnight camping shall be subject to fees established by the City Council, subject to restrictions as to use, occupancy and entry into and of only such portions as may be specified by the director. (1827-5/73, 2891-3/87, 3607-6/03)

 

13.28.120 Facility Deemed City Property
All property within the camper facility is declared City property, devoted to the public use and enjoyment, subject to all laws and regulations applicable thereto, and no person may, by prescription or adverse possession, obtain any right therein. (1827-5/73, 3607-6/03)

 

13.28.130 Plants
No person shall pick, dig up, cut, mutilate, destroy, injure, disturb, move, molest, burn or carry away any tree or plant or portion thereof, including, but not limited to, leaf mold, flowers, foliage, turf, humus or shrubs in City camper facility. (1827-5/73, 3607-6/03)

 

13.28.140 Disturbing City Property
No person shall disturb, destroy, remove, deface or injure any property of the City. No person shall cut, carve, paint, mark, paste or fasten on any tree, fence, wall, building, monument or other property in the City camper facility any bill, advertisement or inscription. (1827-5/73, 3607-6/03)

 

13.28.150 Rubbish
No person shall leave, deposit, drop or scatter bottles, broken glass, ashes, wastepaper, cans or other rubbish in any place in the City camper facility except in a receptacle designated for that purpose. No person shall bring in or deposit any rubbish from outside the City camper facility in or on any part of such facility. (1827-5/73, 3607-6/03)

 

13.28.160 Fires
No person shall light, build, use or maintain a fire within the City camper facility except in an approved, self-contained barbecue, maintained within the designated camping space. (1827-5/73, 3607-6/03)

 

13.28.180 Firearms Prohibited
No person shall carry or possess a firearm within the camper facility, nor shall any person discharge across, in or on any part of the City camper facility any firearm, bow and arrow, air or gas weapon, or any device which discharges a missile and is capable of injuring or killing any animal or damaging or destroying any public or private property. (1827-5/73, 3607-6/03)

 

13.28.200 Hours of Operation
Entry into the City camper facility will be accommodated daily between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. No campsites will be rented after 9:00 p.m. (1827-5/73, 2611-5/83, 3607-6/03)

 

13.28.210 Curfew Imposed
A.    The director may from time to time declare curfew for minors in any part of the City camper facility upon finding that conditions therein warrant special measures for the protection of such minors and others, and for the safety and welfare of the general public.

B.     Such curfew shall be posted and shall state the specific location, if applicable, and the period of time during which such curfew shall remain in effect.

C.     During the period any curfew has been declared, no minor shall enter or remain in the City camper facility, or portion thereof declared to be under curfew except:

1.     One who is accompanied by a parent or guardian; or

2.     One who is part of a group occupying a campsite, accompanied and supervised by one responsible adult for every eight minors in such group. (1827-5/73, 3607-6/03)

 

13.28.220 Games
No person shall play any ball game, horseshoes or other similar game or activity in picnic or campground areas except at those times and places specifically designated for such purposes. (1827-5/73)

 

13.28.230 Sanitation and Appearance
A.    To maintain a sanitary condition and an orderly appearance, and to protect the resources of the City camper facility area, the director may specify size, type and arrangement of camping equipment and the number of persons permitted in such areas, and no equipment shall be brought into, kept, used or arranged except under the direction and supervision of the director. No person shall hang, drape or display any towels or clothing of any type outside any camper, trailer, or mobile home or in a manner which exposes such articles to the public view.

B.     No waste, water, sewage or effluent from sinks, portable toilets or other plumbing fixtures shall be deposited directly on or into the surface of the ground or water. All sewage outlets on campers, trailers or mobile homes must be securely capped at all times while in the City camper facility except when disposing waste in the facility outlet provided therefor. Posted waste disposal guidelines must be adhered to at all times. (1827-5/73, 3607-6/03)

 

13.28.240 Speed of Vehicles
No person shall drive a vehicle within the City camper facility at a speed greater than is reasonable or prudent, having due regard for the traffic on, the surface and width of the road, and the safety of persons, property and wildlife; provided that in no event shall a vehicle be driven at a speed over 10 miles an hour in such facility. The use of any vehicle including motorcycles and scooters for purposes of speed exhibitions and joy riding is prohibited. (1827-5/73, 3607-6/03)

 

13.28.250 Vehicles—Confined to Roads
Operation of vehicles in the City camper facility shall be confined to roads, driveways, parking areas or other areas designed to accommodate such vehicles. No privately-owned vehicle shall be operated on any road which has been designated closed to traffic. (1827-5/73, 3607-6/03)

 

13.28.270 Parking Areas
The director may restrict the parking or standing of vehicles on certain highways, driveways, paths or grounds, or portions thereof, in the City camper facility during all or certain hours of the day, and any vehicle parked or left standing in violation of such restriction may be removed by a City peace officer. (1827-5/73, 3607-6/03)

 

13.28.280 Commercial Vehicles
No commercial vehicles shall be operated inside the City camper facility except for the purpose of delivering merchandise or servicing equipment in such facility, or for emergency purposes. Other commercial vehicles may be granted admission by the director for a special activity not inconsistent with camper facility use. (1827-5/73, 3607-6/03)

 

13.28.300 Camping Outside Designated Areas
No person shall camp in any part of the City camper facility except in areas designated and marked for such purpose, and no minor shall camp in any part of the camper facility unless accompanied by a parent or guardian, or as part of a group occupying a campsite, accompanied by and supervised by one responsible adult for every eight minors in such group. (1827-5/73, 3607-6/03)

 

13.28.310 Parking Provisions
With reference to the City camper facility area, as to any provisions of Section 13.08.300 of this title which are inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter, the provisions of this chapter shall prevail. (1827-5/73, 3607-6/03)

 

13.28.320 Alcoholic Beverages
Notwithstanding the provisions of Sections 13.08.090 and 13.08.100 of this title, any occupant of a campsite, 21 years or older, may possess alcoholic beverages within the confines of such campsite during specified camping periods. (2572-10/82, 2611-4/83, 3607-6/03)

 

13.28.330 Enforcing Officer
This chapter shall be enforced by the director, as well as by peace officers having jurisdiction of any area in which a violation of any provision of this title takes place. (3607-6/03)

 

13.28.340 Violation—Penalty
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor, and subject to a fine of not more than $500.00 or be imprisoned for a period not to exceed six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (3607-6/03)

 

13.28.350 Violation—Alternative Remedies
Any violation of any provision of this chapter shall subject the violator to ejection from the premises of the area in which the violation occurs. (3607-6/03)

 

Chapter 13.32 HARBORS—GENERALLY
13.32.010 Scope
The provisions of this chapter shall, unless otherwise expressly provided, apply to all harbors and other publicly-owned or operated land or inland waterways in the City. (1430-9/68)

 

13.32.020 Definitions
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms shall have the respective meanings set forth herein unless the context in which they are used clearly indicates a different meaning is intended. Words not defined herein which have the meaning ascribed to them by the Harbors and Navigation Code of the State of California, have the meaning ascribed to them in ordinary usage:

“Anchorage area” means any portion of a harbor which has been designated as an anchorage area pursuant to law and approved by the federal government.

“Bulkhead line” means the line or point where the outer portion of the bulkhead meets the water.

“Commercial activity” shall mean any service, trade, business or occupation carried on for which any monetary or other valuable consideration is received, or for the purpose of profit, and shall include but not be limited to water taxi service and sight-seeing vessels.

“Director” means the Director of the Community Services Department.

“Mooring” means any appliance used to secure a vessel other than to pier or dock, which is not carried aboard such vessel as regular equipment.

“Pierhead line” means the line between the bulkhead and the waterway which line separates the area open for navigation from the area extending outward from the bulkhead in which the mooring and docking of vessels is permitted. The exact distance from the bulkhead to the pierhead line shall be determined by the City Council.

“Protected swimming area” means an area for swimming set aside by the City Council and designated by or outlined by lines, floats or buoys.

“Turning basin” means that portion of any channel which has been so designated pursuant to law and approved by the federal government for the purpose of permitting vessels to turn around or permitting their course of direction to be altered.

“Waters of a harbor” means all water in which the tide ebbs and flows whether or not the ordinary or mean high tide line of the Pacific Ocean has been fixed by ordinance, statute, court or otherwise and whether or not the land lying under said tidal waters is privately or publicly owned. (1430-9/68, 2374-7/79)

 

13.32.030 Administrative Authority
The responsibility for enforcement of these chapters is delegated to the Director of Community Services, and such of his or her agents as he or she may designate to perform said duty, as well as by peace officers having jurisdiction in any area in which violation of any provision of this title takes place. (2374-7/79)

 

13.32.040 Permit for Commercial Activities Required
A.    No person shall engage in or carry on any commercial activity on the waters of harbors within the City without first having applied for and obtained a permit for such activity from the director.

B.     Exceptions. The requirement to obtain a commercial activity permit is not applicable to persons operating commercial fishing vessels or private vessels chartered primarily for use outside harbors within the City. Said activity shall be prohibited and considered a violation of this chapter and zoning regulations. (2374-7/79)

 

13.32.050 Application for Permit
An application for a permit under this chapter shall be filed with the director upon forms provided by the City, and shall contain the following information and such other information as the director may require:

A.    The name, business address and business telephone number of applicant.

B.     If the applicant proposes to conduct business under a fictitious name, the application shall state the name, address and telephone number of each person owning a financial interest in the business.

C.     The name, address and telephone number of the person or persons who will have general management responsibility for the applicant’s business.

D.    A drawing of the boat, watercraft and/or other facility which the applicant proposes to use, together with such specifications and other technical data as may be needed for proper evaluation of the application.

E.     A full description of the proposed method of operation of such vessel, watercraft and/or other facility, including but not limited to:

1.     House of operation;

2.     Maximum number of patrons or passengers;

3.     Route or routes of travel;

4.     Embarkation and debarkation points;

5.     Types of activities to be permitted on board; and

6.     Types of merchandise to be sold.

F.     A description of the manner in which the applicant intends to dispose of sewage, trash and litter resulting from the operation.

G.    A description and location of parking facilities available for the proposed operation.

H.    A full description of a plan for monitoring discharge of waste from boats moored, tied or anchored in any facility owned, leased or controlled by the permittee, his or her employees or agents. The description shall include a method of minimizing waste discharge and the way in which it will be employed and shall provide a detailed description of a means of enforcement. Said plan must provide that no person may use a boat slip, mooring, dock, or any place of any other description where a boat can be secured, which is owned, leased or controlled by the permittee, unless such boats are connected to the sanitary sewer system or equipped with an approved holding tank designed to retain all waste on board. Vessels with holding tanks must, at all times, be treated with dye tablets placed into the vessels’ marine sanitation devices. Such dye tablets shall be a type commonly used to test the integrity of sanitary sewer systems and as approved by the director as complying with the intent of this section.

I.      Lessors subject to this section must include in any lease or rental agreement a provision stating that any violation of this section will be grounds for termination of the boat slip lease or rental agreement. Said lessor shall agree that a condition of the permit to operate hereunder shall be that no tenant under his or her control will violate any provision of this section. (2374-7/79, 3078-11/90)

 

13.32.060 Filing Fee
An application as required by this chapter shall be accompanied by a fee in an amount, established by resolution of the City Council, to compensate the City for the administrative costs of processing such application. (2374-7/79)

 

13.32.070 Grounds for Issuance or Denial of a Permit
The director shall determine whether to issue or deny a permit after considering the following factors:

A.    Whether the proposed commercial activity is compatible with the predominant characteristics of the harbor and its surrounding area.

B.     Whether the proposed commercial activity will comply with the requirements pertaining to noise control contained in Chapter 8.40 of this Code.

C.     Whether the proposed activity will have an adverse effect on the efforts to keep harbors free of pollution and litter.

D.    Whether the vessel or watercraft proposed to be used by the applicant satisfies the applicable standards of the U. S. Coast Guard.

E.     Whether the proposed method of operation will create unreasonable traffic problems in the harbors which would interfere with the rights of others to use such harbors within the City. (2374-7/79)

 

13.32.080 Permit—Denial—Appeal
If the director refuses to grant the permit, the applicant may, within 10 days after receipt of notice of refusal to grant the permit, file an appeal in writing with the City Clerk. The City Clerk shall set the appeal for hearing before the City Council, and shall give the applicant 10 days written notice prior to the date the appeal is to be heard. (2374-7/79)

 

13.32.090 Duration of Permit
Any permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall continue to be valid unless such permit is suspended or revoked. (2374-7/79)

 

13.32.100 Revocation or Suspension
Any permit granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter may be revoked or suspended by the director, either in whole or in part, after five days prior written notice to the permittee, directing him or her to appear at a certain time and place to show cause why the permit should not be revoked or suspended on any of the following grounds:

A.    That the permittee has made a misrepresentation as to any material fact set forth in the application.

B.     That the permittee has not filed adequate evidence of liability insurance coverage with the City, or has allowed its insurance coverage to lapse or be canceled.

C.     For the violation of any rule, regulation or condition set forth in or authorized by this chapter.

D.    For the violation of any law or regulation of the state, City, County of Orange, or the Orange County Harbor District, relating to the operation of the business by the permittee or any of his or her employees. (2374-7/79)

 

13.32.110 Public Liability Insurance Requirement
No permittee shall engage in or carry on any commercial activity unless there is on file with the City, and in full force and effect at all times while such commercial activity is being conducted, a certificate of insurance approved by the City Attorney’s office. Minimum liability insurance coverage shall be established by resolution of the City Council. Such public liability insurance policy shall indemnify, defend and hold harmless the City, City Council, elective and appointive officers, employees, boards and commissions of the City while acting within the scope of their official duties against all claims arising out of or in connection with the activity for which the permit was obtained. Failure of any permittee to maintain the insurance required by this section shall constitute grounds for revocation or suspension of this permit. (2374-7/79)

 

Chapter 13.36 BOATING REGULATIONS
13.36.010 Towing Prohibited in Huntington Harbour
No person shall tow from a vessel in the waters of Huntington Harbour any person in the water or on any object, other than a vessel, except where permitted in a designated special use area or during a special event authorized by the Director of the Community Services Department. (1806-2/63)

 

13.36.020 Speed Limit
No owner, operator or person in command of any vessel, except a police officer, fireman or lifeguard in the performance of his or her duty, shall operate any vessel or permit any vessel to be operated in any portion of any harbor at a rate of speed in excess of five miles per hour, or in any such manner or at any rate of speed which would endanger the safety of persons or property. (1634-3/71)

 

13.36.030 Launching and Hauling
No person shall launch or remove any vessel from the waters of a harbor over any public seawall, sidewalk, street or public property, except at locations where launching or removing vessels is conducted by a regular business which has the necessary equipment to do such work, or in those areas designated by the director and posted for such purposes. Any launching site so designated and posted may be regulated by resolution of the City Council as to hours of launching, size of vessels to be launched, types of vessels to be launched, and the method and apparatus to be used in the launching. (1430-9/68)

 

13.36.040 Damaging Harbor Property
No person shall willfully or negligently destroy, damage, disturb or deface or interfere with any buoy, float, life preserver, sign, navigational marking, mooring or similar property owned or used by the City or under the jurisdiction of the City or any other governmental agency. (1430-9/68)

 

13.36.050 Aircraft Landings
No person shall navigate on or land on or take off from the waters of a harbor with any aircraft. (1430-9/68)

 

13.36.060 Airboats Prohibited
No person shall operate on the waters of any harbor under the control of the City any vessel which is operated by mechanical air propulsion above the surface of the water. (1430-9/68)

 

13.36.070 Bulkhead Lines
Pierhead and bulkhead lines are established for the Huntington Harbour area as said lines are shown or described in the records on file in the offices of the Director of Public Works and the City Clerk. (1634-3/71)

 

13.36.080 Mooring of Vessels
No owner, operator or person in command of any vessel shall tie up or moor any vessel in a manner that creates a navigational hazard or dangerous condition as determined by the Orange County Harbor Patrol, nor shall such person place a pylon, dock, float, or other structure beyond the pierhead line. (1634-3/71, 2924-12/87, 3740-7/06)

 

13.36.090 Time Limit for Mooring
No owner, operator or person in command of any vessel shall tie up or moor any vessel at a public dock, float, wharf, sewer pump-out station, or other facility owned, leased or controlled by the City of Huntington Beach in excess of the time posted therefor. It shall be the duty of the Director of Community Services to establish such time limits and to post signs giving notice thereof. (2287-8/78, 2786-9/85)

 

13.36.100 Mooring of Non City-Owned Vessels to Public Docks
No owner, operator or person in command of any non City-owned vessel shall tie up or moor any such vessel at a dock, float, wharf or other facility owned, leased or controlled by the City of Huntington Beach without prior authorization in writing from the Director of the Community Services Department. (2287-8/78)

 

13.36.110 Board Vessel Without Permission
No person shall climb into or upon any vessel moored, docked or anchored in the harbors of the City without the consent of the owner or other in charge thereof, except that in the event of an emergency, public safety personnel may board any vessel to preserve health and safety. (2374-7/79)

 

13.36.120 Tampering With Vessel
No person shall willfully injure or tamper with, or break or remove any part of or from any vessel in the City, or tamper with the lines securing any such vessel, without the consent of the owner or other person in charge thereof. (2374-7/79)

 

13.36.130 Vessel Tie-Up Method
Every vessel lying at any pier in any harbor of the City shall be fastened thereto with lines, at least from the bow and stern, and in such manner as to ensure the security of such vessel. No permittee, or his or her authorized representative, shall permit or allow any vessel under his or her control, lying at any pier to be fastened in a manner other than that set out in this section. (2374-7/79)

 

13.36.140 Direct Fueling Prohibited
No person shall fuel any vessel with any petroleum product directly from a tank wagon or truck. (2374-7/79)

 

13.36.150 Living Aboard Prohibited
No person shall moor or dock any vessel in a harbor in the City for use as living quarters either permanently or for a period in excess of 72 hours. The enforcement of this section shall be the joint responsibility of the Community Services Director and the Community Development Director, and their designated representatives, together with any peace officers having jurisdiction in the area in which a violation of this section is committed. (2374-7/79, 2463-12/80)

 

13.36.160 Abandoned Vessel—Removal
The Police Chief, or his or her authorized agent, may remove, or cause to be removed, sell, destroy or otherwise dispose of any hulk, derelict, wreck or parts of any ship, vessel or other watercraft deemed “abandoned,” as defined in Section 522 of the California Harbors and Navigation Code, from any inland waters owned, operated and/or controlled by this City, including any public or private docks or slips therein in accordance with the procedure set forth in said Section 522. (2374-7/79)

 

13.36.170 Docking Vessel Without Permission
No person having charge of any vessel shall make the same fast to any pier, dock or slip in the harbors of the City, or permit the vessel to remain at such location after finishing loading or unloading such vessel, without the consent of the owner, agent, or person in charge on any such pier, dock or slip. (2951-8/88)

 

Chapter 13.40 SWIMMING RULES
13.40.010 Vessels Prohibited
No person shall operate, drive, propel or permit to drift into the protected swimming area any vessel. (1430-9/68)

 

13.40.020 Designation of Swimming Zones
The City Council, by resolution, may designate zones in water areas contiguous or adjoining water frontage areas owned, leased or controlled by the City within which swimming is allowed. The limits of all swimming zones so designated shall be posted by appropriate signs or markings. (1430-9/68)

 

13.40.030 Diving or Jumping From Public Property
No person shall dive, jump or enter into the water from or immediately in front of any bridge, pier, wharf, dock, float, bulkhead, seawall, groin, jetty, natural rock formations or any other place, or object not specifically designated for the purpose of diving, jumping or entering into the water. (1430-9/68)

 

Chapter 13.44 HARBOR SANITATION
13.44.010 Deposit of Refuse Prohibited
No person shall throw, discharge, deposit or leave, or cause, suffer or permit to be thrown, discharged, deposited or left, any rubbish, dead animals, refuse matter or any waste matter whatsoever into the waters of a harbor, or upon any public pier, wharf, seawall, bulkhead, float, beach jetty or street leading to such facility except in waste receptacles designated for such purposes. (1430-9/68)

 

13.44.020 Discharge of Toilets Prohibited
No person shall discharge, or permit, cause or suffer any person on a vessel under his or her control or command to discharge any human or animal waste or excreta from any head, toilet or similar facility or by any other means whatsoever into the waters of a harbor. (1430-9/68)

 

13.44.030 Discharge of Flammables Prohibited
No person shall throw, discharge, deposit, pump or leave or cause or permit to be thrown, discharged, deposited, pumped or left either from the shore, from any pier or vessel or from any other place whatsoever, any oil, spirits or any flammable liquid into the waters of a harbor. (1430-9/68)

 

13.44.040 Signs Prohibiting Waste Deposit
The owner or operator of any commercial docking facility or marina located on the waters of a harbor shall install and maintain at his or her own expense in conspicuous locations on the premises, signs to inform the public of the regulations prohibiting the discharge or depositing of any waste or refuse in the waters of a harbor. Uniform standards and specifications for the design, lettering and general locations of such signs shall be prescribed by the Director of Community Services. (1430-9/68)

 

13.44.050 Storage on Shoreline Prohibited
No person shall place or allow any abandoned vessel, boat or material, garbage, refuse or timber or waste matter of any type whatsoever to remain on beaches, piers, wharves, jetties, groins, bulkheads, seawalls, floats or shoreline of any harbor. (1430-9/68)

 

13.44.060 Vessel Wastes
No person shall own or operate a vessel equipped with any head (toilet) or receptacle for human body wastes in the waters of a harbor unless:

A.    The vessel is also equipped with a holding tank designed to retain all human body wastes deposited in said head or receptacle until such time as the sewage can be discharged into a sanitary sewer system or discharged otherwise in accordance with law; or

B.     The head or receptacle is connected directly to a sanitary sewer system; or

C.     The head or receptacle is connected to an on-board sewage treatment system which produces an effluent meeting such standards as may be approved by the county health officer for discharge into the waters of a harbor.

The effective date of this section shall be January 1, 1974. (1792-1/73)

 

13.44.070 Marina Pump-Out Facilities
The owner and operator of every commercial marina shall provide a permanent holding tank pump-out facility or equivalent service which is operable and available for use at all times and which is capable of servicing all vessels berthed, docked or moored at the marina.

The effective date of this section shall be January 1, 1974. (1792-1/73)

 

13.44.080 Dead Animals
No person shall throw, place or leave any dead animal or putrefying matter of any kind in the waters of any harbor within the City, or on or along the shore thereof, or the shore of any tidewater in the City. (2374-7/79)

 

Chapter 13.48 PARKS
13.48.010 Definitions
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings as set forth herein, unless the context in which they are used clearly indicates a contrary meaning:

“Alcoholic beverages” means any and all spirituous, vinous, malt or fermented liquor, liquids or compounds, whether medicated, proprietary, patented or not, and by whatever name called, containing one-half of one percent, or more, of alcohol by volume which are potable or fit as, or which may be used for beverage purposes.

“City” means the City of Huntington Beach.

“Department” means the Department of Community Services.

“Director” means the Director of the Community Services Department or other person(s) authorized by him or her, pursuant to law, to act in his or her stead.

“Park” includes every park recreation center, lake, pond or other body of water, riding and hiking trail, parking lot and every other recreation facility owned, managed and/or controlled by the City and under the jurisdiction of the director.

“Permission” means written permission, granted by the director or his or her authorized agent.

“Person” means any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, corporation or any other group acting as a unit.

“Skateboard” means a board of any material which has wheels attached and such wheels may be used for moving or propulsion.

“Skateboard park” means any facility that is designed and maintained for the purpose of recreational skateboard use.

“Smoke or smoking” means the carrying or holding of a lighted pipe, cigar, cigarette, e-cigarette, or any other lighted smoking product or equipment used to burn any tobacco products, weed, plant, or any other combustible substance. Smoking includes emitting or exhaling the fumes of any pipe, cigar, cigarette, e-cigarette or any other lighted smoking equipment used for burning or vaporizing any tobacco or nicotine product, weed, plant, or any other combustible substance.

“Sound amplifying system” means and includes any system of electrical hookup or connection, loudspeaker system or equipment, sound amplifying system and any apparatus, equipment, device, instrument or machine designed for or intended to be used for the purpose of amplifying sound or increasing the volume of the human voice, musical tone, vibration, or sound wave. This definition shall not apply to the regular and customary use of portable radios, televisions, record players or tape recorders played or operated in such places at such times so as not to disturb other persons in their permitted uses of the park. (1246-10/66, 2451-11/80, 3181-1/92, 4124-5/17)

 

13.48.015 Park Rangers
For the purpose of this chapter, all park rangers are designated “limited power peace officers.” Such park rangers shall have the authority to issue citations and/or make arrests for violations of this chapter, pursuant to Section 836.5 of the California Penal Code. (2451-11/80, 2964-10/88)

 

13.48.020 Unlawful Acts
It is unlawful for any person to do or commit, or for any person to cause or permit to be done or committed within the boundaries of any public park within the City of Huntington Beach, any act in the following sections. (1026-2/64, 1246-10/66)

 

13.48.025 Signs
No person shall fail or refuse to obey or comply with any notice or sign, including warning, regulatory and road markings, placed by order of the director for the safety or control of persons, vehicles or animals. No person shall willfully refuse to follow or comply with any lawful order or direction given by a department employee. (2451-11/80)

 

13.48.030 Vandalism
No person shall willfully cut, break, injure, deface, disfigure, mark or write upon, paint, carve, burn, tamper with, attach rope or wire to, displace or remove any tree, shrub, plant, turf, rock, sand, soil, wood, building, fence, table, bench, barbecue unit, pole, light, playground apparatus, bridge, railing, paving material, fountain, trash receptacle, waterline or other public utility, part or appurtenance thereof, sign, notice or placard, whether temporary or permanent, monument, stake, post or other boundary marker, equipment, tools, implements, materials, any structure or park facility whatsoever, either real or personal. (1026-2/64, 1246-10/66, 2451-11/80)

 

13.48.040 Public Toilets
No person shall fail to cooperate in maintaining public toilets in a neat and sanitary condition nor shall any person loiter in or about any public toilet or enter any public toilet designated for the opposite sex except that this provision shall not apply to persons under five years of age that are accompanied by a parent or guardian. (1026-2/64, 1246-10/66, 2303-9/78)

 

13.48.050 Littering
No person shall deposit, throw, discharge or otherwise place any paper, ashes, dirt, bottles, broken glass, cans, trash, litter, animal carcass, rubbish, debris or any substance, matter or thing, either liquid or solid in the waters of any fountain, pond, lake, stream, bay or other body of water in or adjacent to any park or in or on the grounds of said park except in the proper receptacles where these are provided; nor shall any person within any park wash eating or cooking utensils elsewhere than in the sinks provided for such purposes; nor shall any person bring any such substance, except litter accumulated in the course of automobile travel, into a City park for the purpose of disposal thereof in City park facilities. Where receptacles are not provided, all such rubbish or waste shall be carried from the park by the person responsible for its presence and properly disposed of elsewhere. (434-3/40, 511-5/47, 1026-2/64, 1246-10/66, 2451-11/80)

 

13.48.060 Vehicle Operations—Parking
A.    Parking. No person shall operate, drive, ride, park or leave standing any automobile, truck, motorcycle, motor scooter, motorized bicycle, go-cart or any other motor vehicle or any other vehicle at any time in any park; provided, however, that the provisions of this section shall not apply to those specific areas within any public park of the City which shall have been regularly and lawfully set aside for the use of vehicles; and provided further that the provisions of this section shall not apply to any vehicle used or owned by the City or any vehicle to which a temporary parking pass has been issued by the City or any commercial vehicle making lawful deliveries to or otherwise lawfully engaged in any undertaking or enterprise within any public park of the City. No person shall park and leave unattended any vehicle in areas other than those designated for parking. Vehicles left unattended in any area, except those designated for parking, without permission, may be towed away and stored by the City and said removal and storage costs shall be charged to and paid by the owner prior to release. Nor shall any person ride or drive a bicycle, skateboard or roller skates upon any tennis, handball, basketball, shuffleboard or multipurpose court in a City park.

B.     Upon proof of valid California vehicle registration, proof of insurance as required by the California Vehicle Code and proof of a valid driver’s license, the operator of a vehicle may be issued a temporary parking pass by the Director of Community Services or his or her designated representative. The pass will entitle the holder to park or operate a vehicle during short-term use of park facilities. The pass must be displayed at all times on the front dashboard of the vehicle or in a manner so that it is clearly visible through the windshield. (1246-10/66, 2451-11/80, 3373-11/97)

 

13.48.061 Vehicles—Speed
No person shall operate any wheeled conveyance of any type in any park at a speed in excess of 10 miles per hour unless a greater speed is posted. The maximum speed limit when pedestrians are present shall be five miles per hour. (2851-8/86)

 

13.48.070 Animals
No person shall ride, lead or let loose any cattle, horse, mule, goat, sheep, swine, cat, dog, fowl or animal of any kind in a park except that it shall not be unlawful to have dogs, physically restrained by a leash not in excess of six feet, or to ride horses on trails specifically provided for them. No person shall permit a dog to be or remain unattended outside a tent, camper or other enclosed vehicle between the hours of sunset and sunrise. No person shall keep or permit to remain any dog which is noisy, vicious or dangerous or which disturbs other persons within the boundaries of a park after such person has been directed by a park ranger to remove such dog. No person shall trap, kill, injure, catch or maltreat any wild or domesticated bird or animal; or destroy, remove or disturb any of the young or eggs of same, or permit any dog to pursue, trap, kill or wound any wild or domesticated bird or animal, except that the provisions of this section shall not apply to City employees regulating animal populations that have been declared a nuisance or hazard by the director consistent with laws protecting such animals. (434-3/40, 564-10/50, 1026-2/64, 1246-10/66, 2451-11/80, 3715-7/05, 3721-10/05)

 

13.48.075 Feeding Wildlife on City Property Prohibited
Unless specifically authorized by the Director of Community Services in writing, no person shall feed, disturb or have physical contact with wildlife on City property. (4068-9/15)

 

13.48.080 Boisterous Conduct
No person shall maliciously or willfully disturb the peace or quiet of a park or of any person therein, by loud or unusual noises, or by indulging in riotous, boisterous, threatening, indecent or offensive conduct, or by using abusive, profane, indecent or vulgar language. No person shall, within any park, disturb in any manner any picnic, meeting, services, concert, exercise or exhibition. No person shall play or utilize any sound-amplifying system within or upon any park or facility not set aside for such purpose by the City Council or the director. (434-3/40, 511-5/47, 1026-2/64, 2451-11/80)

 

13.48.090 Gambling
No person shall gamble or engage in gambling. (1246-10/66)

 

13.48.100 Vending and Peddling
No person shall expose or offer for sale any article or thing nor shall he or she station or place any stand, cart or vehicle for the transportation, sale or display of any such article or thing except by written permission from the director. No person shall give, set up or maintain any exhibition, show, performance, concert, lecture, entertainment or similar activity without written permission to do so from the director. No person shall for profit offer sports camps, sports lessons or other similar activity on park property without the written permission of the director. (434-3/40, 511-3/47, 1026-2/64, 1246-10/66, 2451-11/80, 2824-4/87)

 

13.48.110 Alcoholic Beverages
No person shall, within the boundaries of any public park within the City, consume any alcoholic beverage of any kind whatsoever, except when attending a function operating under an alcohol permit issued in accordance with Chapter 9.84 of this Code. (1026-2/64, 2043-4/76, 2451-11/80, 3768-7/07)

 

13.48.115 Smoking Boundaries
No Person shall Smoke on the Beach or Adjacent Beach Area, Pier or Pier Plaza or Park unless the Director has designated a specific signed smoking area. (4124-5/17)

 

13.48.120 Games and Activities
It is unlawful for any person to take part in or abet the playing of any activity which endangers the health, safety or welfare of the participant or any person whomsoever in any park, except on fields and courts or areas specifically provided for such games or activities or areas designated for such games and activities by the City Council or director. Such games and activities shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following:

A.    Baseball, tackle football, field hockey, rugby, cricket, golf, boxing, wrestling and the martial arts.

B.     Wading, bathing, swimming, launching any type of boat, raft, air mattress, surfboard or to be in or on any lake, stream or pond found in a City park.

C.     Flying any model airplane or helicopter, and launching any model fuel power boat, provided that this subsection shall not prohibit the launching of model boats powered by battery or sail.

D.    Carrying, transporting, possessing, discharging, firing or shooting over, onto or through any park any firearm, air gun, bb gun, spring gun, slingshot, bow and arrow, crossbow, spear, fireworks, firecracker, rocket, explosive of any kind or any other form of weapon potentially dangerous to human beings or wildlife. This subsection shall not apply to law enforcement officers.

E.     Fishing in any park lake other than those designated by the director, during hours which are authorized for such activity.

F.     Lighting or maintaining any fire except in a stove, barbecue grill, fire circle, portable stove or barbecue grill approved by the director.

G.    Erecting any barrier, whether string, wire, rope or chain, or placing any obstruction of any kind across any path, trail or other area accessible to the public.

H.    Engaging in any other activity which endangers the health and safety of the public.

I.      Operating any remote or radio controlled model car, truck or vehicle, in locations where signs are posted prohibiting such activity. (1246-10/66, 1478-4/69, 1547-1/70, 2451-11/80, 3882-7/10)

 

13.48.125 Safety Regulations and Signs
A.    No person shall ride a skateboard at any skateboard park owned or operated by the City whether supervised or not unless that person is wearing a helmet, elbow pads, and knee pads.

B.     The Director of Community Services shall erect and maintain visible regulatory signs at all skateboard parks owned and operated by the City that are not supervised on a regular basis. Such signs shall afford notice that any person riding a skateboard in the facility must wear a helmet, elbow pads, and knee pads, and that any person failing to do so will be subject to citation under Section 8.46.020 of this chapter. (3181-1/93)

 

13.48.130 Curfew
No person shall remain, stay or loiter on or about any such park between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. of the following day provided that this section shall not apply to attendance at authorized community activities in the park. Any park, recreation center or part or portion thereof may be closed to the public during an emergency, or when it has been determined by the director, a park ranger or police officer that the public health, safety or morals require such action. Such park, recreation center or part or portion thereof shall not be reopened except by order of the City Council, City Manager, director, a park ranger or police officer. (1246-10/66, 2451-11/80)

 

13.48.140 Advertising
No person shall announce, advertise or call the public attention in any way to any article or service for sale or hire, or paste, glue, tack or otherwise post any sign, picture, placard, advertisement or inscription whatever, or distribute any handbill, circular or petition except by permission from the director, provided that this section shall not apply to any concession operating under lease granted by the City Council. (1246-10/66, 2451-11/80)

 

13.48.145 Camping
A.    The following City parks are hereby designated as camping facilities: Lake Park, Farquhar Park, Huntington Central Park, and Norma Brandel Gibbs Park. No person shall use any camping facility for overnight camping purposes without applying for and obtaining written permission from the director upon payment of the required fees established, and amended from time to time, by resolution of the City Council of the City of Huntington Beach.

B.     The director may designate areas within subject parks for camping and may promulgate reasonable rules and regulations pertinent to the use of subject parks for camping purposes.

C.     No person shall use or occupy a camping facility unless the fee, evidenced by a receipt, has first been paid. (2099-9/76, 2451-11/80)

 

13.48.150 Violations—Penalty
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be guilty of a misdemeanor, and subject to a fine of not more than $500.00 or be imprisoned in the City or county jail for a period not to exceed three months, or both such fine and imprisonment. (1026-2/64, 1246-10/66)

 

13.48.155 Nuisance
It shall be deemed a public nuisance for any person to do or commit, or cause to permit to be done or committed on or within the boundaries of any public park within the City of Huntington Beach, any act as described in Sections 13.48.010 through 13.48.150 of this chapter. (3295-8/95)

 

Chapter 13.50 REGULATION OF TREES
13.50.010 Definitions
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meaning hereafter set forth unless a different meaning is clearly intended from the context in which such word or phrase is used. Any word or phrase not herein defined shall have the meaning attributed to it in ordinance usage.

“City” shall mean the City of Huntington Beach.

“Director” shall mean the Director of Public Works or his or her appointed designee, charged with enforcement of this chapter.

“Park, Tree and Landscape Division” shall mean that division of the Department of Public Works charged with the administration of this chapter.

“Parkway” shall mean that part of a street or highway lying between the property line and that portion of the street or highway customarily used for vehicular traffic.

“Person” shall mean any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind.

“Public place” shall mean any place, including buildings, open to the public and owned, managed or controlled by the City of Huntington Beach.

“Standards” shall mean the Arboricultural and Landscape Specifications and Standards of Practice adopted by resolution of the City Council, and by reference made a part hereof as though set forth fully herein.

“Street” shall mean the entire width of every public way or right-of-way when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular and pedestrian traffic. (3518-12/01)

 

13.50.020 Director—Duties and Authority
The director shall have the authority and is hereby charged with the following duties:

A.    To enforce the Arboricultural and Landscape Specifications and Standards of Practice, (“the Standards”) as adopted by the City of Huntington Beach, a copy of which is on file in the office of the City Clerk, governing the planting, maintenance, removal, fertilization, pruning, and bracing of trees on the streets and other public places in the City, and shall direct, regulate, and control the planting, maintenance, and removal of all trees growing now or hereafter on streets or public places, to ensure safety or preserve the aesthetics of such public places.

B.     To supervise or inspect all work done under any permit issued in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.

C.     To formulate a Tree Management Plan. Such plan shall specify the species of tree to be planted on streets and other public places. From and after the effective date of such Tree Management Plan, and any amendments thereto, all tree planting shall conform to the Tree Management Plan and the Standards and any regulation or rule promulgated by the director to implement the same.

D.    To issue or deny permits for maintenance of trees in public places and to place reasonable conditions on the granting of permits in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and the Tree Management Plan and the Standards.

E.     The director shall have the authority to promulgate rules and regulations and to amend or add to them, for the implementation of the Tree Management Plan and the Standards. When recommending species of trees, the director shall consider environmental factors, and all existing and future utilities of an area or specific location. (3518-12/01)

 

13.50.030 Director—Interference With
No person shall interfere with, oppose or obstruct the director or his or her agents or employees in the performance of his or her duties as provided in this chapter. (3518-12/01)

 

13.50.040 Permits Required
No person shall plant, spray, or maintain any tree on any street, parkway, or public place without first applying for and obtaining a permit from the City of Huntington Beach to do so. (3518-12/01)

 

13.50.050 Applications
Applications for original and renewal permits and for any amendments to any permit shall be filed with the director and shall be signed by the applicant. Each application shall be submitted on a form prescribed by the director and shall set forth the following information:

A.    The true name, fictitious name, if any, home and business addresses and telephone numbers of applicant, and if same be a corporation, names and addresses of principal officers, or if a partnership, association or company doing business under a fictitious name, names of partners or persons comprising the partnership, association or company, and address of each.

B.     Street number and exact location of place where applicant proposes to engage in the activity for which the permit is requested (where applicable, the route proposed for the activity shall be included).

C.     The nature of the activity in which applicant proposes to engage.

D.    Detailed information as to the method applicant proposes to employ in the proposed work or activity for which the permit is requested.

E.     Brief description of the nature and number of pieces of equipment to be used in such proposed work or activity, and where applicable, types of chemicals or commercial sprays to be used. If a license of any kind is required for the work, a copy of the license must be supplied.

F.     Evidence of insurance and bond information (if applicable) in accordance with the City of Huntington Beach standard insurance requirements.

G.    Length of time for which permit is desired.

H.    Any other information pertaining to the specific activity or work to be performed for which a permit is requested which may be required by the director.

I.      Proof of insurance in conformance with the City’s standard insurance resolution. (3518-12/01)

 

13.50.060 Applications—Generally
Applications for permits shall be filed with the director no less than 10 days prior to the time the work is to be commenced. The director shall issue such permits if applicant has complied with the provisions of this chapter, the City standard on insurance requirements, and the work to be performed meets the requirements and conditions contained in the Standards and the Tree Management Program. (3518-12/01)

 

13.50.070 Application—Fee
The City of Huntington Beach will not charge or collect a fee for filing of any permit required in this chapter. (3518-12/01)

 

13.50.080 Surety or Cash Bond
Prior to the issuance of any permit, the director may require the deposit of a surety or cash bond in an amount sufficient to guarantee that the activity or work proposed will be performed in a professional, skillful manner and to secure the City against all costs, charges and expenses incurred by reason of permittee’s failure to abide by the provisions of this chapter, the requirements contained in the standards of the City, or any federal or state laws appertaining thereto. (3518-12/01)

 

13.50.090 Permit—Issuance Not Warranty
The issuance of any permit under the provisions of this chapter shall not be construed as a warranty by the City as to the competence of permittee, or that the activity or work proposed to be performed under such permit will be done with safety to the permittee or other persons or property. All such risks shall be assumed by permittee. (3518-12/01)

 

13.50.100 Permits—Types
The following activities shall require issuance of a permit: planting, spraying and maintenance. (3518-12/01)

 

13.50.110 Permits—General Contents
A.    Permits shall contain the address or a description of the exact location where the work is to be performed; a detailed description of the methods to be used and the manner in which such work is to be performed; any conditions which may be attached to the issuance of such permit by the director and the date on which such permit shall expire.

B.     Within five days after the expiration date specified on any permit, unless application has been made for a renewal or amendment of such permit, the director shall be notified that the work has been completed and ready for inspection. (3518-12/01)

 

13.50.120 Permit—Planting
No person shall plant, replant, relocate or remove any tree from any street, parkway or public place without first complying with Sections 13.50.050 through 13.50.070. In addition to the information required by Section 13.50.120 of this chapter, such permit shall set out the specific number of trees to be planted and the specific work to be performed in connection therewith. (3518-12/01)

 

13.50.130 Permit—Spraying
No person shall spray any tree on any street, parkway or public place without first complying with Sections 13.50.050 through 13.50.070. In addition to the information required by Section 13.50.120 of this chapter, such permit shall specify the types of chemicals and commercial sprays which may be used in the work to be performed and require that the performance of all such work shall confirm all state, municipal and federal laws. (3518-12/01)

 

13.50.140 Permit—Maintenance
No person shall fertilize, preserve or prune any tree on any street, parkway or public place, without first complying with Sections 13.50.050 through 13.50.070. In addition to the information required by Section 13.50.120 of this chapter, such permit shall state the kinds and number of trees to be fertilized, pruned or otherwise preserved and maintained, and types of materials and equipment, including irrigation systems, to be used in such work. Such permit shall specify that the performance of all maintenance work shall comply with all the standards of the City, and all federal and state laws applicable thereto. (3518-12/01)

 

13.50.150 Permits—Approval or Denial
The director, after investigation of the application and the proposed work to be performed, may grant or refuse to grant a permit. Refusal shall be based upon a finding by the director that the proposed work does not meet adopted City standards and requirements including this chapter, the Tree Management Plan, and the Arboricultural Standards. (3518-12/01)

 

13.50.160 Appeal
Within 10 days after receipt of an application, the director shall inform the applicant in writing of his or her reasons for refusing to issue any permit provided for in this chapter, and such applicant shall have the right to appeal in writing within 30 days to the City Council. (3518-12/01)

 

13.50.170 Council Action
The decision of the director is appealable to the City Council. Appeal to the City Council from the director must be made in writing within 10 days of the director’s decision. At the first regular meeting following receipt of an appeal, the Council shall consider the matter under the requirements contained in this chapter, the standards adopted by the City, and pertinent information furnished by the director and the Public Works Commission. The determination of the City Council to sustain or overrule the decision of the director shall be final. (3518-12/01)

 

13.50.180 Defacing Prohibited
No person shall cut down, pull up, burn, destroy or remove any tree, plant or shrub in any street or public place. No person shall trim, skin, deface or remove the outer trunk surface or bark of any tree, plant or shrub located in any street or public place to such extent or in such manner as to deface, injure, destroy or endanger the life of any tree, plant or shrub. No person shall attach any wire, nail, advertising material or any other foreign object to any tree, plant or shrub, or allow any gaseous liquid or solid substance to come into contact therewith, which gaseous liquid or other substance is harmful to such tree, plant or shrub. (3518-12/01; 4023-6/14)

 

13.50.190 Certain Materials Prohibited
No person shall deposit, place, store or maintain upon any public place in the City any stone, brick, sand, concrete or other material which may obstruct the free passage of water, air and fertilizer to the roots of any tree, plant or shrub growing in such public place without first obtaining written permission from the tree superintendent to do so. (3518-12/01)

 

13.50.200 Excavations
A.    No person shall excavate any ditch, tunnel, trench, or lay any driveway within a radius of 10 feet from any tree in any street or parkway without first obtaining written permission from the director to do so.

B.     Any tree on any street or public place near any excavation or construction of any building, structure, or street work, shall be protected with a good substantial enclosure placed a sufficient number of feet, as determined by the director, from such tree, to guard against any building material, refuse, or other debris from damaging such tree. (3518-12/01)

 

13.50.210 Final Inspection
Upon notice from the permittee that the permitted work has been completed, the director or his or her designee shall inspect the work done. Should the completed work fail to meet the standards set forth in this chapter, the permittee shall have 15 days to correct the work. A civil citation may be issued for failure to complete the work within the 15-day extension period. (3518-12/01)

 

Chapter 13.52 PUBLIC BUILDINGS
13.52.010 Definitions
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings as set forth herein, unless the context in which they are used clearly indicates a contrary meaning:

“Alcoholic beverages” means any and all spirituous, vinous, malt or fermented liquor, liquids or compounds, whether medicated, proprietary, patented or not, and by whatever name called, containing one-half of one percent, or more, of alcohol by volume, which are potable or fit as, or which may be used for, beverage purposes.

“Cellular phone” means any walkie-talkie, two-way radio, mobile phone, pager, beeper, and other electronic communication device.

“Person” means any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, corporation or any other group acting as a unit.

“Smoke” means the act of smoking lighted tobacco and the distribution of tobacco smoke or fumes into the air by any means. (1026-2/64, 1833-6/73, 3659-9/04)

 

13.52.020 Unlawful Acts
It is unlawful for any person to do or commit, or for any person to cause or permit to be done or committed on or within the premises of any public building within the City, any of the following:

A.    Disfiguration and Removal. Willfully mark, deface, disfigure, injure, tamper with, or displace or remove, any building, bridges, tables, benches, fireplaces, railings, paving or paving material, waterlines or other public utilities or parts or appurtenances thereof, signs, notices or placards whether temporary or permanent, monuments, stakes, posts or other boundary markers, or other structures or equipment, facilities or park property or appurtenances whatsoever, either real or personal.

B.     Restrooms and Washrooms. Fail to cooperate in maintaining restrooms and washrooms in a neat and sanitary condition. No person over the age of five years shall use the restrooms and washrooms designated for the opposite sex.

C.     Sanitation. Have brought in or shall dump, deposit or leave any bottles, broken glass, ashes, paper, boxes, cans, dirt, rubbish, waste, garbage or refuse, or other trash.

D.    Alcoholic Beverages. To consume any alcoholic beverages of any kind whatsoever except when attending a function operating under an alcohol permit issued in accordance with Chapter 9.84 of this Code.

E.     Vending and Peddling. Expose or offer for sale any article or thing, nor shall he or she station or place any stand, cart or vehicle for the transportation, sale or display of any such article or thing.

F.     Advertising. Announce, advertise or call the public attention in any way to any article or service for sale or hire.

G.    Signs. Paste, glue, tack or otherwise post any sign, placard, advertisement or inscription whatever.

H.    Cellular Phone.

1.     Communicating on a cellular phone or have a cellular phone in a mode other than vibrate or silent or its equivalent, that is capable of emitting noise within any public library outside of a designated cellular phone area. Public employees working in their official capacity are exempt from this chapter.

2.     Violation of this subsection is subject to the issuance of an administrative citation under the provisions of Chapter 1.18 of this Code.

I.      City Parking Structures. No person shall sit, walk, or balance on the rails of any City parking structure or climb upon, over, or under such rails, or sit, walk, balance, or climb upon or over any cement walls that may be adjacent to such rails or serve as rails. (1026-2/64, 2043-4/76, 3659-9/04, 3799-4/08)

 

13.52.030 Nuisance
It shall be deemed a public nuisance for any person to do or commit, or cause to permit to be done or committed on or within the premises of any public building within the City of Huntington Beach, any act as described in the foregoing sections. (3296-8/95)

 

Chapter 13.54 SPECIFIC EVENTS
Note
*       Note: Section 13.54.200 repealed by Ord. No. 3695-3/05.

 

13.54.010 Definitions
“Director” refers to the Director of Community Services Department and/or his/her designee.

“Fourth of July Parade” is that annual parade sponsored by the City of Huntington Beach.

“Parade” means any march, parade, procession or public assembly consisting of persons or animals or vehicles or any combination thereof, upon any public or quasi-public street, road, highway, sidewalk, alley, park, parkway, pier, beach, building or other public or quasi-public place, which obstructs or unreasonably interferes with the free passage of vehicular traffic or pedestrian travel.

“Parade route” means the entire route of a parade as approved by the Director.

“Parkway” means that area between the edge of the roadway and the adjacent property line excluding that area occupied by the sidewalk. Parkway shall also include any area within a roadway which is not open to vehicular travel.

“Public property” includes, but is not limited to, sidewalks, parkways, streets, and medians.

“Roadway” means that portion of a street improved, designated, or ordinarily used for vehicular travel.

“Rope” is any rope, ribbon, string, line or other device used to delineate a public area for parade viewing by private parties.

“Seat” is any common chair, stool, folding chair, folding stool, bench or similar device whose purpose is seating.

“Sidewalk” means any surface provided for the exclusive use of pedestrians.

“Specific event” means the temporary use of public property, including, but not limited to, streets, beaches, and parks for any purpose including, but not limited to, events such as art shows, fund-raising events, sidewalk sales, amusement attractions, walkathons, marathon runs, block parties, parades, demonstrations, rallies, protests, picket lines, public assemblies, performances, weddings, company events and sporting events, or any combination thereof. This chapter has no application to events that are conducted on private property.

“Street” means all that area dedicated to public use for public street purposes and shall include, but not be limited to, roadways, parkways, alleys, and sidewalks.

“Structure (including grandstand)” is that which is framed or erected. “Grandstand” is a structure whose primary purpose is seating. (3608-6/03, 4202-3/20)

 

13.54.020 Permit Required
No person shall organize, produce, direct, conduct, manage, institute or carry on any specific event without a permit first had and obtained from the Director. No person shall promote, advertise, encourage or solicit attendance or otherwise participate in any way in a specific event for which no permit has been issued, or for which such permit has been suspended or revoked. (3608-6/03)

 

13.54.030 Permit Application
An application for a permit shall be filed with the Director not less than 90 days nor more than two years before the date proposed for holding a specific event. Such application shall be signed by the applicant, who must be at least 18 years of age, or his or her authorized agent and shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee. The amount of said fee shall be established by resolution of the City Council. (3608-6/03)

 

13.54.040 Application—Contents
Application for a permit to hold a specific event shall be made on forms provided by the City, and shall contain the following:

A.    The sponsoring organization, the contact person, and the address and telephone number of each;

B.     A detailed description of the specific event proposed to be held, the number of persons participating in the event, the purpose of the event, the date, hours and location where the event is proposed to be held, if alcohol is to be served or sold, or if closure of public streets is required, a description of merchandise to be sold or any food and beverages to be sold or otherwise made available to attendees of the specific event and the admission fee, if any, to be charged;

C.     For parades, a description and map of the assembly area, disbanding area and the route to be traveled; the assembly time, the starting time, the disbanding time; the maximum parade length; the total number of bands, sound vehicles or musical units, if any, their type and number of members in each unit; the total number of public address units, including those that are stationary, mounted on vehicles or portable; the total number of marching units, if any, their type and number of members in each unit; the number of animals, if any, and type; the number of floats, if any, their size, type and methods of power; the space between their units and their speed; and the maximum number of persons who will participate in the parade;

D.    A detailed description of the equipment to be used, if any, including the number and types of vehicles, the number of public address or amplified sound systems, whether mounted, portable, or stationary, the number and type of special units such as musical or performance groups, animal zoos or shows, bleachers, canopies, tents, banners, inflatables, generators and the like;

E.     An agreement that the City shall be compensated for any damage to public property, and that the site shall be cleaned and restored to the condition in which it was found prior to the holding of the specific event;

F.     Such other information as requested by the Director;

G.    Said application shall be signed by the applicant under penalty of perjury. (3608-6/03)

 

13.54.050 Permit—Specific Event for Other Than Applicant
If such specific event is designed to be held by, on behalf of or for any organization other than the applicant, the applicant for such permit shall file a communication in writing from such organization, authorizing the applicant to apply for such permit on its behalf. (3608-6/03)

 

13.54.060 Specific Events Committee Established
There is hereby established a Specific Events Committee composed of representatives of pertinent City departments and community organizations, as appointed by the City Manager. (3608-6/03)

 

13.54.070 Review of Permit Application by Director
Within 30 business days of the filing of the permit application with the Community Services Department, the director shall either issue the permit, deny the permit, or refer the permit application to the Specific Events Committee for further review. (3608-6/03)

 

13.54.080 Denial by the Director
No action on the part of the Director within 30 business days of the filing of the permit application shall be deemed a denial. (3608-6/03)

 

13.54.090 Review of Permit Application to Specific Events Committee
At any time, the director may refer any permit application to the Specific Events Committee for further investigation of the activity proposed to be conducted, the persons involved, and other facts. The Specific Events Committee shall conduct a hearing on the application within 60 days after notification of referral of the permit application, after which hearing the Specific Events Committee shall recommend to the director to issue or deny the permit. (3608-6/03)

 

13.54.100 Permit—Granting or Refusal
The granting or denial of any permit or part thereof by the Director shall be final unless a written appeal is filed as provided elsewhere in this chapter. Failure to file an appeal within such 10 calendar day period, shall constitute a waiver of the right to such appeal. (3608-6/03)

 

13.54.110 Permit—Late Applications
A.    Any application received after the deadlines established in Section 13.54.040 is a late application. The Director may consider any permit application filed less than 90 days prior to the time requested for holding a Specific Event.

B.     The Director shall accept a late application if he/she finds that:

1.     The proposed event is in response to an occurrence whose timing did not reasonably allow the applicant to file a timely application; and

2.     The imposition of the time limitations would place an unreasonable restriction on the free speech rights of the applicant.

C.     If the Director finds both of the conditions of subsection B are present, he/she shall accept and process the Specific Event application in accordance with this chapter, unless it does not meet the criteria set forth in Section 13.54.040, violates Section 13.54.140, or there is insufficient time for the City to make necessary preparations for traffic control or to protect the public safety prior to the proposed date. (3608-6/03, 4202-3/20)

 

13.54.120 Permit—Surety and Insurance
Prior to the issuance of a permit, the Specific Events Committee may require:

A.    In lieu of an agreement to compensate the City for loss or damage to public property, the deposit of cash, check or money order in an amount sufficient to guarantee the cleaning up of the site and the removal of any debris left as a result of the holding of a specific event. If it is determined that such specific event will warrant the presence of City personnel, the Director shall also require payment in full prior to issuance of a permit.

B.     That the applicant provide public liability insurance and property damage insurance, including products liability coverage, workers compensation insurance, and a separate additional insured endorsement written by an insurance company acceptable to the City in the minimum limits as set by resolution of the City Council. (3608-6/03)

 

13.54.130 Permit—Granting Conditions
As a condition to granting such permit, the Director may impose reasonable terms and regulations concerning the time and place of such specific event; the area and manner of conducting such specific event; the maximum number of persons participating therein; the use of amplified music, the regulation of traffic, if required, including the number and type of vehicles; the number and type of signs, banners, and barricades to be provided by applicant, if any, together with a plan of disposition attached to the application; whether alcohol shall be allowed; and such other requirements as they may find reasonable and necessary for the protection of persons and property. Any change in the approved plan must be submitted to the Community Services Department and approved by the director 14 days in advance of the event. All applicable fees shall be paid at least 30 days prior to such event. (3608-6/03)

 

13.54.135 Prohibition on Carrying Specified Items or Articles While Attending Specific Event
A.    No person, unless authorized by a valid permit or license from a government agency, shall carry or possess the following items or articles while attending or participating in any parade, demonstration, rally, protest, picket line, public assembly or other Specific Event:

1.     Weapons such as firearms, knives, swords, sabers or other bladed devices, axes, hatchets, ice picks, razor blades, nunchucks or martial arts weapons of any kind, box cutters, pellet or BB guns, conducted electrical weapons (CEWs), including, but not limited to, Tasers or stun guns, metal/composite/ wooden knuckles, or any chain greater than 20 inches in length or greater than one-fourth inch in diameter. This subdivision also includes toy or replica firearms unless such toy or replica is florescent colored or transparent.

2.     Baseball or softball bats, regardless of composition or size;

3.     Any lengths of lumber or wood, regardless of dimension;

4.     Any length of metal or plastic pipe;

5.     Any aerosol spray, tear gas, mace, pepper spray or bear repellant;

6.     Any projectile launcher or other device, such as a catapult or wrist rocket, which is commonly used for the purpose of launching, hurling or throwing any object, liquid, material or other substance, whether through force of air pressure, spring action or any other mechanism;

7.     Balloons, bottles or any other container such as water cannons or super-soakers, filled with any flammable, biohazard or other noxious matter which is injurious, or nauseous, sickening or irritating to any of the senses, with intent to throw, drop, pour, disperse, deposit, release, discharge or expose the same in, upon or about any demonstration, rally, protest, picket line or public assembly;

8.     Glass bottles, whether empty or filled;

9.     Open flame torches, lanterns or other devices that utilize combustible materials such as gasoline, kerosene, propane or other fuel sources;

10.   Shields made of metal, wood, hard plastic or any combination thereof;

11.   Bricks, rocks, pieces of asphalt, concrete, pellets or ball bearings.

B.     Notwithstanding subsection A, signs, posters, banners, plaques or notices may be carried and presented during the Specific Event, provided they are constructed solely of soft material, such as cloth, paper, soft plastic capable of being rolled or folded, or cardboard material no greater than one-fourth inch in thickness. Signs, posters banners, plaques and notices may be mounted on any length of lumber, wood, or wood lath that is less than one-fourth inch or less in thickness and two inches or less in width, or if not generally rectangular, it shall not exceed three-fourths inch in its thickest dimension. Alternatively, the signs, posters, banners or notices may be mounted on solid or hollow plastic pipe not exceeding three-fourths inch in its thickest dimension and not exceeding one-eighth inch in wall thickness, and not filled with any material, liquid, gas or solid. Both ends of any wood or plastic pipe permissible under this subsection shall be blunt.

C.     When feasible, excluding exigent circumstances, law enforcement personnel shall issue a warning before enforcing the provisions of this section. Such warning shall be sufficient if provided orally, by posted signs or by amplified announcement.

D.    Authorized peace officers, or employees, agents or representatives of a government agency, shall be exempt from the provisions of this section when such officers, employees, agents or representatives of the said government agency are engaged in official business of the government agency. In addition, persons permitted or authorized by a government agency through a valid official permit or license to carry concealed weapons, are also exempt from this section.

E.     Nothing in this section shall prohibit an individual from carrying a cane or using a walker or other device necessary for providing mobility so that the person may participate in a public protest, demonstration, rally, picket line or public assembly. (4202-3/20)

 

13.54.140 Permit—Denial
The director, upon recommendation of the Specific Events Committee shall not issue any permit if any of the following conditions exist:

A.    The application is not on the form provided or does not contain the required information;

B.     The applicant has knowingly made any false, misleading, or fraudulent statement of material fact in the application for a permit;

C.     The building, structure, equipment, or location of such specific event does not comply with or fails to meet all of the health, zoning, fire and safety requirements or standards of all of the ordinances of the City of Huntington Beach or the State of California applicable thereto;

 

D.    The activity or location of the activity is such as to interfere with or unreasonably obstruct the free flow of vehicular traffic or other means of travel on any public street, or with pedestrian traffic on the sidewalk;

E.     Proof of insurance required by this chapter as a prerequisite to the holding of a specific event has not been filed with the City;

F.     The conduct of the specific event will be contrary to law;

G.    Applicant has had a similar specific event permit denied for good cause within one year prior to the application, and can show no material change in circumstances since such denial;

H.    Applicant refuses to agree to, abide by or comply with all conditions and regulations attendant upon such specific event permit;

I.      Such specific event will interfere or conflict with another specific event for which a permit has already been issued, or will interfere or conflict with another specific event for which no permit is required by this Code;

J.      Applicant has failed to pay the assigned fees or failed to meet any other conditions imposed by the director. (3608-6/03)

 

13.54.150 Permit—Contents
A specific event permit shall contain the following:

A.    The name of the person or organization to whom issued;

B.     The name and telephone number of the individual on-site contact person;

C.     The date, hour and location for the specific event; and

D.    Any on-site conditions imposed on the holding of such specific event. (3608-6/03)

 

13.54.160 Permit Suspension or Revocation
A permit for a specific event issued hereunder, shall be summarily suspended or revoked by the director at any time when there is reasonable cause to believe that any of the grounds exist for which the original application for permit would have been denied. (3608-6/03)

 

13.54.170 Appeal—Filing
An appeal from suspension, revocation or denial of a permit, or conditions imposed thereupon by the director, may be made to the City Manager within 10 calendar days after service of notice of such action on the applicant or permittee. Such appeal shall be in writing, setting forth fully the grounds upon which the appeal is based, and shall be filed with the City Clerk who shall forward copies to the City Manager, and the director. The director shall submit to the City Manager the record of the case appealed. The City Manager shall rule on the appeal within 10 calendar days after receipt of such record from the director. The decision of the City Manager may be appealed to the City Council. Such appeal shall be filed with the City Clerk within 10 calendar days of receipt of the decision of the City Manager. (3608-6/03)

 

13.54.180 Appeal—Council Action
A.    Within 60 days after filing a written appeal from the suspension, revocation, or denial of a permit with the City Clerk, the City Council shall consider the appeal at a regular meeting. Written notice of the time and place the City Council will consider the appeal shall be mailed by the City Clerk to the person who filed the appeal at least 10 days before the date set for hearing unless the applicant/permittee shall waive notice in writing.

B.     In any appeal, the City Council shall consider the application, the record of the case submitted by the director and other pertinent information presented, and may grant or deny the permit subject to the conditions, terms and regulations set forth in this chapter. The decision of the City Council shall be final.

C.     The City Clerk shall, within three days after decision of the City Council, notify the applicant/permittee in writing of the decision of the City Council. (3608-6/03)

 

13.54.190 Exceptions to Provisions
No permit shall be required under this chapter with respect to:

A.    Any specific event sponsored by, or held under the auspices of, the City of Huntington Beach;

B.     Any bona fide funeral procession, the purpose of which is to transport the remains of a deceased person to a place of burial or cremation. (3608-6/03)

 

13.54.210 Interference With Specific Events
No person shall knowingly join or participate in any specific event in violation of any of the terms, conditions, or regulations of the permit issued therefor, or knowingly join or participate in any specific event without the consent and over the objection of the permittee or in any manner interfere with the orderly conduct of such event. For purposes of this chapter, “interfere” shall mean:

A.    Placing furniture or erecting booths or stands within 20 feet of the area designated for use by the permittee only; or so as to obstruct the view of audience members, after having first been warned;

B.     Operating a radio, loudspeaker, or other similar device, whistle, or other machine or musical instrument without permission from the permittee;

C.     Making noise, including yelling and screaming, either at a volume higher than that of the event or in a manner so as to disturb the peace of others, after having been warned;

D.    Entering upon the stage or otherwise joining a performance without permission of the permittee;

E.     Disrobing or engaging in other conduct which disrupts the event, after having been warned. (3608-6/03)

 

13.54.220 Parking of Vending Vehicles
No person shall stop, let stand, or park any vehicle, for the purpose of selling, or offering for sale there from, any goods, wares or merchandise on any street on a parade route. (3608-6/03)

 

13.54.230 Enforcing Officer
This chapter shall be enforced by the director, as well as by peace officers having jurisdiction of any area in which a violation of any provision of this title takes place. (3608-6/03)

 

13.54.240 Permit Conditions
The permittee shall follow all conditions as set forth in the permit. (3608-6/03)

 

13.54.250 Violation—Penalty
Any person violating this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of $1,000.00 or by imprisonment in the county jail for a period not to exceed six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (3608-6/03)

Title 14 WATER AND SEWERS
Note
*       Note: Chs. 14.04 and 14.32 repealed by Ord. 2591-1/83, Ch. 14.40 repealed by Ord. 2931-4/88, Ch. 14.55 repealed by Ord. 4158-5/18 and Ch. 14.24 repealed by Ord. 4206-7/20.

 

Chapter 14.08 SERVICE CONNECTIONS
14.08.010 Application Form
A.    Before water can be served from the City mains to any person or for any premises, such person or the owner or occupant of such premises shall be required to provide the following information by telephone, in writing, or by any other means as deemed acceptable by the department:

1.     Name of responsible party (individual or business);

2.     Social security number;

3.     Driver’s license number or passport number;

4.     Business license number (if applicable);

5.     Address of premises to be serviced;

6.     Date on which the applicant will be ready for service;

7.     Name and address to which bills will be mailed or delivered;

8.     Description of applicant as owner, tenant, agent, builder, or property manager;

9.     Contact information which may include but is not limited to primary contact phone number, mobile phone number, fax number and employer phone number.

B.     Failure to provide the information listed above may require the applicant to apply for services in person on a form provided by the Finance Director. (674-12/57, 3592-1/03, 3751-11/06)

 

14.08.020 Separate Required
Every premises supplied by City water shall have its own separate service connection with the City main, and the premises so supplied shall not supply water to any other premises. (674-12/57)

 

14.08.030 Multiple Occupancies on Premises
Where more than one occupancy is placed on the same parcel of property and each is conducting a separately established residence or business, a water meter shall be required and installed for each occupancy, unless otherwise approved by the Water Superintendent. (674-12/57)

 

14.08.040 Multiple Occupancy Exceptions
The following exception shall apply to multiple occupancies on the same premises:

A.    Where there exists a dwelling on the rear of a lot, in front of which is another dwelling, one service may be provided for such premises. The cost of such water meter installation and service shall be paid by the owner or party receiving service.

B.     Where two or more buildings owned by the same person are built upon the lot, said buildings may be served by one service pipe and one meter if approved by the Water Superintendent. (674-12/57)

 

14.08.050 Property Separation
Whenever one service pipe and meter has been serving more than one occupancy on the same parcel of property owned by one owner, and the property ownership is severed, the Water Superintendent may, in his or her discretion, require separate service pipe and meter for each occupancy. (674-12/57)

 

14.08.060 Interfering With Pipes
No person shall, without the permission of the Water Superintendent, or his or her duly appointed agents or employees, remove, change, disturb, or in any way tamper with or interfere with any of the facilities, apparatus, appliances or property used or maintained for the production, storage or supply of water by the City to consumers thereof; nor shall any person without the permission of the Water Superintendent install any pipe, apparatus, appliance or connection to any part of the system of waterworks in the City. (674-12/57)

 

Chapter 14.12 FEES, RATES AND DEPOSITS
Note
*       Note: § 14.12.080 repealed by Ord. 2709-6/84.

 

14.12.010 Service Fee
A.    Commercial or Industrial. For uses zoned commercial or industrial, the Public Works Department, as a condition to granting the application and furnishing water service to the premises, is authorized to charge and shall collect in advance the following sums for the purpose of reimbursing the City for the cost of the system and future replacements and extensions thereof:

1.     The sum of $60.00 for each usable unit on parcels containing less than 10,000 square feet. A “usable unit” shall be each residential quarter in hotels and motels.

2.     For any parcel containing 10,000 square feet of area or more, $300.00 per acre or fraction thereof, or $60.00 per usable unit, whichever is greater. A “usable unit” shall be any unit defined in paragraph 1 of this subsection A. The charge of $300.00 per acre shall apply to all commercial and manufacturing developments.

3.     Those areas served by a water main constructed and charged as determined by another ordinance or executed agreement may be exempt from the usable unit charge in paragraph 1 of this subsection A if said other ordinance or agreement charge is greater than the charge per said paragraph 1.

4.     All necessary service fees established by the City shall be deposited with the City prior to approval of the final subdivision map or issuance of a building permit if a subdivision map is not required.

B.     Non-Commercial and Non-Industrial. For uses zoned other than commercial or industrial, the Public Works Department, as a condition to granting the application and furnishing water service to the premises, is authorized to charge and shall collect in advance the Capital Facilities Charge for the purpose of reimbursing the City for the cost of the system and future replacements and extensions thereof. The Capital Facilities Charge is based on the number of equivalent dwelling units based on meter size, or the actual number of dwelling units, whichever is greater, of existing facilities or the proposed expansion facilities, which shall be set by a resolution of the City Council. All monies collected as the Capital Facilities Charge shall be used for water projects that are consistent with the goals and objectives of the Water Master Plan but which projects are specifically identified in a resolution, and any amendment thereto, adopted by the City Council. (674-12/57, 723-6/59, 1001-10/63, 1100-12/64, 2022-1/76, 2535-3/82, 3302-11/95, 3496-5/01, 3743-8/06; 3970-3/13; 4104-12/16)

 

14.12.020 Installation and Meter Fees
In addition to the fee set forth in Section 14.12.010(A), the Water Department shall charge and collect in advance the following amount for the installation of water connections and meters: a sum equal to the actual cost of labor and material in laying such service line, including the cost of the meters, the cost of replacing pavement, plus 15% for overhead. The cost of such installation shall be estimated by the Water Department, and such estimated cost shall be paid by the applicant to the Water Department before the work of connecting the main with the property is commenced. Whenever the estimated cost is not sufficient to cover the total expense for labor, material, meters and overhead, the deficit shall be charged to the property for which such installation was made and paid by the owner thereof. Any excess payment shall be returned to the person applying for installation. (674-12/57, 1996-8/75)

 

14.12.030 Installation by Applicant
The Water Superintendent may in his or her discretion authorize an applicant to make the installation at applicant’s own cost, and in conformity with the specifications set forth by the Water Department. (674-12/57)

 

14.12.040 Authority to Adopt Rates and Charges
A.    Pursuant to California Health & Safety Code Section 5470 et seq., including Sections 5471 and 5474, the City is authorized to adopt rates and charges for the acquisition, construction, reconstruction, maintenance, and operation of water facilities. This chapter is intended to ensure that sufficient revenues are collected to adequately acquire, construct, reconstruct, maintain, and operate the City’s needed water facilities. By imposing a Water Meter Rate, a Water Commodity Rate, and a Capital Facility Charge that are reasonably related to the burdens imposed upon the water facilities by water service customers, the City will be able to acquire and/or construct the required capital improvements to the water facilities to maintain and improve water facilities.

B.     The City shall charge a Water Meter Rate and a Water Commodity Rate. The Water Meter Rate shall be charged based upon the size of the water meter, or the number of dwelling units the meter serves. The Water Commodity Rate shall be a water consumption charge for each 100 cubic feet of water delivered. The Water Meter Rate and Water Commodity Rate shall be set by a Resolution adopted by a two-thirds vote of the members of the City Council. Both Rates shall be further defined in the Resolutions establishing the Rates. Both Rates shall be charged and collected monthly. No Resolution may be adopted except in compliance with Section 6 of Article XIIID of the California Constitution and the majority protest provisions of Government Code Sections 53755 and 53756.

 

C.     The City may charge a Capital Surcharge based upon the size of the water meter, or the number of dwelling units the meter serves. The Capital Surcharge shall be set by a Resolution adopted by a two-thirds vote of the members of the City Council. The Surcharge shall be charged and collected monthly. All monies collected by the Capital Surcharge shall be used for water projects that are consistent with the goals and objectives of the Water Master Plan adopted by the City Council.

D.    As part of the Resolutions establishing the Water Meter Rate, any Capital Surcharge, and the Water Commodity Rate, the City Council may include a schedule of adjustments, effective July 1 of each year, for up to five years. The adjustments may include an annual percentage adjustment reflecting the increase in the Consumer Price Index for all Urban Consumers (“CPIU”) in Los Angeles, Orange and Riverside Counties established by the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. Notice of any adjustment to the Water Meter Rate and any Capital Surcharge shall be provided by way of an insert in the monthly City water and sewer bill at least 30 days before the effective date of the Rate and Surcharge adjustment.

E.     The Water Commodity Rate shall be adjusted annually, effective July 1 of each year to reflect the increase to the cost to the City of well water from the Orange County Water District, and the cost of water from the Municipal Water District of Orange County. Notice of any adjustment to the Water Commodity Rate shall be provided by way of an insert in the City monthly water and sewer bill at least 30 days before the effective date of the rate adjustment.

F.     Neither the Water Meter Rate, the Capital Surcharge, nor the Water Commodity Rate shall exceed the reasonable cost of providing the services, facilities or regulatory activity for which the rates or charges are imposed.

G.    Pursuant to Health & Safety Code Section 5472, any person may pay under protest the Water Meter Rate, Capital Surcharge, and/or Water Commodity Rate, and bring an action against the City in the Orange County Superior Court to recover money which the City refuses to refund. Any protest shall be filed with the City Clerk no later than prior to or concurrently with the date the payment of the rate(s) and/or surcharge are due. (674-12/57, 751-4/60, 892-4/62, 1100-12/64, 1217-7/66, 1343-A-8/67, 1344-9/67, 1901-4/74, 1996-8/75, 2205-7/77, 2218-11/77, 2709-6/84, 2826-5/86, 2948-8/88, 3119-7/91, 3302-11/95, 3496-5/01, 3743-8/06, 3795-1/08, 4073-12/15, 4157-5/18)

 

14.12.045 Water Rates—Budget
A.    It shall be the policy of the City that a balanced budget shall be maintained for the Water Fund. Pursuant to Section 602 of the Charter of the City of Huntington Beach, the City Manager shall be required to submit said Water Fund budget in a balanced condition to the City Council, together with the other budget submittals. For the purpose of this section, “balanced budget” shall mean that total appropriations for operating expenses do not exceed total estimated revenues in the annual budget of the Water Fund. Use of Water Fund reserves shall follow established financial policies as adopted in the annual budget.

B.     Operating expenses shall include appropriations for the depreciation cost of those capital improvements customarily provided for in the operating budget and in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles. Revenues shall exclude bond proceeds, if any, but include interest earnings and other nonoperating revenue in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles. (2709-6/84, 4073-12/15)

 

14.12.050 Water Rates—Construction Purposes
All construction water shall be taken from existing outlets designated by the Water Department or from special outlets installed at the expense of the consumer. If in the determination of the Water Department, the setting of a meter is impracticable or uneconomical for the supply of construction water, the charge for such unmetered water shall be set by a resolution of the City Council. (674-12/57, 792-10/60, 1996-8/75, 2535-3/82, 2709-6/84, 2948-8/88)

 

14.12.060 Water Rates—Other Uses
Water used for any purpose not hereinbefore enumerated, or for schools, hospitals and similar uses, shall be furnished and charged for either at meter rates or at a special rate to be fixed by the City Council under separate agreement with the consumer. (674-12/57)

 

14.12.070 Private Fire Service Rates
The monthly rate for private fire service protection shall be set by a resolution of the City Council. (674-12/57, 751-4/60, 2948-8/88)

 

14.12.090 Water Service—Applications
A.    All applications for water must be made out on forms provided by the Water Department and must be signed by the applicant or his or her agent.

B.     All applicants must deposit with the Water Department a fee established by resolution of the City Council as a guarantee that all water bills, fines and penalties shall be paid by the applicant. The City Treasurer shall waive the deposit upon a showing of creditworthiness by the applicant as determined by the City.

C.     The deposit shall be returned to the applicant, without interest, at the time water service is discontinued provided that applicant has not left unpaid any water bill, fine or penalty. Such unpaid water bill, fine or penalty shall be deducted from the applicant’s deposit and the balance thereof, if any, shall be refunded to the applicant at his or her last known address. (674-12/57, 2020-12/75, 2508-11/81, 3404-10/98)

 

14.12.100 Water Service—Turn-On Charges
A.    No charge shall be made for the transfer due to change of ownership or occupancy.

B.     Where the owner or occupant requests temporary turnoff of water service, a charge of five dollars shall be made for restoring the water service to the premises. (697-12/57, 1996-8/75)

 

14.12.110 Water Rates—Turn On
Whenever the distribution line of the municipal water system shall be duly connected with the premises of any person, and the water turned on such premises, the charge for water shall be a charge against the person in possession of the premises who used the water, and the charges shall continue so long as the water is turned on to the premises, whether the same is actually used or not. (674-12/57)

 

14.12.120 Water Billing
A.    All water bills are due upon presentation and are payable at the Office of the Treasurer of the City of Huntington Beach, or in a method and at locations designated by the City Treasurer. Bills are deemed presented if (1) addressed to the water customer at the address shown on the records of the City Treasurer and deposited with the United States mail service, postage prepaid; or (2) the statement or notice of the statement is sent electronically to the customer using e-mail or another approved format that has been authorized by the customer in the records of the City Treasurer. Accounts which remain unpaid 30 days following presentation of the bill, or unpaid after the due date and time on the statement, whichever is earlier, are delinquent. All delinquent accounts shall be charged a late fee as set by a resolution of the City Council to recover billing and mailing costs. A delinquent notice shall be delivered to each delinquent account (by mail or electronically) specifying a date by which full payment is due to avoid shut-off of water service. Said notice shall include a late fee, as set by resolution of the City Council, imposed to recover costs associated with the delinquent notice.

B.     Water service for delinquent accounts shall be shut off until all outstanding bills, fees, utility taxes and penalties have been paid. When the supply of water has been shut off for nonpayment or a violation of any ordinance or of any rule or regulation, service shall not be resumed until a turn-on fee, as set by resolution of the City Council, and all delinquent balances have been paid. (674-12/57, 1996-8/75, 2400-11/79, 2589-1/83, 3905-1/11)

 

14.12.130 Vacating Premises
Whenever a consumer shall vacate any premises, he or she shall immediately give written notice thereof to the Water Department. Upon the receipt of such notice, the department shall read the water meter, shut off the water from the premises and immediately present the consumer all unpaid bills for water furnished by the City to him or her up to that time. Thereupon the consumer shall pay said bills to the Water Department. In the event that the consumer shall have made a deposit with the department, as required in Section 14.12.090, the balance, if any, of such deposit shall be returned to the consumer after deducting therefrom the amount of said bills. Until such notice and payments shall have been made, the premises shall be deemed occupied by the consumer and his or her liability continued. (674-12/57)

 

14.12.140 Change of Address
Failure to receive mail will not be recognized as a valid excuse for failure to pay water rates when due. Change in occupancy of property supplied with City water, and changes in mailing addresses of consumers of City water must be filed in writing at the Water Department on forms provided for that purpose. (674-12/57)

 

14.12.150 Renewing Service
Each owner or occupant of any premises previously connected with the City water system desiring to renew the use of water shall make application for renewal of water service and upon payment of all unpaid charges, if any, together with any turn-on charge imposed by Section 14.12.100, the water will be turned on. (674-12/57)

 

14.12.170 Water Fund
All moneys collected from fees and charges under Chapters 14.08 through 14.20 of the Huntington Beach Municipal Code shall be deposited in the treasury of the City in a Water Fund. (738-12/59, 1927-8/74, 4073-12/15)

 

Chapter 14.16 WATER USE REGULATIONS
14.16.010 During Fire
No person shall use any water for irrigation or any steady flow during the progress of any fire in the City unless for protection of property, and all irrigation and sprinkling shall immediately be stopped when an alarm of fire is sounded in any part of the City, and shall not be begun until the fire is extinguished. (674-12/57)

 

14.16.020 Waste From Improper Fixtures
No person shall waste water or allow it to be wasted by imperfect or leaking stops, valves, pipes, closets, faucets or other fixtures, or use water closets without self-closing valves, or use the water for purposes other than those named in the application upon which rates for water are based, or use it in violation of any of the provisions of any ordinance of this City, provided further that no person shall drain or permit water to drain upon any public street or alley, or over any private property not owned by such person. (674-12/57)

 

14.16.030 Meters—Property of City
All water service and water meters installed or required to be installed by the City Water Department shall remain at all times the property of the City and shall be maintained, repaired and renewed by the City Water Department when rendered unserviceable by normal wear and tear. (674-12/57)

 

14.16.040 Meters—Replacement or Repair
Where replacements, repairs or adjustments of any meter are rendered necessary by an act resulting from malice, carelessness or neglect of the consumer or any member of his or her family, or anyone employed by him or her, and any damage which may result from hot water, or steam from water heater, boiler or otherwise, shall be charged to and paid for by such consumer to the Water Department on presentation of a bill therefor; and in case such bill is not paid, the water shall be shut off from such premises and shall not be turned on again until all charges are paid. No person shall interfere with or remove from any service any water meter which has been so attached. (674-12/57)

 

14.16.050 Meters—Accuracy Tests
Where the accuracy of record of a water meter is questioned, it shall be removed at the consumer’s request and shall in his or her presence be tested in the shops of the Water Department by means of the apparatus there provided, and a report thereon duly made. Both parties to the test must accept the findings so made. If the test discloses an error against the consumer of more than three percent of the meter’s registry, the excess of the consumption on the three percent readings shall be credited to the consumer’s meter account, and the Water Department will bear the entire expenses of the test, and the deposit required as hereinafter prescribed shall be returned. On the other hand, where no such error is found, the person who has requested the test shall pay the charge fixed for such test. (674-12/57)

 

14.16.060 Meters—Test Deposit
Before making a test of any meter, the person requesting such a test shall, at the time of filing his or her request, make a deposit with the Water Department of the amount charged for such a test, subject to the conditions herein stated, which charges are fixed as follows:

 

 

 

For testing 5/8 inch meters

$10.00

 

For testing l inch meters

$10.00

 

For testing 1 1/2 inch meters

$20.00

 

For testing 2 inch meters

$20.00

 

For testing 3 inch meters

$80.00

 

For testing 4 inch meters

$105.00

 

No meter shall be removed, or in any way disturbed, nor the seal broken except in the presence of or under the direction of the superintendent. (674-12/57, 1996-8/75)

 

14.16.070 Meters—Placement
All meters of the Water Department shall be placed at the curb line of the street or near the property line in alleys, whenever and wherever practicable, and be protected and maintained as a part of the operation of the department. (674-12/57)

 

14.16.080 Meters—Inside Premises
Where a water meter is placed inside the premises of a consumer, for the convenience of the consumer, provisions shall be made for convenient meter reading and repairing by representatives of the department. Failure to make such provisions by the consumer shall be sufficient cause for removal of such meter at the option of the superintendent of the department and the withholding of service until installation is made at the curb line as herein provided. (674-12/57)

 

14.16.090 Consumer’s Responsibility
The City shall in no way whatsoever be responsible for any damage to person or property because of any leakage, breakage or seepage from, or accident or damage to any meter or pipe situated within any private premises, and the City shall not be responsible for any leakage, breakage or seepage for any pipe situated between any meter properly installed at the curb and the private premises served thereby nor shall the City be responsible for or on account of any damage, injury or loss occasioned directly or indirectly by the existence of any meter or pipe situated upon private property. (674-12/57)

 

14.16.100 Fire Hydrants—Maintenance
Public fire hydrants shall be placed, maintained and repaired by the Water Department. Any damage thereto by persons or agency other than representatives of the Fire and Water Departments, shall be a claim against the person or agency committing such damage, and the superintendent shall take such action as may be necessary to collect the same. (674-12/57)

 

14.16.110 Fire Hydrants—Use
Fire hydrants are provided for the sole purpose of extinguishing fires and shall be used otherwise only as herein provided for, and shall be opened and used only by the Water and Fire Departments or such persons as may be authorized to do so by the Chief of the Fire Department, or the Superintendent of the Water Department as herein provided. (674-12/57)

 

14.16.120 Fire Hydrants—Permits for Special Use
All persons desiring to use water through fire hydrants, or other hydrants, owned or controlled by the City, shall be required to obtain a permit first from the Chief of the Fire Department; second, from the Superintendent of the Water Department, who shall issue no such permit to any person who has violated any of the provisions of this title or whose indebtedness to the City of water used or damage to hydrants or equipment is delinquent. All such persons having permit for use of water from the fire hydrants must provide hydrant wrenches for the operation of such fire hydrants. (674-12/57)

 

14.16.130 Fire Hydrants—Use Permit Cancellation
Permit for the use of water through the fire hydrants of the City may be cancelled at the will of the superintendent on evidence that the holder thereof is or has violated the privileges conveyed thereunder. Such notice of cancellation shall be in writing delivered or mailed to the persons to be notified and shall be immediately effective and enforced. (674-12/57)

 

14.16.140 Fire Hydrants—Obstructing Access
No person shall obstruct the access to any fire hydrant by placing around or thereon any stone, brick, lumber, dirt or other material or willfully or carelessly injure the same, or open or operate any fire hydrant, or draw or attempt to draw water therefrom, except as provided in Section 14.16.120. (674-12/57)

 

14.16.150 Pressure Maintenance or Shutoff
The Water Department shall not accept any responsibility for the maintenance of pressure and it reserves the right to shut off the water from any premises, or from any part of the distributing system, as long as necessary without notice to consumers, at any time of emergency, but in all cases of extensions or connections, the department shall notify occupants of the premises of the necessity of shutting off water and the probable length of time the water shall be so shut off before taking such action. (647-12/57)

 

14.16.160 Drawing Water Into Steam Boilers
No stationary steam boiler shall be connected directly with the water distribution system of the City, but in each and every case a suitable tank of storage capacity sufficient for a 12 hour supply for said boiler shall be provided and the service pipe supplying the tank shall discharge directly into the top of the tank. (674-12/57)

 

14.16.170 Violations Reported
It shall be the duty of the employees of the police, fire and street departments to give vigilant aid to the superintendent in the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter and to this end they shall report all violations thereof which come to their knowledge to the Water Department, and it shall be the duty of the Chief of the Fire Department to report immediately to the superintendent, in case of fire in premises having metered service for fire protection purposes, that fire has occurred there. (674-12/57)

 

14.16.180 Sale of Water Outside City
It is unlawful for the City Water Department to sell water to consumers outside the City, or to allow any consumer outside the City to use any water furnished by the City system unless the City Council shall by resolution determine and declare as follows: (1) that a surplus of water exists in excess of that required by the inhabitants of the City; or (2) that the sale or use of water outside the City will enhance the health or safety of the public during the use of public property such as a public park, beach, or other facility owned or operated by a public agency. (674-12/57, 3754-12/06)

 

14.16.190 Protecting Cross Connections
The City shall maintain a Cross-Connection Control Program throughout the Huntington Beach water system service area. Such program shall be established by the City Council pursuant to Resolution No. 5921, titled “A Resolution of the City Council of the City of Huntington Beach Establishing a Cross-Connection Control Program for the Huntington Beach Water System.” (674-12/57, 2404-1/80, 2966-11/88)

 

Chapter 14.18 WATER MANAGEMENT PROGRAM
14.18.010 Title
This chapter will be known as the City of Huntington Beach Water Conservation and Water Supply Shortage Program. (3104-4/91, 3849-1/10)

 

14.18.020 Purpose and Intent
A.    The purpose of this chapter is to establish a water conservation and supply shortage program that will reduce water consumption within the City of Huntington Beach through conservation, enable effective water supply planning, ensure reasonable and beneficial use of water, prevent waste of water, and maximize the efficient use of water within the City of Huntington Beach to avoid and minimize the effect and hardship of water shortage to the greatest extent possible.

B.     This chapter establishes permanent water conservation standards intended to alter behavior related to water use efficiency at all times and further establishes three levels of water supply shortage response actions to be implemented during times of declared water shortage or declared water shortage emergency, with increasing restrictions on water use in response to worsening drought or emergency conditions and decreasing supplies. (3104-4/91, 3849-1/10)

 

14.18.030 Definitions
For purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meaning hereafter set forth unless a different meaning is clearly intended from the context in which such word or phrase is used. Any word or phrase not herein defined shall have the meaning attributed to it in ordinary usage.

“Billing unit” means the unit of water used to apply water rates for purposes of calculating water charges for a person’s water usage and equals 748 gallons.

“Landscape irrigation system” means an irrigation system with pipes, hoses, spray heads, or sprinkling devices that are operated by hand or through an automated system.

 

“Large landscape areas” means a lawn, landscape, or other vegetated area, or combination thereof, equal to more than one acre of irrigable land.

“Person” means any natural person or persons, corporation, public or private entity, governmental agency or institution, including all agencies and departments of City of Huntington Beach or any other user of water provided by City of Huntington Beach.

“Potable water” means water which is suitable for drinking.

“Recycled water” means the reclamation and reuse of non-potable water for beneficial use as defined in Title 22 of the California Code of Regulations.

“Single pass cooling systems” means equipment where water is circulated only once to cool equipment before being disposed. (3104-4/91, 3849-1/10)

 

14.18.040 Application
A.    The provisions of this chapter apply to any person in the use of any potable water provided by the City of Huntington Beach.

B.     The provisions of this chapter do not apply to uses of water necessary to protect public health and safety or for essential government services, such as police, fire and other similar emergency services.

C.     The provisions of this chapter do not apply to the use of recycled water, with the exception of Section 14.18.050(A).

D.    The provisions of this chapter do not apply to the use of water by commercial nurseries and commercial growers to sustain plants, trees, shrubs, crops or other vegetation intended for commercial sale.

E.     This chapter is intended solely to further the conservation of water. It is not intended to implement any provision of federal, state, or local statutes, ordinances, or regulations relating to protection of water quality or control of drainage or runoff. Refer to the local jurisdiction or Regional Water Quality Control Board for information on any stormwater ordinances and stormwater management plans. (3104-4/91, 3849-1/10)

 

14.18.050 Permanent Water Conservation Requirements—Prohibition Against Waste
The following water conservation requirements are effective at all times and are permanent. Violations of this section will be considered waste and an unreasonable use of water.

A.    Limits on Watering Hours. Watering or irrigating of lawn, landscape or other vegetated area with potable water is prohibited between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. Pacific Standard Time on any day, except by hand using a bucket and/or by hand using a hose with an automatic shutoff nozzle or a hose-end sprinkler with a radius of not more than 10 feet, if such sprinkler causes no overspray or runoff, or for very short periods of time for the express purpose of adjusting or repairing an irrigation system.

B.     Limit on Watering Duration. Watering or irrigating of lawn, landscape or other vegetated area with potable water using a landscape irrigation system or a watering device that is not continuously attended is limited to no more than 10 minutes watering per day per station. This subsection does not apply to landscape irrigation systems that exclusively use very low-flow drip type irrigation systems when no emitter produces more than two gallons of water per hour and weather based controllers or steam rotor sprinklers that meet a 70% efficiency standard.

C.     No Excessive Water Flow or Runoff. Watering or irrigating of any lawn, landscape or other vegetated area in a manner that causes or allows excessive water flow or runoff onto an adjoining sidewalk, driveway, street, alley, gutter or ditch is prohibited.

D.    No Washing Down Hard or Paved Surfaces. Washing down hard or paved surfaces, including, but not limited to, sidewalks, walkways, driveways, parking areas, tennis courts, patios or alleys, is prohibited except when necessary to alleviate safety or sanitary hazards, and then only by use of a hand-held bucket or similar container, a hand-held hose equipped with a positive self-closing water shut-off device, a low-volume, high-pressure cleaning machine equipped to recycle any water used, or a low-volume high-pressure water broom.

E.     Obligation to Fix Leaks, Breaks or Malfunctions. Excessive loss or escape of water through breaks, leaks or other malfunctions in the water user’s plumbing or distribution system for any period of time after such escape of water should have reasonably been discovered and corrected and in no event more than five days of receiving notice from the City of Huntington Beach, is prohibited.

F.     Re-circulating Water Required for Water Fountains and Decorative Water Features. Operating a water fountain or other decorative water feature that does not use re-circulated water is prohibited.

G.    Limits on Washing Vehicles. Use of water to wash or clean a vehicle, including, but not limited to, any automobile, truck, van, bus, motorcycle, boat or trailer, whether motorized or not, is prohibited, except by use of a hand-held bucket or similar container or a hand-held hose equipped with a positive self-closing water shut-off nozzle or device. This subsection does not apply to any commercial car washing facility.

H.    Drinking Water Served Upon Request Only. Eating or drinking establishments, including, but not limited to, a restaurant, hotel, café, cafeteria, bar, or other public place where food or drinks are sold, served, or offered for sale, are prohibited from providing drinking water to any person unless expressly requested.

I.      Commercial Lodging Establishments Must Provide Guests Option to Decline Daily Linen Services. Hotels, motels and other commercial lodging establishments must provide customers the option of not having towels and linen laundered daily. Commercial lodging establishments must prominently display notice of this option in each bathroom using clear and easily understood language.

J.      No Installation of Single Pass Cooling Systems to Domestic Water Supplies. Installation of single pass cooling systems is prohibited in buildings requesting new water service.

K.    No Installation of Non-recirculating Water Systems in Commercial Car Wash and Laundry Systems. Installation of non-recirculating water systems is prohibited in new commercial conveyor car wash and new commercial laundry systems.

L.     Restaurants Required to Use Water Conserving Dish Wash Spray Valves. Food preparation establishments, such as restaurants or cafés, are prohibited from using non-water conserving dish wash spray valves.

M.    Commercial Car Wash Systems. Effective on January 1, 2010, all new commercial conveyor car wash systems must have installed operational re-circulating water systems, or must have secured a waiver of this requirement from the City of Huntington Beach.

N.    Construction. (1) No potable water may be used for compacting or dust control purposes in construction activities where there is a reasonably available source of other non-potable water approved by the California Department of Public Health and appropriate for such use. This condition must be identified and specified on construction drawings submitted to the City for review. (2) All water hoses used in connection with any construction activities shall be equipped with an automatic shut-off nozzle when an automatic shut-off nozzle can be purchased or otherwise obtained for the size or type of hose in use.

O.    Use of Hydrants. No person may use water from any fire hydrant for any purpose other than fire suppression or emergency aid without first obtaining a City hydrant meter account or written approval from the Director of Public Works/City Engineer or designee.

P.     Indiscriminate Use. No person shall cause or permit the indiscriminate running of water not otherwise prohibited above which is wasteful and without reasonable purpose.

Q.    Public Health and Safety. These regulations shall not be construed to limit water use which is immediately necessary to protect health and/or safety.

R.     Measurable Rainfall Event—Watering Prohibited. Watering or irrigating of lawn, landscape or other vegetated area with potable water is prohibited during a measurable rainfall event, or within 48 hours following the cessation of a measurable rainfall event. (3104-4/91, 3810-9/08, 3849-1/10, 4022-5/14, 4060-5/15, 4063-8/15)

 

14.18.060 Level 1 Water Supply Shortage
A.    A Level 1 Water Supply Shortage exists when the City of Huntington Beach determines, in its sole discretion, that due to drought or other water supply conditions, a water supply shortage or threatened shortage exists and a consumer demand reduction is necessary to make more efficient use of water and appropriately respond to existing water conditions. Upon the declaration by the City of Huntington Beach of a Level 1 Water Supply Shortage condition, the City of Huntington Beach will implement the mandatory Level 1 conservation measures identified in this section.

B.     Additional Water Conservation Measures. In addition to the prohibited uses of water identified in Section 14.18.050, the following water conservation requirements apply during a declared Level 1 Water Supply Shortage:

1.     Limits on Watering Days. Watering or irrigating of lawn, landscape or other vegetated area with potable water is limited to three days per week during the months of April through October on a schedule established and posted by the City of Huntington Beach. During the months of November through March, watering or irrigating of lawn, landscape or other vegetated area with potable water is limited to no more than two days per week on a schedule established and posted by the City of Huntington Beach. This provision does not apply to landscape irrigation zones that exclusively use very low flow drip type irrigation systems when no emitter produces more than two gallons of water per hour. This provision also does not apply to watering or irrigating by use of a hand-held bucket or similar container, a hand-held hose equipped with a positive self-closing water shut-off nozzle or device, or for very short periods of time for the express purpose of adjusting or repairing an irrigation system.

2.     Obligation to Fix Leaks, Breaks or Malfunctions. All leaks, breaks, or other malfunctions in the water user’s plumbing or distribution system must be repaired within 72 hours of notification by the City of Huntington Beach unless other arrangements are made with the City of Huntington Beach. (3104-4/91, 3849-1/10, 4022-5/14)

 

14.18.070 Level 2 Water Supply Shortage
A.    A Level 2 Water Supply Shortage exists when the City of Huntington Beach determines, in its sole discretion that due to drought or other water supply conditions, a water supply shortage or threatened shortage exists and a consumer demand reduction is necessary to make more efficient use of water and appropriately respond to existing water conditions. Upon the declaration by the City of Huntington Beach of a Level 2 Water Supply Shortage condition, the City of Huntington Beach will implement the mandatory Level 2 conservation measures identified in this section.

B.     Additional Conservation Measures. In addition to the prohibited uses of water identified in Section 14.18.050 and 14.18.060, the following additional water conservation requirements apply during a declared Level 2 Water Supply Shortage:

1.     Watering Days. Watering or irrigating of lawn, landscape or other vegetated area with potable water is limited to two days per week during the months of April through October on a schedule established and posted by the City of Huntington Beach. During the months of November through March, watering or irrigating of lawn, landscape or other vegetated area with potable water is limited to no more than one day per week on a schedule established and posted by the City of Huntington Beach. This provision does not apply to landscape irrigation zones that exclusively use very low flow drip type irrigation systems when no emitter produces more than two gallons of water per hour. This provision also does not apply to watering or irrigating by use of a hand-held bucket or similar container, a hand-held hose equipped with a positive self-closing water shut-off nozzle or device, or for very short periods of time for the express purpose of adjusting or repairing an irrigation system.

2.     Obligation to Fix Leaks, Breaks or Malfunctions. All leaks, breaks, or other malfunctions in the water user’s plumbing or distribution system must be repaired within 48 hours of notification by the City of Huntington Beach unless other arrangements are made with the City of Huntington Beach.

3.     Limits on Filling Ornamental Lakes or Ponds. Filling or re-filling ornamental lakes or ponds is prohibited, except to the extent needed to sustain aquatic life, provided that such animals are of significant value and have been actively managed within the water feature prior to declaration of a supply shortage level under this ordinance.

4.     Limits on Washing Vehicles. Using water to wash or clean a vehicle, including, but not limited to, any automobile, truck, van, bus, motorcycle, boat or trailer, whether motorized or not, is prohibited except by use of a hand-held bucket or similar container, a hand-held hose equipped with a positive self-closing water shut-off nozzle or device, by high pressure/low volume wash systems, or at a commercial car washing facility that utilizes a re-circulating water system to capture or reuse water.

5.     Limits on Filling Residential Swimming Pools and Spas. Initial filling of a pool or spa is permitted only if an appropriate cover is in place. Refilling of an existing pool or spa is permitted only if repair of a leak has been made or if the pool or spa was drained to address a health or safety issue. (3104-4/91, 3849-1/10, 4022-5/14, 4060-5/15, 4063-8/15)

 

14.18.080 Level 3 Water Supply Shortage—Emergency Condition
A.    A Level 3 water supply shortage condition is also referred to as an “emergency” condition. A Level 3 condition exists when the City of Huntington Beach declares a water shortage emergency and notifies its residents and businesses that a significant reduction in consumer demand is necessary to maintain sufficient water supplies for public health and safety. Upon the declaration of a Level 3 water supply shortage condition, the City of Huntington Beach will implement the mandatory Level 3 conservation measures identified in this section.

 

B.     Additional Conservation Measures. In addition to the prohibited use of water identified in Sections 14.18.050, 14.18.060 and 14.18.070, the following water conservation requirements apply during a declared Level 3 water supply shortage emergency:

1.     Watering or Irrigating. Watering or irrigating of lawn, landscape or other vegetated area with potable water is prohibited. This restriction does not apply to the following categories of use, unless the City of Huntington Beach has determined that recycled water is available and may be applied to the use:

a.     Maintenance of vegetation, including trees and shrubs, that are watered using a hand-held bucket or similar container, hand-held hose equipped with a positive self-closing water shut-off nozzle or device;

b.     Maintenance of existing landscape necessary for fire protection;

c.     Maintenance of existing landscape for soil erosion control;

d.     Maintenance of plant materials identified to be rare or essential to the well-being of protected species;

e.     Maintenance of landscape with active public parks and playing fields, day care centers, golf course greens, and school grounds, provided that such irrigation does not exceed two days per week according to the schedule established in Section 14.18.070(B)(1) and time restrictions in Sections 14.18.050(A) and 14.18.060(B)(1);

f.      Actively irrigated environmental mitigation projects. (3849-1/10)

2.     Obligation to Fix Leaks, Breaks or Malfunctions. All leaks, breaks, or other malfunctions in the water user’s plumbing or distribution system must be repaired within 24 hours of notification by the City of Huntington Beach unless other arrangements are made with the City of Huntington Beach.

3.     a.     New Potable Water Service. Upon declaration of a Level 3 water supply shortage emergency condition, no new potable water service will be provided, no new temporary meters or permanent meters will be provided, and no statements of immediate ability to serve or provide potable water service (such as, will-serve letters, certificates, or letters of availability) will be issued, except under the following circumstances:

i.      A valid, unexpired building permit has been issued for the project; or

ii.     The project is necessary to protect the public health, safety, and welfare; or

iii.    The applicant provides substantial evidence of an enforceable commitment that water demands for the project will be offset prior to the provision of a new water meter(s) to the satisfaction of the City of Huntington Beach.

This provision does not preclude the resetting or turn-on of meters to provide continuation of water service or the restoration of service that has been interrupted for a period of one year or less.

Or

b.     Limits on Building Permits. The City of Huntington Beach will limit or withhold the issuance of building permits which require new or expanded water service, except to protect the public health, safety and welfare, or in cases which meet the City of Huntington Beach’s adopted conservation offset requirements.

4.     Discontinue Service. The City of Huntington Beach, in its sole discretion, may discontinue service to consumers who willfully violate provisions of this section.

5.     New Annexations. Upon the declaration of a Level 3 water supply shortage condition, the City of Huntington Beach will suspend consideration of annexations to its service area. This subsection does not apply to boundary corrections and annexations that will not result in any increased use of water. (3849-1/10)

 

14.18.090 Procedures for Determination and Notification of Water Supply Shortage
A.    The City’s Director of Public Works and the City Manager, or their designated representatives, are authorized and directed by the City Council to implement the provisions of this chapter. The Director of Public Works shall make such rules and regulations as may be necessary, reasonable and proper to enforce the provisions of this Code. A copy of any rule or regulation promulgated by the director shall be provided to the City Council.

B.     The City shall monitor the projected supply and demand for water by its customers. The Director of Public Works shall determine the extent of the conservation required through the implementation and/or termination of particular conservation stages in order for the City to prudently plan for and supply water to its customers. The existence of Level 1, Level 2 or Level 3 water supply shortage conditions shall be declared by resolution of the City of Huntington Beach adopted at a regular or special public meeting held in accordance with state law. The mandatory conservation requirements applicable to Level 1, Level 2 or Level 3 conditions, will take effect on the 10th day after the date the shortage level is declared. Within five days following the declaration of the shortage level, the City of Huntington Beach shall publish a copy of the resolution in a newspaper used for publication of official notices. If the City of Huntington Beach activates a water allocation process, it shall provide notice of the activation by including it in the regular billing statement or by any other mailing to the address to which the City of Huntington Beach customarily mails the billing statement for fees or charges for on-going water service. A water allocation process will be effective on the fifth day following the date of mailing or at such later date as specified in the notice.

C.     In case of local emergencies as defined under the Huntington Beach Municipal Code, the City Manager shall have the authority to order the implementation of the appropriate level of water conservation subject to ratification by the City Council within seven days thereafter or such order shall have no further force or effect. (3849-1/10)

 

14.18.100 Hardship Waiver
A.    Undue and Disproportionate Hardship. If, due to unique circumstances, a specific requirement of this chapter would result in undue hardship to a person using water or to property upon which water is used, that is disproportionate to the impacts to water users generally or to similar property or classes of water users, then the person may apply to the City Manager for a waiver to the requirements as provided in this section.

B.     Written Finding. The waiver may be granted or conditionally granted only upon a written finding of the existence of facts demonstrating an undue hardship to a person using water or to property upon which water is used, that is disproportionate to the impacts to water users generally or to similar property or classes of water use due to specific and unique circumstances of the user or the user’s property.

1.     Application. Application for a waiver must be on a form prescribed by the City of Huntington Beach and accompanied by a non-refundable processing fee in an amount set by City of Huntington Beach resolution of the City Council.

2.     Supporting Documentation. The application must be accompanied by photographs, maps, drawings, and other information, including a written statement of the applicant.

3.     Required Findings for Waiver. An application for a waiver will be denied unless the City Manager finds, based on the information provided in the application, supporting documents, or such additional information as may be requested, and on water use information for the property as shown by the records of the City of Huntington Beach or its agent, all of the following:

a.     That the waiver does not constitute a grant of special privilege inconsistent with the limitations upon other residents and businesses;

b.     That because of special circumstances applicable to the property or its use, the strict application of this chapter would have a disproportionate impact on the property or use that exceeds the impacts to residents and businesses generally;

c.     That the authorizing of such waiver will not be of substantial detriment to adjacent properties, and will not materially affect the ability of the City of Huntington Beach to effectuate the purpose of this chapter and will not be detrimental to the public interest.

4.     Approval Authority. The City Manager shall act upon any completed application no later than 10 days after submittal and may approve, conditionally approve, or deny the waiver. The applicant requesting the waiver shall be promptly notified in writing of any action taken. Unless specified otherwise at the time a waiver is approved, the waiver will apply to the subject property during the period of the mandatory water supply shortage condition. The decision of the City Manager will be final. (3849-1/10)

 

14.18.110 Violation—Penalty
A.    Any person violating this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00 or by imprisonment in the county jail for a period not to exceed six months, or by both fine and imprisonment. Each day that a violation of this chapter occurs is a separate offense.

B.     In addition to any fines, the City may install a water flow restrictor device of approximately one gallon per minute capacity for service up to one and one-half inch size and comparatively sized restrictors for larger services after written notice of intent to install a flow restrictor for a minimum of 48 hours.

C.     A person or entity that violates this chapter is responsible for payment of the City’s charges for installing and/or removing any flow restricting device and for disconnecting and/or reconnecting service per the City’s schedule of charges then in effect. The charge for installing and/or removing any flow restricting device must be paid to the City before the device is removed. Nonpayment will be subject to the same remedies as nonpayment of basic water rates.

D.    In addition to any fines and the installation of a water flow restrictor, the City may disconnect a customer’s water service for willful violations of mandatory restrictions in this chapter. (3849-1/10)

 

14.18.120 Severability
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase in this chapter is for any reason held invalid, the validity of the remainder of the chapter will not be affected. The City of Huntington Beach hereby declares it would have passed this chapter and each section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses, or phrases is declared invalid. (3849-1/10)

 

Chapter 14.20 WATER MAIN EXTENSIONS
14.20.010 Application—Deposit—Installation
Any person, as owner or subdivider of a single lot, subdivision or tract of land, who desires the extension of water mains and services to such lot, subdivision or tract of land, shall file a written application with the Water Department. Any number of persons may join together in a single application.

A.    The Water Department shall determine the size, locations and total costs for such extension, and shall on approval of such extension, collect from the applicant a deposit covering the total estimated cost of installing all facilities from the nearest existing main line of adequate capacity.

B.     The term “all facilities” includes distribution mains, services, fire hydrants, etc.

C.     If and when the applicant has complied with all requirements of the Water Department and made the deposit as herein required, the Water Department shall install such mains and services, subject to provisions of subsection D of this section, such line shall thereupon become and remain the property of the City Water Department.

D.    In the event the deposit was in excess of the actual cost of installation the excess amount shall be returned to the applicant. In the event the deposit was less than the actual cost of installation the applicant shall immediately pay to the Water Department the deficit.

E.     If in the opinion of the Superintendent of the Water Department it is for the best interests of the City, he or she may authorize the applicant to install the extension lines at applicant’s sole cost and expense in accordance with specifications approved by the superintendent, and such line shall thereupon become and remain the property of the City Water Department. (674-12/57)

 

14.20.020 Oversized Mains—Decision of Superintendent
Whenever an application for extension of a main line is received, the superintendent shall determine whether the best interests of the City water system would be served by a line larger than required by the applicant’s need. In the event the superintendent so determines, he or she shall require the larger size line to be installed. (674-12/57)

 

14.20.030 Main Size Determination
The determination of the Superintendent of the Water Department as to the size of the line necessary to meet applicant’s need and his or her determination of the size of the line which would best serve the interest of the City water system shall be final and binding on applicant. (674-12/57)

 

14.20.040 Oversize Mains—Installation
When the Superintendent of the Water Department has determined that the City water system will be best served by a line larger than needed for applicant’s use, the superintendent shall require the installation of such oversize line in accordance with the provisions of Section 14.20.010. (674-12/57)

 

14.20.050 Oversize Mains—Cost Paid by Applicant
The cost of installing the oversize line shall be paid for by the applicant, subject to the provisions for refunds as hereinafter set forth. (674-12/57)

 

14.20.060 Refund Conditions
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the payment of refunds shall be governed as follows:

A.    Refunds shall be payable for a period of five years only from the date of the Director of Public Works acceptance of a main line extension.

B.     Refunds for oversize water mains shall be made from fees derived from subsequent development as set forth in Section 14.20.010 of the Huntington Beach Municipal Code.

C.     Refunds shall not exceed 90% of off-site construction costs.

D.    Refunds shall bear no interest.

E.     Refunds shall be payable only to the original applicant or applicants. Upon death of applicant, the right to refund shall terminate. In the event applicant is a partnership or corporation, the dissolution of the partnership or corporation shall terminate the right to refund.

F.     The City and City Water Department shall not be liable for payment of any refund by reason of its failure to collect or receive from any person the service fee for connecting into the main line paid for by applicant.

G.    The City Water Department’s refusal to allow any connection or connections into the main line paid for by applicant shall not make the City or City Water Department liable to applicant for any refund which might have accrued to applicant if such connection had been permitted.

H.    The City retains the right to allow a connection by any public agency exempted from payment of connection fees and the City shall not be liable to applicant for refund because of the connection.

I.      Refunds for off-site water main extensions shall be made from fees derived from subsequent development at the rate set forth in Section 14.20.010. (674-12/57, 2196-7/77)

 

14.20.070 Subdivided Land Shall Have Water Rights Deeded
Whenever land is to be subdivided, any water wells, mains and easements needed therefor, which may be appurtenant thereto or which may be used exclusively thereon, shall be deeded to the City in consideration of the City approving any application for City water to be placed on such tract or subdivision. The deed to the City shall be executed before any such application shall be approved by the superintendent. However, where water wells and equipment, as described above, are used to supply water to additional land not subdivided, the City may allow such wells and equipment to continue to supply such unsubdivided portion until such time as such parcel is subdivided into four or more parcels of land containing five acres or less. (674-12/57)

 

Chapter 14.25 STORMWATER AND URBAN RUNOFF MANAGEMENT
14.25.010 Purpose
A.    The United States Congress passed the Clean Water Act 33 USC Section 1251 et seq., as amended, including Section 402(p) therein as a mandate, in part, that municipal separate storm sewer systems, such as in Orange County, obtain permits to “effectively prohibit non-stormwater discharges into the storm sewers” and “require controls to reduce the discharge of pollutants to the maximum extent practicable.” This permitting authority has been delegated by the United States Environmental Protection Agency (“EPA”) to the State of California, which has authorized the State Water Resources Control Board and its local regulatory agencies, the Regional Water Quality Control Boards, to control non-point source discharges to California’s waterways.

B.     The Santa Ana and San Diego Regional Water Quality Control Boards have addressed the obligation to implement the Clean Water Act by issuing waste discharge requirements governing stormwater runoff for the County of Orange, Orange County Flood Control District and the incorporated cities of Orange County. These permits shall be referred to collectively herein as the National Pollution Discharge Elimination System Permit or “NPDES Permit.”

C.     The City of Huntington Beach has adopted and amended this chapter to comply with the Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System permit (“MS4 permit”) the California Water Quality Control Board-Santa Ana Region issued Orange County. The MS4 permit requires the City to demonstrate through ordinances the necessary legal authority to enforce prohibited discharges to the storm drain that would have a negative impact on the water quality and aesthetic value of downstream receiving water bodies such as the Santa River and the Pacific Ocean.

D.    Stormwater runoff is one step in the natural cycle of water. However, human activities, such as agriculture, construction and the operation and maintenance of an urban infrastructure may result in undesirable discharges of pollutants and certain sediments, which may accumulate in local drainage channels and waterways and eventually may be deposited in the waters of the United States.

E.     The purpose of this chapter is to participate in the improvement of water quality and comply with federal requirements for the control of urban pollutants to stormwater runoff, which enters the network of storm drains throughout Orange County. (3364-8/97, 4206-7/20)

 

14.25.020 Definitions
“Authorized inspector” shall mean the Director of Public Works, the Fire Chief and the Director of Community Development, and persons designated by and under his or her instruction and supervision, who are assigned to investigate compliance with, detect violations of, and/or take actions pursuant to this chapter.

“Best Management Practices (“BMPs”)” shall mean schedules of activities, pollution treatment practices or devices, prohibitions of practices, general good housekeeping practices, pollution prevention and educational practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices or devices to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly to stormwater, receiving waters, or the stormwater drainage system. Best Management Practices also include, but are not limited to, treatment practices, operating procedures, and practices to control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or water disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage. Best Management Practices may include any type of pollution prevention and pollution control measure that can help achieve compliance with this chapter.

“City” shall mean the City of Huntington Beach, Orange County, California.

“City Attorney” shall mean the City Attorney of the City of Huntington Beach and his or her designee, which counsel is authorized to take enforcement action as described herein. For purposes of criminal prosecution, only the City Attorney, or his or her designee, shall act as the City Attorney.

“Co-permittee” shall mean the County of Orange, the Orange County Flood Control District, and/or any one of the 31 municipalities, including the City of Huntington Beach, which are responsible for compliance with the terms of the NPDES Permit.

“DAMP” shall mean the Orange County Drainage Area Management Plan, as the same may be amended from time to time.

“Development project guidance” shall mean DAMP Chapter VII and the appendix thereto, entitled Best Management Practices for New Development Including Nonresidential Construction Projects, as the same may be amended from time to time.

“Discharge” shall mean any release, spill, leak, pump, flow, escape, leaching (including subsurface migration or deposition to groundwater), dumping or disposal of any liquid, semi-solid or solid substance.

“Discharge exception” shall mean the group of activities not restricted or prohibited by this chapter, including only:

1.     Discharges composed entirely of stormwater;

2.     Discharges subject to regulation under current EPA or Regional Water Quality Control board issued NPDES permits, State General Permits, or other waivers, permits or approvals granted by an appropriate government agency;

3.     Emergency firefighting flows (i.e., flows necessary for the protection of life and property). Where reasonably feasible, however, and without interfering with health and safety, the use of BMPs should be considered;

4.     Diverted stream flows, flows from riparian habitats and wetlands, rising groundwater, and de minimis ground water infiltration to the stormwater drainage system (from leaks in joints or connections or cracks in water drainage pipes or conveyance systems);

5.     Dechlorinated swimming pool discharges, dechlorinated to a concentration of 0.1 ppm or less, pH adjusted and reoxygenated if necessary, and volumetrically and velocity controlled to prevent causing hydrologic conditions of concern in receiving waters (cleaning wastewater and filter backlash discharges, however are prohibited).

6.     Discharges to the stormwater drainage system from passive foundation drains, air conditioning condensation, water from crawl space pumps, passive footing drains, non-commercial vehicle washing;

7.     Discharges of waters not otherwise containing waste as defined in California Water Code Section 13050(d);

8.     Discharges from portable water sources, including water line flushing, super-chlorinated water line flushing, fire hydrant system flushing, and pipeline hydrostatic test water: Planned discharges shall be dechlorinated to a concentration of 0.1 ppm or less, pH adjusted if necessary, and volumetrically and velocity controlled to prevent causing hydrologic conditions of concern in receiving waters. pH must be no less than 6.5 and no greater than 8.6;

9.     Other types of discharges identified and recommended by the permittees and approved by the Santa Ana Regional Water Quality Control Board.

In any action taken to enforce this chapter, the burden shall be on the person who is the subject of such action to establish that a discharge was within the scope of this discharge exception.

“EPA” shall mean the Environmental Protection Agency of the United States.

“Fugitive dust” shall mean very small particles suspended in the air, the source of which is primarily the earth’s soil but can include dust generated from cutting stone and concrete.

“Hearing officer” shall mean the Director of Public Works, Planning Director, Fire Chief or Director of Building and Safety, or his or her designee, who shall preside at the administrative hearings authorized by this chapter and issue final decisions on the matters raised therein (or) shall mean the appeals board established by separate resolution of the City Council, which shall preside at the administrative hearings authorized by this chapter and issue final decisions on the matters raised therein.

“Illicit connection” shall mean any man-made conveyance or drainage system, pipeline, conduit, inlet or outlet through which the discharge of any pollutant to the stormwater drainage system occurs or may occur. The term “illicit connection” shall not include legal nonconforming connections or connections to the stormwater drainage system that are hereinafter authorized by the agency with jurisdiction over the system at the location at which the connection is made.

“Imminent danger” shall mean, but is not limited to, exigent circumstances created by the dispersal of pollutants, which present a significant and immediate threat to the public safety or the environment.

“Invoice for costs” shall mean the actual costs and expenses of the City of Huntington Beach, including but not limited to administrative overhead, salaries and other expenses recoverable under state law, incurred during any inspection conducted pursuant to this chapter or where a notice of noncompliance, administrative compliance order or other enforcement option under this chapter is utilized to obtain compliance with this chapter.

“Legal nonconforming connection” shall mean connections to the stormwater drainage system existing as of the adoption of this chapter that were in compliance with all federal, state and local rules, regulations, statutes and administrative requirements in effect at the time the connection was established, including but not limited to any discharge permitted pursuant to the terms and conditions of an individual discharge permit issued pursuant to the industrial waste ordinance, County Ordinance No. 703.

“New development” shall mean all public and private residential (whether single-family, multi-unit or planned unit development), industrial, commercial, retail, and other nonresidential construction projects, or grading for future construction, for which either a discretionary land use approval, grading permit, building permit or nonresidential plumbing permit is required.

“Nonresidential plumbing permit” shall mean a plumbing permit authorizing the construction and/or installation of facilities for the conveyance of liquids other than stormwater, potable water, reclaimed water or domestic sewage.

“NPDES Permit” shall mean the currently applicable municipal discharge permit(s) issued by the Regional Water Quality Control Board, Santa Ana Region (and/or the Regional Water Quality Control Board, San Diego Region, as appropriate), which permit(s) establishes waste discharge requirements applicable to stormwater runoff in the City of Huntington Beach.

“Nuisance” shall mean any discharge permitted as a discharge exemption but identified by the authorized inspector as a nuisance and a threat to water quality, either due to the nature of the discharge, volume of the discharge, and/or potential negative impact to the receiving water body.

“Person” shall mean any natural person as well as any corporation, partnership, government entity or subdivision, trust, estate, cooperative association, joint venture, business entity, or other similar entity, or the agent, employee or representative of any of the above.

“Pollutant” shall mean any liquid, solid or semi-solid substances, or combination thereof, including, and not limited to:

1.     Trash and debris, (such as, but not limited to, floatable plastics, wood products or metal shavings).

2.     Domestic sewage.

3.     Sediment due to construction or landscaping activities or due to lack of effective erosion and sediment controls.

4.     Metals and non-metals, including compounds of metals and non-metals (such as cadmium, lead, zinc, copper, silver, nickel, chromium, cyanide, phosphorus and arsenic) with characteristics which cause an adverse effect on living organisms.

5.     Petroleum and related hydrocarbons (such as fuels, lubricants, surfactants, waste oils, solvents, coolants and grease).

6.     Animal waste and wash-water resulting from cleaning activities to areas affected by animal wastes (such as discharge from confinement facilities, kennels, pens and recreational facilities, including, stables, show facilities, or polo fields).

7.     Substances having a pH less than 6.5 or greater than 8.6, or unusual coloration, turbidity or odor.

8.     Waste materials and wastewater generated on construction sites and by construction activities (such as painting and staining; use of sealants and glues; use of lime; use of wood preservatives and solvents; disturbance of asbestos fibers, paint flakes or stucco fragments; application of oils, lubricants, hydraulic, radiator or battery fluids; construction equipment washing; concrete pouring and cleanup; use of concrete detergents; steam cleaning or sand blasting; use of chemical degreasing or diluting agents; and use of super chlorinated water for portable water line flushing).

9.     Materials causing an increase in biochemical oxygen demand, chemical oxygen demand or total organic carbon.

10.   Materials which contain base/neutral or acid extractable organic compounds.

11.   Those pollutants defined in Section 1362(6) of the Federal Clean Water Act.

12.   Any other constituent or material, including, but not limited to, pesticides, herbicides, fertilizers, fecal coliform, fecal streptococcus or enterococcus, or eroded soils, sediment and particulate materials, in quantities that will interfere with or adversely affect the beneficial uses of the receiving waters, flora or fauna of the City and State.

13.   Washwater resulting from cleaning activities of outdoor surfaces such as patios, sidewalks, walkways, building exteriors, balconies, roofs, windows and decks.

14.   Discharge resulting from cleaning activities, repair, or maintenance of any type of equipment, machinery, or facility, including, but not limited to, motor vehicles, concrete mixing equipment, portable toilet servicing, etc.

15.   Washwater from mobile auto detailing and washing, steam and pressure cleaning, carpet cleaning, and other such commercial and industrial mobile washing activities.

16.   Water from cleaning of municipal, industrial, and commercial facilities, locations and area, including, but not limited to, parking lots, streets, sidewalks, driveways, patios, refuse enclosures, plazas, work yards, and outdoor eating or drinking areas, etc.

17.   Runoff from material storage areas including, but not limited to, receptacles that contain chemicals, fuels, grease, oil, hazardous materials, food waste, and trash/debris.

18.   Non-stormwater discharges defined as Discharge Exception but identified by the authorized inspector as a nuisance due to the nature of the discharge, volume of the discharge, and/or potential negative impact to quality.

19.   Discharges of pool or fountain water containing chlorine, biocides, or other chemicals; pool filter backwash containing debris and chlorine.

20.   Food service establishment or food processing facility wastes including, but not limited to, food waste, grease oil, washwater from floor mat, equipment, and trash enclosure cleaning activities, etc.

21.   Fugitive dust.

Any pollutant which is duplicative of another shall not be construed to exclude either item, as the same pollutant may be described more than one time.

“Prohibited discharge” shall mean any discharge which contains any pollutant, from public or private property:

1.     The stormwater drainage system;

2.     Any upstream flow, which is tributary to stormwater drainage systems;

3.     Any groundwater, river, stream, creek, wash or dry weather arroyo, wetlands area, marsh, coastal slough; or

4.     Any coastal harbor, bay or the Pacific Ocean.

The term “prohibited discharge” shall not include discharges allowable under the discharge exception unless declared a nuisance by City staff.

“Receiving waters” shall mean a “water of the United States” within the scope of the California Water Code, including, but not limited to, natural streams, creeks, rivers, reservoirs, lakes, ponds, water in vernal pools, lagoons, estuaries, bays, the Pacific Ocean and groundwater.

“Significant redevelopment” shall mean the rehabilitation or reconstruction of public or private residential (whether single-family, multi-unit or planned unit development), industrial, commercial, retail, or other nonresidential structures, for which either a discretionary land use approval, grading permit, building permit or nonresidential plumbing permit is required.

“State General Permit” shall mean either the State Industrial General Permit or the State Construction General Permit and the terms and requirements of either or both. In the event the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (“EPA”) revokes the in-lieu permitting authority of the State Water Resources Control Board, then the term “State General Permit” shall also refer to any EPA administered stormwater control program for industrial and construction activities.

“Stormwater drainage system” shall mean street gutter, channel, storm drain, constructed drain, lined diversion structure, wash area, inlet, outlet or other facility, which is a part of or tributary to the Countywide storm water runoff system and owned, operated, maintained or controlled by the City, the County of Orange, the Orange County Flood Control District, or any co-permittee city, and used for the purpose of collecting, storing, transporting, or disposing of stormwater. (3364-8/97, 3620-12/03, 4206-7/20)

 

14.25.030 Prohibition on Illicit Connections and Prohibited Discharges
A.    No person shall:

1.     Construct, maintain, operate and/or utilize any illicit connection.

2.     Cause, allow or facilitate any prohibited discharge.

3.     Act, cause, permit or suffer any agent, employee, or independent contractor, to construct, maintain, operate or utilize any illicit connection, or cause, allow or facilitate any prohibited discharge.

B.     No person shall cause, facilitate or contribute to a discharge into the stormwater drainage system, or into an area or in a manner that will result in a discharge into the stormwater drainage system of:

1.     Any substance causing, or threatening to cause, a condition of pollution, contamination, or a nuisance, as that term is defined in Section 13050 of the California Water Code.

2.     Any substance causing or contributing to an exceedance of any water quality standard for surface water or groundwater.

C.     The prohibition against illicit connections shall apply irrespective of whether the illicit connection was established prior to the date of enactment of this chapter; however, legal nonconforming connections shall not become illicit connections until the earlier of the following:

1.     For all structural improvements to property installed for the purpose of discharge to the stormwater conveyance system, the expiration of five years from the adoption or amendment of this chapter establishing the new standard.

2.     For all nonstructural improvements to property existing for the purpose of discharge to the stormwater conveyance system, the expiration of six months following delivery of a notice to the owner or occupant of the property, which states a legal nonconforming connection has been identified. The notice of a legal nonconforming connection shall state the date of expiration of the use under this chapter.

D.    A civil or administrative violation of Section 14.25.030 shall occur irrespective of the negligence or intent of the violator to construct, maintain, operate or utilize an illicit connection or to cause, allow or facilitate any prohibited discharge.

E.     If an authorized inspector reasonably determines that a discharge, which is otherwise within the discharge exception, may adversely affect the beneficial uses of receiving waters, then the authorized inspector may give written notice to the owner of the property or facility that the discharge exception shall not apply to the subject discharge following expiration of the 30-day period commencing upon delivery of the notice. Upon expiration of the 30-day period, any such discharge shall constitute a violation of Section 14.25.030.

F.     The owner or occupant of property on which a legal nonconforming connection exists may request an administrative hearing, pursuant to the procedures set forth in Section 14.25.060 for an extension of the period allowed for continued use of the connection. A reasonable extension of use may be authorized by the Director of Public Works or City Engineer, upon consideration of the following factors:

1.     The potential adverse effects of the continued use of the connection upon the beneficial uses of receiving waters;

2.     The economic investment of the discharger in the legal nonconforming connection; and

3.     The financial effect upon the discharger of a termination of the legal nonconforming connection. (3364-8/97, 4206-7/20)

 

14.25.040 New Development and Significant Redevelopment
A.    All new development and significant redevelopment shall be undertaken in accordance with:

1.     The DAMP, including, but not limited to, the Orange County Technical Guidance Document;

2.     Any conditions and requirements established by the Community Development Department and/or the Public Works Department, which are reasonably related to the reduction or elimination of pollutants in stormwater runoff from the project site; and

3. Conformance with the Statewide Water Quality Control Plan for Ocean Waters of California to control trash, also known as the Trash Provisions.

B.     Prior to the issuance of a grading permit, building permit or nonresidential plumbing permit for any new development or significant redevelopment, the Community Development Department and/or Public Works Department shall review the project plans and impose terms, conditions and requirements on the project in accordance with this section. If the new development or significant redevelopment will be approved without application for a grading permit, building permit or nonresidential plumbing permit, the Community Development Department and/or the Public Works Department shall review the project plans and impose terms, conditions and requirements on the project in accordance with this section prior to the issuance of a discretionary land use approval or, at the City’s discretion, prior to recordation of a subdivision map.

C.     Notwithstanding the foregoing subsections, compliance with the development project guidance shall not be required for construction of a (one) single-family detached residence unless the Community Development Department and/or Public Works Department determines that the construction may result in the discharge of significant levels of a pollutant into a tributary to the stormwater drainage system.

D.    Compliance with the conditions and requirements of the DAMP shall not exempt any person from the requirement to independently comply with each provision of this chapter.

E.     If the Community Development Department and/or Public Works Department determines that the project will have a de minimis impact on the quality of stormwater runoff, then it may issue a written waiver of the requirement for compliance with the provisions of the development project guidance.

F.     The owner of a new development or significant redevelopment project, or upon transfer of the property, its successors and assigns, shall implement and adhere to the terms, conditions and requirements imposed pursuant to this section on a new development or significant redevelopment project.

Each failure by the owner of the property or its successors or assigns to implement and adhere to the terms, conditions and requirements imposed pursuant to this section on a new development or significant redevelopment project shall constitute a violation of this chapter.

G.    The Community Development Department and/or Public Works Department may require that the terms, conditions and requirements imposed pursuant to this section be recorded with the County Recorder’s office by the property owner. The signature of the owner of the property or any successive owner shall be sufficient for the recording of these terms, conditions and requirements and a signature on behalf of the City shall not be required for recordation.

H.    Cost Recovery. The City shall be reimbursed by the project applicant for all costs and expenses incurred by the Community Development Department and/or Public Works Department in the review of new development or significant development projects for compliance with the DAMP. The Community Development Department and/or Public Works Department may elect to require a deposit of estimated costs and expenses, and the actual costs and expenses shall be deducted from the deposit, and the balance, if any, refunded to the project applicant.

I.      Litter Control

1.     No person shall discard any waste material, including, but not limited to, common household rubbish or garbage of any kind (whether generated or accumulated at a residence, business or other location) upon any public or private property, whether occupied, open or vacant, including, but not limited to, any street, sidewalk, alley, right-of-way, open area or point of entry to the stormwater drainage system.

2.     Every person occupying or having charge and control of property on which a prohibited disposal of waste materials occurs shall cause the proper collection and disposal of same.

3.     A prohibited disposal of waste materials creates a danger to public health, safety and welfare, and otherwise threatens the environment, surface waters and groundwater; therefore, any owner or occupant of property who fails to remove waste material within a reasonable time may be charged with creating a nuisance upon the property. (3364-8/97, 4206-7/20)

 

14.25.050 Scope of Inspections
A.    Right to Inspect. Prior to commencing any inspection, the authorized inspector shall obtain either the consent of the owner or occupant of the property or shall obtain an administrative inspection warrant or criminal search warrant.

B.     Entry to Inspect. The authorized inspector may enter property to investigate the source of any discharge to any public street, inlet, gutter, storm drain or the stormwater drainage system located within the jurisdiction of the City.

C.     Compliance Assessments. The authorized inspector may inspect property or business activity for the purpose of verifying compliance with this chapter, including, but not limited to:

1.     Conducting inspections as mandated by an NPDES permit and/or other State or Federally mandated inspections;

2.     Identifying products produced, processes conducted, chemicals used and materials stored on or contained within the property;

3.     Identifying point(s) of discharge of all wastewater, process water systems and pollutants;

4.     Investigating the natural slope at the location, including drainage patterns and man-made conveyance systems;

5.     Establishing the location of all points of discharge from the property, whether by surface runoff or through a storm drain system;

6.     Locating any illicit connection or the source of prohibited discharge;

7.     Investigating the condition of any legal nonconforming connection.

D.    Portable Equipment. For purposes of verifying compliance with this chapter, the authorized inspector may inspect any vehicle, truck, trailer, tank truck or other mobile equipment.

E.     Records Review. The authorized inspector may request and inspect all records of the owner or occupant of property relating to chemicals or processes presently or previously occurring on-site, including material and/or chemical inventories, facilities maps or schematics and diagrams, material safety data sheets, hazardous waste manifests, business plans, pollution prevention plans, state general permits, stormwater pollution prevention plans, monitoring program plans and any other record(s) relating to illicit connections, prohibited discharges, a legal nonconforming connection or any other source of contribution or potential contribution of pollutants to the stormwater drainage system.

F.     Sample and Test. The authorized inspector may inspect, sample and test any area runoff, soils area (including groundwater testing), process discharge, materials within any waste storage area (including any container contents), and/or treatment system discharge for the purpose of determining the potential for contribution of pollutants to the stormwater drainage system. The authorized inspector may investigate the integrity of all storm drain and sanitary sewer systems, any legal nonconforming connection or other pipelines on the property using appropriate tests, including, but not limited to, smoke and dye tests or video surveys. The authorized inspector may take photographs or video tape, make measurements or drawings, and create any other record reasonably necessary to document conditions on the property.

G.    Monitoring. The authorized inspector may erect and maintain monitoring devices for the purpose of measuring any discharge or potential source of discharge to the stormwater drainage system.

H.    Test Results. The owner or occupant of property subject to inspection shall, on submission of a written request, receive copies of all monitoring and test results conducted by the authorized inspector.

I.      Closed Circuit Television (CCTV) Footage. In the event of a sanitary sewer overflow, the authorized inspector may request the owner to conduct a CCTV inspection of the sanitary sewer line and sewer laterals and provide the CCTV footage to the inspector. (3364-8/97, 4206-7/20)

 

14.25.060 Enforcement
A.    Administrative Remedies

1.     Notice and Service of Orders. Orders for Noncompliance, Administrative Compliance, Cease and Desist and Cost Recovery may be issued to and served upon the property owner pursuant to the following procedure:

a.     The Notice shall be served and delivery shall be deemed complete upon the property owner or occupant by:

i.      Personal service;

ii.     Seven days after deposit in the U.S. mail, postage pre-paid for first class delivery. Where the recipient of notice is the owner of the property, the address for notice shall be the mailing address from the most recently issued equalized assessment roll for the property, or the address as it appears in the current records of the City;

iii.    Via electronic mail; or

iv.    Where the owner or occupant of any property cannot be located after the reasonable efforts of the authorized inspector, notice shall be deemed delivered after posting on the property for a period of 10 business days.

b.     Notice may be served upon any or all of the following parties:

i.      The owner or occupant of any property requiring abatement of conditions on the property that cause or may cause a prohibited discharge or an illicit connection in violation of this chapter.

ii.     The owner of property subject to terms, conditions or requirements imposed on a project in accordance with Section 14.25.040 to ensure adherence to those terms, conditions and requirements.

iii.    A permittee subject to the requirements of any permit issued pursuant to Section 14.25.070 to ensure compliance with the terms, conditions and requirements of the permit.

iv.    Any person responsible for an illicit connection or prohibited discharge.

c.     The Notice shall state that the property owner or occupant has a right to appeal the matter by filing a written request for an administrative hearing with the office of the City Clerk, within 30 days of the date of the Notice. The appeal shall be accompanied by an administrative hearing fee as established by separate Resolution of the City Council.

2.     Notice of Noncompliance. The authorized inspector may deliver to the owner or occupant of any property, or to any person responsible for an illicit connection or prohibited discharge a Notice of Noncompliance. The Notice of Noncompliance shall:

a.     Identify the provision(s) of this chapter or the applicable permit which has been violated. The Notice of Noncompliance shall state that continued noncompliance may result in additional enforcement actions against the owner, occupant and/or person.

b.     The Notice of Noncompliance shall state a compliance date that must be met by the owner, occupant and/or person; provided, however, that the compliance date may not exceed 90 days unless the authorized inspector extends the compliance deadline an additional 90 days where good cause exists for the extension.

3.     Issuance and Terms of Administrative Compliance Orders. The authorized inspector may issue an Administrative Compliance Order. The Administrative Compliance Order may include the following terms and requirements:

a.     Specific steps and time schedules for compliance as reasonably necessary to prevent the imminent threat of a prohibited discharge, including, but not limited to, a prohibited discharge from any pond, pit, well, surface impoundment, holding or storage area;

b.     Specific steps and time schedules for compliance as reasonably necessary to discontinue any illicit connection;

c.     Specific requirements for containment, cleanup, removal, storage, installation of overhead covering, or proper disposal of any pollutant having the potential to contact stormwater runoff;

d.     Any other terms or requirements reasonably calculated to prevent the imminent threat of or continuing violations of this chapter, including, but not limited to, requirements for compliance with best management practices guidance documents promulgated by any Federal, State of California or regional agency;

e.     Any other terms or requirements reasonably calculated to achieve full compliance with the terms, conditions and requirements of any permit issued pursuant hereto.

4.     Issuance and Terms of Cease and Desist Orders. The authorized inspector may issue a Cease and Desist Order directing the noticed party responsible for a violation of this chapter to:

a.     Immediately discontinue any illicit connection or prohibited discharge to the stormwater drainage system;

b.     Comply with the terms, conditions and requirements of, and immediately cease any activity in violation of any Discharge Permit issued pursuant to Section 14.25.070;

c.     Immediately contain or divert any flow of water off the property, where the flow is occurring in violation of any provision of this chapter;

d.     Immediately discontinue any other violation of this chapter; and/or

e.     Clean up the area affected by the violation.

5.     Issuance of Order for Recovery of Costs. The authorized inspector may deliver an Order for Recovery of Costs to the owner or occupant of any property, any permittee or any other person who becomes subject to a Notice of Noncompliance or Administrative Compliance Order. An Order for Recovery of Costs shall be delivered in accordance with this section. An Order for Recovery of Costs shall be immediately due and payable to the City for the actual costs incurred by the City in issuing and enforcing any notice or order.

If any owner or occupant, permittee or any other person subject to an Order for Recovery of Costs fails to either pay the Order for Recovery of Costs or successfully appeal the Order for Recovery of Costs in accordance with this section, then the City Attorney may institute collection proceedings.

6.     Administrative Hearing for Notices of Noncompliance, Administrative Compliance Orders, Invoices for Costs and Adverse Determinations. Except as set forth in subsection (A)(8) below, any person receiving a Notice of Noncompliance, Administrative Compliance Order, Order for Recovery of Costs, or any person who is subject to any adverse determination made pursuant to this chapter, may appeal the matter by filing a written request for an administrative hearing with the office of the City Clerk within 30 days of the Notice. The appeal request shall be accompanied by an administrative hearing fee as established by separate City Council resolution, with a copy of the request for administrative hearing mailed on the date of filing to the City Manager. Thereafter, a hearing on the matter shall be held before the hearing officer within 45 days of the date of filing of the written request unless, at the reasonable discretion of the hearing officer and pursuant to a written request by the appealing party, a continuance of the hearing is granted.

7.     Administrative Hearing for Cease and Desist Orders and Emergency Abatement Actions. A request for an administrative hearing shall not be required from the person subject to the Cease and Desist Order or an Emergency Abatement Action. An administrative hearing on the issuance of a Cease and Desist Order or following an Emergency Abatement Action shall be held within five business days following the issuance of the Order or the Emergency Abatement, unless the hearing (or the time requirement for the hearing) is waived in writing by the party subject to the cease and desist order or the emergency abatement.

8.     Hearing Proceedings. The authorized inspector shall appear in support of the Notice of Noncompliance, Compliance Order, Cease and Desist Order, Order for Recovery of Costs or Emergency Abatement Action, and the appealing party shall appear in support of withdrawal of the same. The City shall have the burden of supporting any enforcement or other action by a preponderance of the evidence. Each party shall have the right to present testimony and other documentary evidence as necessary for explanation of the case.

9.     Final Decision and Appeal. The final decision of the hearing officer shall be issued within 10 business days of the conclusion of the hearing and shall be delivered by first-class mail, postage prepaid, to the parties. The final decision shall include notice that any legal challenge to the final decision shall be made pursuant to the provisions of Code of Civil Procedure Sections 1094.5 and 1094.6 and shall be commenced within 90 days following issuance of the final decision. The administrative hearing fee paid by a prevailing party in an appeal shall be refunded.

Notwithstanding this subsection (A)(9), the final decision of the hearing officer in any preceding determining the validity of a cease and desist order or following an emergency abatement action shall be mailed within five business days following the conclusion of the hearing.

10.   City Abatement. In the event of an illegal discharge of pollutants to the storm drain system, the responsible party (property owner, contractor, business owner, etc.) shall be responsible for the cleanup of affected areas including all downstream conveyance structures, affected public/private property, and receiving water bodies. However, the authorized inspector may assign responsibility of the cleanup/abatement to City staff or contract staff if the size, nature, and or complexity of the cleanup is beyond the capability of the responsible party. If in the event of an illegal discharge of pollutants, the operator of a facility, property owner or any other person fails to comply with any provision of a Compliance Order issued to such owner, operator, permittee or person pursuant to this chapter, the authorized inspector may request the City Attorney to obtain an abatement warrant or other appropriate judicial authorization to enter the property, abate the condition and restore the area. Any costs incurred by the City in obtaining and carrying out an abatement warrant or other judicial authorization may be recovered pursuant to this section.

B.     Nuisance. Any condition in violation of the prohibitions of this chapter, including, but not limited to, the maintenance or use of any illicit connection or the occurrence of any prohibited discharge, shall constitute a threat to the public health, safety and welfare, and is declared and deemed a nuisance pursuant to Government Code Section 38771. At the request of the City Manager, the City Attorney may seek a court order to enjoin and/or abate the nuisance pursuant to the following procedure:

1.     Notice to Owner and Occupant. Prior to seeking any court order to enjoin or abate a nuisance or threatened nuisance, the authorized inspector shall provide notice of the proposed injunction or abatement to the owner and occupant, if any, of the property where the nuisance or threatened nuisance is occurring.

2.     Emergency Abatement. In the event the nuisance constitutes an Imminent Danger to public safety or the environment, the authorized inspector may enter the property from which the nuisance emanates, abate the nuisance and restore any property affected by the nuisance. To the extent reasonably practicable, informal notice shall be provided to the owner or occupant prior to abatement. If necessary to protect the public safety or the environment, abatement may proceed without prior notice to or consent from the owner or occupant, of and without judicial warrant, provided that an administrative hearing pursuant to this section shall follow the abatement action.

3.     Reimbursement of Costs. All costs incurred by the City in responding to any nuisance, all administrative expenses and all other expenses recoverable under State law, shall be recoverable from the person(s) creating, causing, committing, permitting or maintaining the nuisance.

4.     Nuisance Lien. All costs shall become a lien against the property from which the nuisance emanated and a personal obligation against the owner in accordance with Government Code Sections 38773.1 and 38773.5. The owner of record of the property subject to any lien shall be given notice of the lien prior to recording as required by Government Code Section 38773.1.

At the direction of the authorized inspector, the City Attorney is authorized to collect nuisance abatement costs or enforce a nuisance lien in an action brought for a money judgment or by delivery to the County Assessor of a special assessment against the property in accord with the conditions and requirements of Government Code Section 38773.5.

C.     Criminal Sanctions

1.     Prosecutor. The City Attorney may act on the request of the authorized inspector to pursue enforcement actions in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.

2.     Infractions. Notwithstanding Chapter 1.16 of this Code, any person who may otherwise be charged with a misdemeanor under this chapter may be charged, at the discretion of the City Attorney, with an infraction punishable by a fine of not more than $100.00 for a first violation, $200.00 for a second violation, and a fine not exceeding $500.00 for each additional violation occurring within one year.

3.     Misdemeanors. Any person who negligently or knowingly violates any provision of this chapter, undertakes to conceal any violation of this chapter, continues any violation of this chapter after notice thereof, or violates the terms, conditions and requirements of any permit issued pursuant to this chapter, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000.00 or by imprisonment for a period of not more than six months, or both.

D.    Administrative Citations. Violations of this chapter are subject to the issuance of administrative citations under the provisions of Chapter 1.18 of this Code.

E.     Consecutive Violations. Each instance in which a business, property owner, or other persons fails to comply with the correction due date(s) and time(s) established in a Notice of Noncompliance, an Administrative Citation, an Administrative Compliance Order, or a Cease and Desist Order, shall constitute a separate violation of this chapter punishable by fines or sentences issued in accordance herewith.

F.     Nonexclusive Remedies. Each and every remedy available for the enforcement of this chapter, shall be nonexclusive and it is within the discretion of the authorized inspector or City Attorney to seek cumulative remedies, except that multiple monetary fines or penalties shall not be available for any single violation of this chapter.

G.    Citations. Pursuant to Penal Code Section 836.5, the authorized inspector shall have the authority to cause the arrest of any person committing a violation of this chapter. The person shall be released and issued a citation to appear before a magistrate in accordance with Penal Code Sections 853.5, 853.6 and 853.9, unless the person demands to be taken before a magistrate. Following issuance of any citation the authorized inspector shall refer the matter to the City Attorney.

Each citation to appear shall state the name and address of the violator, the provisions of this chapter violated, and the time and place of appearance before the court, which shall be at least 10 business days after the date of violation. The person cited shall sign the citation giving his or her written promise to appear as stated therein. If the person cited fails to appear, the City Attorney may request issuance of a warrant for the arrest of the person cited.

H.    Violations of Other Laws. Any person acting in violation of this chapter also may be acting in violation of the Federal Clean Water Act or the State Porter-Cologne Act and other laws and also may be subject to sanctions including civil liability. Accordingly, the City Attorney is authorized to file a citizen suit pursuant to Federal Clean Water Act Section 505(a), seeking penalties, damages, and orders compelling compliance and other appropriate relief. The City Attorney may notify EPA Region IX, the Santa Ana or San Diego Regional Water Quality Control Boards, or any other appropriate state or local agency, of any alleged violation of this chapter.

I.      Injunctions. At the request of the authorized inspector, the City Attorney may cause the filing in a court of competent jurisdiction of a civil action seeking an injunction against any threatened or continuing noncompliance with the provisions of this chapter.

J.      Order for Reimbursement. Any temporary, preliminary or permanent injunction issued pursuant hereto may include an order for reimbursement to the City of all costs incurred in enforcing this chapter, including costs of inspection, investigation and monitoring, the costs of abatement undertaken at the expense of the City, costs relating to restoration of the environment and all other expenses as authorized by law.

K.    Civil Damages. The authorized inspector may request the City Attorney file:

1.     An action for civil damages in a court of competent jurisdiction seeking recovery of: (a) all costs incurred in enforcement of this chapter, including, but not limited to, costs relating to investigation, sampling, monitoring, inspection, administrative expenses, all other expenses as authorized by law, and consequential damages; (b) all costs incurred in mitigating harm to the environment or reducing the threat to human health, and (c) damages for irreparable harm to the environment.

2.     The City Attorney is authorized to file actions for civil damages resulting from any trespass or nuisance occurring on public land or to the stormwater drainage system from any violation of this chapter where the same has caused damage, contamination or harm to the environment, public property or the stormwater drainage system.

3.     The remedies available to the City pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall not limit the right of the City to seek any other remedy that may be available by law. (3364-8/97, 3620-12/03, 4206-7/20)

 

14.25.070 Interagency Cooperation
A.    The City intends to cooperate with other agencies with jurisdiction over stormwater discharges to ensure that the regulatory purposes underlying stormwater regulations promulgated pursuant to the Clean Water Act (33 USC Section 1251 et seq.) are met.

B.     The City may, to the extent authorized by law, elect to contract for the services of any public agency or private enterprise to carry out the planning approvals, inspections, permits, abatements, and enforcement authorized by this chapter. (3364-8/97, 4206-7/20)

 

14.25.080 Miscellaneous
A.    Compliance Disclaimer. Full compliance by any person or entity with the provisions of this chapter shall not preclude the need to comply with other local, State or Federal statutory or regulatory requirements, which may be required for the control of the discharge of pollutants into stormwater and/or the protection of stormwater quality.

B.     Severability. If any provision of this chapter or its application to any circumstance is held invalid, the remainder of the chapter shall not be affected. (3364-8/97, 4206-7/20)

 

14.25.090 Judicial Review
The provisions of Sections 1094 and 1094.6 of the Code of Civil Procedure set forth the procedure for judicial review of any act taken pursuant to this chapter. Parties seeking judicial review of any action taken pursuant to this chapter shall file such action within 90 days of the occurrence of the event for which review is sought. (3364-8/97, 4206-7/20)

 

Chapter 14.26 CONSTRUCTION AND ABANDONMENT OF WATER WELLS
14.26.010 Adoption of County Regulations
Except as herein otherwise provided, that certain document entitled Ordinance No. 2607 of the County of Orange relating to construction and enhancement of wells as compiled and adopted by the County of Orange, three copies of which have been filed with the City Clerk of the City of Huntington Beach for use and examination by the public, is adopted and enacted as the Well Construction and Abandonment Ordinance of the City of Huntington Beach as fully as though the same were set forth herein, and for the purposes stated therein. (1919-6/74)

 

14.26.020 Requirements Augment Existing Regulations
The requirements of this chapter shall be in addition to any other requirements of the City of Huntington Beach, and before a permit is issued by the City, satisfactory proof of compliance with all provisions relating thereto must be presented to the Director of Public Works. (1919-6/74)

 

14.26.030 Designation of Advisory Board
The Orange County Well Standards Advisory Board, established by Orange County Ordinance No. 2607, dated July 18, 1972, is designated as the Well Standards Advisory Board of the City of Huntington Beach. (1919-6/74)

 

14.26.040 Adaptation of Designations
A.    Any reference to “unincorporated territory” in said Orange County Ordinance No. 2607 shall mean “territory within the boundaries of the City.”

B.     Reference to Government Code Section 28545 in Orange County Ordinance No. 2607 shall mean Section 29773.5 of the Government Code, the appropriate section applicable to cities. (1919-6/74)

 

14.26.050 Permit Fee Schedule
The City Council shall adopt, by resolution, an appropriate permit fee schedule for construction, reconstruction and abatement of abandoned wells. (1919-6/74)

 

Chapter 14.36 SEWER SYSTEM SERVICE CONNECTIONS, FEES, CHARGES AND DEPOSITS
Note
*       Note: §§ 14.36.020 and 14.36.080 repealed by Ord. 3613-9/03; § 14.36.050 repealed by Ord. 3795-1/08.

         [Ordinance No. 3827 (expired 4/15/10) and Ordinance No. 3879, effective from 5/3/10 to 5/3/11, temporarily deferred the payment of certain Development Impact Fees.]

 

14.36.005 Intent and Purpose
A.    This chapter is intended to implement the goals, objectives and policies of the City of Huntington Beach General Plan, by ensuring the long-term adequacy of the City’s sewer facilities are maintained when new development is constructed within the City limits. By imposing a fee or charge that is reasonably related to the burdens created by new development on the City’s sewer system, together with funding available from other City revenue sources, the City will be able to construct the required capital improvements, accommodate projected growth and fulfill the goals, objectives and policies of the City’s General Plan.

B.     It is the intent of the City Council that the charge required by this chapter shall be supplementary to any conditions imposed upon a development project pursuant to other provisions of the Municipal Code, the Subdivision Map Act, the California Environmental Quality Act, other state and local laws, ordinances or Charter provisions which may authorize the imposition of conditions on development. (3613-9/03)

 

14.36.006 Definitions
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms shall be defined as follows:

“Applicant” shall mean any person or legal entity that applies for a permit or other entitlement for a new development project.

“City” shall mean the City of Huntington Beach.

“Equivalent dwelling unit (EDU)” shall refer to the unit cost assessed to a non-residential development.

“Multiple family dwelling unit” shall mean a building or buildings designed with two or more dwelling units.

“Public Works Director” shall mean the Director of Public Works or the director’s designee.

“Sewer connection fee,” “fee” or “charge” shall mean the fee imposed on new development projects pursuant to this chapter.

“Single-family unit” shall mean a detached building designed primarily for use as a single dwelling, no portion of which is rented as a separate unit, except as permitted by this Code. Attached single-family dwellings shall be considered as multifamily. (3613-9/03)

 

14.36.010 Service Application—Form
All persons requesting service from the City sewer system shall file a written application, signed by the applicant, or his or her agent, containing the following information:

A.    The address or location of the premises to be served;

B.     Whether the applicant is owner, developer, occupant or lessee, or agent of any of the foregoing;

C.     The name and address of the applicant if such person is not the occupant or lessee of the premises;

D.    Any additional information which the director may require. (2931-4/88, 3613-9/03)

 

14.36.030 Encroachment Permit—Connection by Applicant
A.    No person shall install any pipe, apparatus, appliance or connection to any part of the City sewer system without first obtaining an encroachment permit to do so. The applicant shall bear the cost for all labor and materials, and shall be a licensed contractor or shall employ a contractor duly licensed under the laws of the State of California to perform such work. The applicant shall also be responsible for the cost of constructing, maintaining, or replacing any part of a sewer system on private property, required by the director, from the sewer main line to and including any on-site structure.

B.     Applicant shall comply with all relevant portions of Title 12 of this Code not inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter. (2931-4/88, 3613-9/03)

 

14.36.040 Change of Occupancy—Installation of Separate Lines
Whenever occupancy on a parcel of land is changed from one to two or more, and more than one occupancy on such parcel is served by the City sewer system, an additional connection fee shall apply. The director, at his or her discretion, may require the owner of such a parcel of land to install separate sewer lines for each occupancy. (2931-4/88, 3613-9/03)

 

14.36.060 Private Premises—User/Owner Responsibility
The City shall in no way whatsoever be responsible for any damage to persons or property because of any leakage, breakage, or seepage from, or accident or damage to, any sewer pipe or its appurtenances located on any private premises; nor shall the City be responsible for or on account of any damage, injury or loss caused directly or indirectly by the existence on private premises of any sewer pipe or its appurtenances. (2931-4/88, 3613-9/03)

 

14.36.070 Sanitary Sewer Facilities Fund Established—Fees and Charges
A.    There is hereby established, pursuant to California Government Code Sections 66013 and 66483 et seq., a sanitary sewer facilities fund. As a condition precedent to granting applications for sewer connections, or an increase in an applicant’s water meter size, the Department of Public Works is hereby authorized to collect fees and charges in amounts which shall not exceed the estimated reasonable cost of providing a City sewer system, maintaining same, and for future replacements or extensions thereof (“sewer service charge”). All monies collected pursuant to this chapter shall be deposited into the sanitary sewer facilities fund.

B.     Except as otherwise provided in Chapter 14.44, the sewer service charge authorized by this chapter shall be collected and expended solely for the construction or reimbursement for construction of sanitary sewer facilities within the City’s service area, and to reimburse the City for the cost of engineering and construction services to rehabilitate existing facilities or construct new sewer facilities.

C.     The monies collected pursuant to this chapter and deposited into the sanitary sewer facilities fund account shall be used solely for the purposes specified in this chapter. All monies deposited into the sanitary sewer facilities fund shall be held separate and apart from other City funds. All interest and other earnings on the unexpended balance in the sanitary sewer facilities fund shall be credited to the sanitary sewer facilities fund.

D.    Within 180 days after the last day of each fiscal year, the City Council shall review the status of compliance with this chapter, including the amount of funds collected, expenditures from the sanitary sewer fund facilities reserve account, and the degree to which the fees and charges collected pursuant to this chapter have been expended on existing sewer system facilities or new facilities that benefit the applicant or the development for which the fee or charge was collected. At least every five years after the effective date of the ordinance enacting this chapter, the Public Works Director shall prepare, and the City Council shall consider, the fee formula established to implement this chapter, whether any adjustment in the fee formula or use of fee proceeds is warranted, or any other changes are needed to the procedures established by this chapter, to fulfill the goals, objectives or policies of the City’s General Plan and the sewer master plan. Each year between periodic reviews of the fee formula, the fee shall be increased by a factor to account for inflation in construction costs, as provided for by Section 14.36.110. (2931-4/88, 3613-9/03)

 

14.36.085 City Sewer Service Area—Fee Schedule
The City operates and maintains a City-wide wastewater collection and pumping system. The City’s planned local sanitary service area is as described in the City’s sewer master plan and consists of a City-wide sanitary sewer system. The sewer master plan evaluates the capacity of this City-wide sewer system and identifies a plan to provide sewer service to existing and anticipated future users as a result of new development. The sewer master plan also contains an estimate of total costs of constructing the City’s sewer facilities required by the sewer master plan to serve new development, a map of the City’s sewer service area and the location of the City’s sewer facilities. The sewer service charge authorized by this chapter shall be set by resolution of the City Council, which resolution shall set forth the sewer system charge for single family dwelling units, multiple family dwelling units and for equivalent dwelling units (“EDU”) as defined by this chapter. (2931-4/88, 3613-9/03)

 

14.36.090 Payment
A.    The sewer service charge and all other applicable sewer fees, including county sewer fees, shall be paid to the City prior to recording the final subdivision map with the County Recorder’s Office, or prior to issuance of a building permit by the City if a subdivision map is not required.

B.     The subdivider or person to whom a building permit has been issued may enter into a standard reimbursement agreement with the City, pursuant to Chapter 14.44 of this Code. (2931-4/88, 2985-3/89, 3613-9/03, 3827-4/09, 3879-6/10)

             [Ordinance No. 3827 (expired 4/15/10) and Ordinance No. 3879, effective from 5/3/10 to 5/3/11, temporarily deferred the payment of certain Development Impact Fees.]

 

14.36.100 Fee Adjustments
Any applicant subject to the sewer service charge authorized by this chapter may apply to the Director of Public Works for a reduction, adjustment or waiver of the fee. Circumstances that may justify a fee adjustment include an applicant’s proposal to increase to a larger water meter size and sufficient information about the prior use is available to determine that credit for the existing meter size is warranted. A decision of the Director of Public Works to deny an applicant’s request for a fee adjustment or waiver may be appealed by filing a fee adjustment application with the Director of Public Works. Such application shall be made on a form provided by the Director of Public Works and shall be filed with the Director of Public Works at the time of the application for building permit. Each application shall state in detail the factual basis for the requested fee reduction, adjustment or waiver. The Director of Public Works shall determine if the fee adjustment application is complete. The Public Works Commission shall consider the fee adjustment application at a hearing within 60 days after the fee adjustment application is deemed complete by the Director of Public Works. The decision of the Public Works Commission will be final with respect to City action on the appeal. (2931-4/88, 3613-9/03)

 

14.36.110 Annual Construction Cost Index Adjustments
A.    Each sewer system charge shall be adjusted to reflect the annual percentage adjustment in the Construction Cost Index (“CCI”) established by Engineering News Record as published by McGraw Hill Construction/McGraw Hill Companies as of July 1st each year.

B.     Adjustments based on these criteria will be determined on July 1st of each year. The adjustments will be implemented effective the following October 1st, which is the beginning of the City’s fiscal year. (2931-4/88, 3613-9/03)

 

Chapter 14.44 SEWER MAIN EXTENSIONS
14.44.010 Application
Any person, as owner or subdivider of a single lot, subdivision, or tract of land, who desires the extension of sewer mains and connections to such lot, subdivision, or tract of land, shall file a written application with the Department of Public Works. Any number of persons owning or subdividing contiguous lots or tracts of land may join in a single application. (2931-4/88)

 

14.44.020 Plans and Specifications
Plans and specifications, as required by the director, shall be prepared and submitted at the sole cost of the applicant prior to approval of an application for extension of any sewer main or connection. (2931-4/88)

 

14.44.030 System Requirements Determined
Pursuant to California Government Code Section 66485, the Director of Public Works may determine that it is in the best interests of the City that the improvements to be installed by the applicant shall include supplemental sizes, capacities, numbers or lengths for the benefit of property not within the subdivision. Supplemental length may include minimum size offsite sewer lines necessary to reach a sewer outlet in existence at the time application is made. Such improvements shall be dedicated to the City, and the cost therefor shall be borne by the applicant. (2931-4/88)

 

14.44.040 Reimbursement Agreement
Pursuant to Government Code Section 66485, the applicant shall enter into a reimbursement agreement with the City under the following terms and conditions:

A.    Reimbursement shall be made for a period of 10 years only, and shall commence from and after the date all basic and any required supplemental improvements have been completed, approved by the director, dedicated to and accepted by the City.

B.     Reimbursement to the applicant shall be made for that portion of the cost, including an amount attributable to interest, in excess of the actual construction required for the subdivision.

C.     Reimbursement shall be made only to the original applicant or applicants. The right to reimbursement shall terminate upon the death of applicant(s). In the event applicant is a corporation, company, firm, association, organization, partnership, joint venture, or syndicate, dissolution shall terminate the right to reimbursement.

D.    Reimbursement shall be made from the sanitary sewer area fund for which fees from subsequent development comprising such fund are collected for the planned sanitary sewer area in which the sanitary sewer facilities constructed by applicant are located. (2931-4/88)

 

14.44.050 Liability
A.    Neither the City nor the department shall be liable for failure to reimburse fees to an applicant by reason of its omission to collect or receive fees from any person connecting to or utilizing supplemental improvements made or paid for by an applicant.

B.     The City’s refusal to allow a connection or connections to a main line or supplemental improvements, constructed and paid for by an applicant, shall not make the City or the department liable for any reimbursement of fees which might have accrued if such connection and utilization had been permitted.

C.     The City reserves the right to exempt another public agency from paying fees for connecting to or using supplemental improvements, and shall not be liable to an applicant for any failure to collect fees therefrom. (2931-4/88)

 

Chapter 14.48 DRAINAGE
Note
*       Ordinance No. 3827 (expired 4/15/10) and Ordinance No. 3879, effective from 5/3/10 to 5/3/11, temporarily deferred the payment of certain Development Impact Fees.

 

14.48.010 Master Plan of Drainage
A.    The City has adopted a Master Plan of Drainage pursuant to California Government Code Sections 66483 et seq.

B.     Said drainage plan has been determined by the Board of Supervisors of the County of Orange to be in conformity with the County Drainage Plan. A copy of the City’s Master Plan of Drainage is on file in the City Clerk’s office and the same is made a part hereof as if fully set forth in this chapter.

C.     The City Council hereby finds, by adopting the City’s Master Plan of Drainage, that the subdivision and development of property within the district areas requires the construction of the facilities as set forth in the aforementioned Master Plan of Drainage.

D.    The City Council hereby finds, by adopting the City’s Master Plan of Drainage, that the fees, established by resolution of the City Council, are fairly apportioned within the drainage areas set out in the City’s Master Plan. (1985-7/75, 2798-11/85, 3741-9/06)

 

14.48.020 Drainage Areas
A.    The boundaries of the drainage areas are hereby declared to be those identified in the Master Plan of Drainage, which is on file in the City Clerk’s office, and the same are made a part hereof as though fully set forth in this chapter.

B.     All drainage facilities set forth in the Master Plan of Drainage for the City of Huntington Beach are in addition to present local drainage facilities serving the drainage areas. (1985-7/75, 2798-11/85, 3741-9/06)

 

14.48.030 Drainage Fund
A.    There is hereby created a separate fund which shall be known as the “planned local drainage facilities fund.” All moneys collected pursuant to this chapter shall be deposited into the “planned local drainage facility fund” and separate accounts shall be established for each local drainage area.

B.     The City shall have the right in lieu of accepting cash, pursuant to this chapter, to accept other proper and valid consideration. (1985-7/75, 3741-9/06)

 

14.48.040 Advances From General Fund
The City may advance funds from its general fund to pay the cost of constructing drainage facilities within a local drainage area and may reimburse the general fund for such advances from the planned local drainage facilities fund for the local drainage area in which the drainage facilities were constructed. (1985-7/75)

 

14.48.050 Drainage Fees
A.    There is hereby established a requirement for the payment of fees for the purpose of defraying the actual or estimated costs of constructing planned drainage facilities for the removal of surface and stormwaters for the various drainage areas. Actual drainage fees for each drainage area shall be established and amended from time to time by resolution of the City Council.

B.     Such fees shall be collected, deposited and expended pursuant to California Government Code Sections 66483 et seq., and all other applicable laws of the State of California.

C.     All necessary drainage fees established by the City shall be deposited with the City prior to recordation of a subdivision map, or issuance of a building permit if a subdivision map is not required. The subdivider or person to whom a building permit has been issued may make application for a reimbursement agreement.

D.    Within 180 days after the last day of each fiscal year, the City Council shall review the status of compliance with this chapter, including the amount of fees collected and expenditures from the “planned local drainage facility fund.” (1985-7/75, 1998-9/75, 2068-7/76, 2142-1/77, 2163-2/77, 2179-4/77, 2798-11/85, 3741-9/06, 3827-4/09, 3879-6/10)

             [Ordinance No. 3827 (expired 4/15/10) and Ordinance No. 3879, effective from 5/3/10 to 5/3/11, temporarily deferred the payment of certain Development Impact Fees.]

 

14.48.060 Applicability
A.    The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all subdivisions of land and the development of all land within the drainage area unless the fees were previously paid by prior development.

B.     It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to construct all on-site improvements as may be required by the City, including all off-site drainage facilities as are required by the City. The applicant shall be reimbursed by the City for all required off-site construction, in accordance with Section 14.48.070. (1985-7/75)

 

14.48.070 Conditions Governing Reimbursements
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, the payment of refunds shall be governed as follows:

A.    Refunds shall be payable for a period of five years from date of applicant’s application.

B.     Refunds shall not exceed 90% of off-site construction costs.

C.     Refund shall bear no interest.

D.    The City shall not be liable for payment of any refund by reason of its failure to collect or receive from any person the drainage fee.

E.     The City retains the right to exempt a public agency from payment of drainage fees and shall not be liable to applicant for refund because of said exemption.

F.     Reimbursement agreements covering the payment of refunds shall be in writing.

G.    The City shall not be required to make reimbursement to any person until all drainage construction projects in a drainage area are completed. (1985-7/75, 2048-5/76)

 

14.48.080 Drainage Fee Deferments
A.    The owner or developer of any industrial property may apply to have a portion of the drainage fees required by this section deferred for a period of time not to exceed five years from the date of deferment. The application for deferment of any drainage fees must be made to the Director of Public Works and be approved by the City Council. The owner or developer of any property to be used for open space developments such as for horses, golf driving ranges, or other transitional or temporary uses, may apply to have a portion of the drainage fees required by this section deferred for a period of time not to exceed 10 years from the date of application.

B.     In the case of open space developments, every owner or developer shall pay a cash deposit in the amount of 10% of the drainage fee established at the time the owner or developer files application for fee deferment, 25% of said drainage fee five years after said application, and 65% of said drainage fee 10 years after said application. For each subsequent developer, or for each change of use, the subsequent developer shall pay 10% of the drainage fee established at the time the subsequent developer filed application for fee deferment, 25% of said drainage fee five years after said application and 65% of said drainage fee 10 years after said application, or the entire balance if the balance of the total drainage fee owed to the City is the lesser amount. Each deposit shall be retained by the City Treasurer and shall be applied to the drainage fee which is in effect at the time of the application for deferment and shall be a credit to the total drainage fee applicable to such property.

C.     In the case of industrial development, the owner or developer shall pay a cash deposit in the amount of 20% of the drainage fee established for the development at the time of deferment. The remaining 80% shall be paid at the rate of 20% per year for the following four years on the anniversary date of the deferment.

D.    For the purposes of this section, transitional and temporary uses shall only be those uses permitted by ordinance, use permit or conditional use permit, and approved by the Planning Commission or Board of Zoning Adjustments.

E.     The City Council shall have the discretion to accept or reject any application for deferment of drainage fees or any portion thereof.

F.     Application for such deferment shall be made to the Director of Public Works and be approved by the City Council. In the event the required waiver is denied, the cash deposit shall be returned to the applicant within a reasonable time.

G.    Land areas which are covered by existing reimbursement agreements for storm drains or other drainage structures are excluded from deferment of drainage fees hereunder. (2073-7/76, 2165-3/77)

 

14.48.090 Annual Construction Cost Index Adjustment
A.    Each drainage fee shall be adjusted to reflect the annual percentage adjustment in the Construction Cost Index (“CCI”) established by Engineering News Record as published by McGraw Hill Construction/McGraw Hill Companies as of July 1st commencing July 1, 2007.

B.     Adjustments based on these criteria will be determined on July 1st of each year. The adjustments will be implemented effective the following October 1st, which is the beginning of the City’s fiscal year. (3741-9/06)

 

Chapter 14.52 WATER EFFICIENT LANDSCAPE REQUIREMENTS
14.52.010 Purpose and Intent
The purpose of this chapter is to:

A.    Promote the values and benefits of landscapes while recognizing the need to use water and other resources as efficiently as possible;

B.     Establish a structure for planning, designing, installing, maintaining and managing water efficient landscapes in new and rehabilitated landscape projects;

C.     Establish provisions for water management practices and water waste prevention for new and existing landscapes;

D.    Establish a long range goal of water efficiency through proper planning and design, the use of technologically current equipment with proper installation, continued maintenance and monitoring of water use through the designed systems;

E.     When used in conjunction with the “Arboricultural and Landscape Standards and Specifications” Resolution Number 4545, to give the landscape architect and/or owner the tools to provide an individualized landscape improvement to suit the needs of the owner and the requirements of the City; and

F.     To provide standards for a finished landscape that is physically attractive, conserves water and is easy to maintain. (3183-2/93, 3854-2/10)

 

14.52.020 Definitions
For purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases have the meaning hereafter set forth unless a different meaning is clearly intended from the context in which such word or phrase is used. Any word or phrase not herein defined shall have the meaning attributed to it in ordinary usage.

“Anti-drain valve” or “check valve” means a valve located in a lateral line or under a sprinkler head to hold water in the system so it prevents drainage from the lower elevation sprinkler heads when the system is off.

“Application rate” means the depth of water applied to a given area, usually measured in inches per minute, inches per hour or gallons per minute or gallons per hour.

“Applied water” means the portion of water supplied by the irrigation system to the landscape.

“Arboricultural and landscape specifications and standards” means the standards adopted by resolution of the City Council governing the planting, maintenance,        removal, fertilization, pruning and bracing of trees.

“Automatic irrigation controller” means a mechanical or solid state timer or an automatic timing device capable of operating valve stations to set the days and length of time of a water application in an irrigation system. Smart automatic irrigation controllers schedule irrigation events using either evapotranspiration (weather-based) or soil moisture data.

“Backflow prevention device” means a safety device used to prevent pollution or contamination of the water supply due to the reverse flow of water from the irrigation system.

“Certification of design” means the certification included as Appendix A of these guidelines that must be included in the landscape documentation package.

“City” means the City of Huntington Beach or its authorized designee.

“Common interest development” means community apartment projects, condominium projects, planned developments, and stock cooperatives per Civil Code Section 1351.

“Conversion factor (0.62)” means the number that converts the maximum applied water allowance from acre-inches per acre per year to gallons per square foot per year. The conversion factor is calculated as follows:

 

 

(325,850 gallons/43,560 square feet)/12 inches

=

(0.62)

325,850 gallons

=

one acre foot

43,560 square feet

=

one acre

12 inches

=

one foot

 

To convert gallons per year to 100-cubic feet per year, the City’s billing unit for water, divide gallons per year by 748. (748 gallons = 100 cubic feet.)

“Distribution uniformity” or “DU” is a measure of how uniformly an irrigation head applies water to a specific target area and theoretically ranges from zero to 100%.

“Drip irrigation” means any non-spray low volume irrigation system utilizing emission devices with a flow rate measured in gallons per hour. Low volume irrigation systems are specifically designed to apply small volumes of water slowly at or near the root zone of plants.

“Drought tolerant” means plant material which, when established in the landscape, is able to grow and survive on little or no additional water than is provided by rainfall.

“Ecological restoration project” means a project where the site is intentionally altered to establish a defined, indigenous, historic ecosystem.

“Effective precipitation” or “usable rainfall” means the portion of total precipitation that is used by the plants.

“Emitter” means drip irrigation fittings or devices that deliver water slowly from the system to the soil.

“Established landscape” means the point at which plants in the landscape have developed roots into the soil adjacent to the root ball.

“Establishment period” means the first year after installing the plant in the landscape.

“Estimated applied water use (EAWU)” means the average annual total amount of water estimated to be necessary to keep plants in a healthy state, calculated as provided in the guidelines. It is based on the reference evapotranspiration rate, the size of the landscape area, plant water use factors, and the relative irrigation efficiency of the irrigation system.

“Estimated total water use” means the annual total amount of water estimated to be needed to keep the plants in the landscaped area healthy. It is based upon such factors as the local evapotranspiration rate, the size of the landscaped area, the types of plants and the efficiency of the irrigation system, as described in this chapter.

“ET adjustment factor (ETAF)” is equal to the plant factor divided by the irrigation efficiency factor for a landscape project. The ETAF is calculated in the context of local reference evapotranspiration, using site-specific plant factors and irrigation efficiency factors that influence the amount of water that needs to be applied to the specific landscaped area. A combined plant mix with a site-wide average plant factor of 0.5 (indicating a moderate water need) and average irrigation efficiency of 0.71 produces an ET adjustment factor of (0.7) = (0.5/0.71), which is the standard of water use efficiency generally required by this chapter and the guidelines; except that the ETAF for a special landscape area shall not exceed 1.0.

“Evapotranspiration (ET)” means the quantity of water evaporated from adjacent soil surfaces and transpired by plants during a specific time. (The City of Huntington Beach reference evapotranspiration is approximately 43 inches per year.)

“Flow rate” means the rate at which water flows through pipes and valves (gallons per minute or cubic feet per second).

“Guidelines” refers to the guidelines for implementation of water efficient landscape ordinance, as adopted by the local agency, which describes procedures, calculations and requirements for landscape projects subject to this chapter.

“Hardscapes” means any durable material or feature (pervious and non-pervious) installed in or around a landscaped area, such as pavements or walls. Pools and other water features are considered part of the landscaped area and not considered hardscapes for purposes of this chapter.

“Homeowner-installed landscaping” means any landscaping either installed by a private individual for a single family residence or installed by a licensed contractor hired by a homeowner. A homeowner, for purposes of this chapter, is a person who occupies the dwelling he or she owns. This definition excludes speculative homes, which are not owner-occupied dwellings, and which are subject under this chapter to the requirements applicable to developer-installed residential landscape projects.

“Hydrozone” means a portion of the landscaped area having plants with similar water needs that are served by a valve or set of valves with the same schedule. A hydrozone may be irrigated or non-irrigated. For example, a naturalized area planted with native vegetation that will not need supplemental irrigation once established is a non-irrigated hydrozone.

“Infiltration rate” means the rate of water entry into the soil expressed as a depth of water per unit of time (inches per hour).

“Invasive plants species” or “noxious” means species of plants not historically found in California that spread outside cultivated areas and can damage environmental or economic resources. Invasive plant species may be regulated by county agricultural agencies as noxious species.

“Irrigation audit” or “landscape irrigation audit” means an in-depth evaluation of the performance of an irrigation system conducted by a state-regulated and certified landscape irrigation auditor. An irrigation audit means a process to perform a site inspection that includes, but is not limited to: inspection, system tune-up, system test with catchment for distribution uniformity or emission uniformity, reporting overspray or runoff that causes overland flow, and preparation of an irrigation schedule.

“Irrigation efficiency (IE)” means the measurement of the amount of water beneficially used divided by the amount of water applied. Irrigation efficiency is derived from measurements and estimates of irrigation system characteristics and management practices. The minimum average irrigation efficiency for purposes of this chapter is 0.71. Greater irrigation efficiency can be expected from well designed and maintained systems.

“Irrigation management efficiency” or “IME” means the measurement used to calculate the irrigation efficiency of the irrigation system for a landscaped project. A 90% IME can be achieved by using evapotranspiration controllers, soil moisture sensors, and other methods that will adjust irrigation run times to meet plant water needs.

“Landscape coefficient” means the estimate of water loss from landscape plantings determined by the use of a formula. It is the product of the plant species factor, the plant material density factor, and the microclimate factor. The formula is: landscape coefficient = species factor x density factor x microclimate factor.

“Landscape contractor” means a person licensed by the State of California to construct, maintain, repair, install, or subcontract the development of landscape systems.

“Landscape documentation package” means the documents required to be provided to the City for review and approval of landscape design projects.

“Landscape professional” means a licensed landscape architect, licensed landscape contractor, or any other person authorized to design a landscape pursuant to Sections 5500.1, 5615, 5641, 5641.1, 5641.2, 5641.3, 5641.4, 5641.5, 5641.6, 6701, 7027.5 of the California Business and Professions Code, Section 832.27 of Title 16 of the California Code of Regulations, and Section 6721 of the California Food and Agriculture Code.

“Landscape project” means total area of landscape in a project as defined in “landscape area” for the purposes of this chapter.

“Landscaped area” means all the planting areas, turf areas, and water features in a landscape design plan subject to the maximum applied water allowance and estimated applied water use calculations. The landscape area does not include footprints of buildings or structures, sidewalks, driveways, parking lots, decks, patios, gravel or stone walks, other pervious or non-pervious hardscapes, and other nonirrigated areas designated for non-development (e.g., open spaces and existing native vegetation).

“Lateral line” means the water delivery pipeline that supplies water to the emitters or sprinklers from the valve.

“Low volume overhead irrigation” means aboveground irrigation heads with an upper flow limit of 0.5 gallons per minute.

“Main line” means the pressurized pipeline that delivers water from the water source to the valve or outlet.

“Maximum applied water allowance (MAWA)” means the upper limit of annual applied water for the established landscaped area. It is based upon the area’s reference evapotranspiration, the ET adjustment factor, and the size of the landscaped area. The estimated applied water use shall not exceed the maximum applied water allowance. Special landscape areas, including recreation areas, areas permanently and solely dedicated to edible plants such as orchards and vegetable gardens, and areas irrigated with recycled water are subject to the MAWA with an ETAF not to exceed 1.0.

“Mined-land reclamation projects” means any surface mining operation with a reclamation plan approved in accordance with the Surface Mining and Reclamation Act of 1975.

“Mulch” means any material such as sawdust, bark or other materials left loose and applied to the soil surface to reduce evaporation.

“New construction” means, for the purposes of this chapter, a new building with a landscape or other new landscape such as a park, playground or greenbelt without an associated building.

“Non-pervious” means any surface or natural material that does not allow for the passage of water through the material and into the underlying soil.

“Operating pressure” means the pressure at which a system of sprinklers is designed by the manufacturer to operate, usually referenced to the base of a sprinkler.

“Overspray” means the water which is delivered beyond the targeted landscaped area, wetting pavements, walks, structures, or other non-landscaped areas.

“Permit” means an authorizing document issued by the City for new construction or rehabilitated landscape.

“Person” means any natural person, firm, joint venture, joint stock company, partnership, public or private association, club, company, corporation, business trust, organization, public or private agency, government agency or institution, school district, college, university, any other user of water provided by the City or the local water purveyor, or the manager, lessee, agent, servant, officer, or employee of any of them or any other entity which is recognized by law as the subject of rights or duties.

“Pervious” means any surface or material that allows the passage of water through the material and into the underlying soil.

“Plant factor” or “plant water use factor” is a factor, when multiplied by ETo, estimates the amount of water needed by plants. For purposes of this chapter, the plant factor range for low water use plants is 0 to 0.3, the plant factor range for moderate water use plants is 0.4 to 0.6, and the plant factor range for high water use plants is 0.7 to 1.0. Plant factors cited in this chapter are derived from the Department of Water Resources 2000 publication, “Water Use Classification of Landscape Species.”

“Precipitation rate” means the rate of application of water measured in inches per hour.

“Project applicant” means the person submitting a landscape documentation package required to request a permit, plan check, or design review from the City. A project applicant may be the property owner or his or her designee.

“Property owner” or “owner” means the record owner of real property as shown on the most recently issued equalized assessment roll.

“Rain sensing device” or “rain sensing override device” means a system which automatically shuts off the irrigation system when it rains.

“Record drawing” or “as-builts” means a set of reproducible drawings which show significant changes in the work made during construction and which are usually based on drawings marked up in the field and other data furnished by the contractor.

“Recreational area” means areas of active play or recreation such as sports fields, school yards, picnic grounds, or other areas with intense foot traffic.

“Recycled water” or “reclaimed water” means treated or recycled wastewater of a quality suitable for non-potable uses such as landscape irrigation and water features. This water is not intended for human consumption.

“Reference evapotranspiration” or “ETo” means a standard measurement of environmental parameters which affect the water use of plants. ETo is given in inches per day, month, or year as represented in this chapter and is an estimate of the evapotranspiration of a large field of four- to seven-inch tall, cool-season grass that is well watered. Reference evapotranspiration is used as the basis of determining the maximum applied water allowance so that regional differences in climate can be accommodated.

“Rehabilitated landscape” means any relandscaping project public or private that requires City processing, or is a condition of approval for a specific project.

“Runoff” means water which is not absorbed by the soil or landscape to which it is applied and flows from the area. For example, runoff may result from water that is applied at too great a rate (application rate exceeds infiltration rate) or when there is a severe slope.

“Slope” means the inclined surface of the ground or a roof, generally described as a percentage or ratio of horizontal to vertical distances. For example, a 25% slope gradient is a surface incline with a ratio of four feet horizontal to one foot in height, or a 4 to 1 slope.

“Soil moisture sensing device” means a device that measures the amount of water in the soil.

“Soil texture” means the classification of soil based on the percentage of sand, silt, and clay in the soil.

“Special landscape area (SLA)” means an area of the landscape dedicated solely to edible plants, areas irrigated with recycled water, water features using recycled water and areas dedicated to active play such as parks, sports fields, golf courses, and where turf provides a playing surface.

“Special sub-surface construction” means the products, procedures and results required to provide an adequate tree rooting space that will allow larger trees to be grown in normal tree planting areas and allow the roots from those trees to grow in such a manner that they will not impact the street or infrastructure negatively for an extended period of time.

“Sprinkler head” means a device which sprays water through a nozzle.

“Static water supply pressure” means static water supply pressure when water is not flowing.

“Station” means an area served by one valve or by a set of valves that are operated simultaneously by an automatic controller.

“Swing joint” means an irrigation component that provides a flexible, leak-free connection between the emission device and lateral pipeline to allow movement in any direction and to prevent equipment damage.

“Turf” means a surface layer of earth containing mowed grass with its roots. Annual bluegrass, Kentucky bluegrass, perennial ryegrass, red fescue, and tall fescue are cool-season grasses. Bermuda grass, Kikuyugrass, seashore paspalum, St. Augustine grass, Zoysiagrass, and buffalo grass are warm-season grasses.

“Valve” means a device used to control the flow of water in the irrigation system.

“Water efficient” means a combination of landscape features and watering techniques that in the aggregate reduce the demand for and consumption of water. Water efficient also means the result of selecting plant materials that require low amounts of water as opposed to plant materials which require tropical amounts of water.

“Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance” means Ordinance No. 3854 adopted by the City Council on January 19, 2010, and codified in this chapter.

“Water efficient landscape worksheets” means the worksheets required to be completed and which are included in Appendix B of this chapter.

“Water feature” means a design element where open water performs an aesthetic or recreational function. Water features include ponds, lakes, waterfalls, fountains, artificial streams, spas and swimming pools (where water is artificially supplied). The surface area of water features is included in the high water use hydrozone of the landscape area. Constructed wetlands used for on-site wastewater treatment, habitat protection or stormwater best management practices that are not irrigated and used solely for water treatment or stormwater retention are not water features and, therefore, are not subject to the water budget calculation.

“Watering window” means the time of day irrigation is allowed.

“WUCOLS” means the Water Use Classification of Landscape Species published by the University of California Cooperative Extension, the Department of Water Resources and the Bureau of Reclamation, 2000. www.owue.water.ca.gov/docs/wucols00.pdf

“Xeriscape,” a registered trademark of the National Xeriscape Council, Inc., means plantings which require little or no additional water than is provided by normal rainfall. (3183-2/93, 3854-2/10)

 

14.52.030 Director—Duties and Authority
The Director of Public Works shall have authority to perform the following duties:

A.    To enforce the provisions of this chapter and the Arboricultural and Landscape Specifications and Standards of Practice (the “Standards”);

B.     To supervise or inspect all work done under any permit or approval issued in accordance with the provisions of this chapter;

C.     To promulgate rules and regulations, and to amend or add to them, for the implementation of the provisions of this chapter and the standards as technology, situations, products and procedures change. (3183-2/93, 3854-2/10)

 

14.52.040 Applicability
After January 1, 2010, the provisions of this chapter shall apply to all new and/or rehabilitated landscaped areas as follows:

A.    Landscape areas for public agency projects and private development projects with a landscape and/or water feature area of 2,500 square feet and greater. These provisions are in addition to building permit requirements and/or entitlement conditions of approval for specific projects and other ministerial permit required projects such as plumbing, electrical, etc., unless exempt by approval of the governing body or specified elsewhere in this Code.

B.     All single-family residential projects with less than 2,500 square feet of landscaped area that are required to provide a landscape plan as a part of an entitlement, a condition of approval or are in an area described in the Zoning and Subdivision Ordinance as requiring a landscape plan shall follow the following criteria:

1.     The irrigation system design shall follow the requirements described in Section 14.52.060(C), irrigation design plan, with respect to irrigation efficiency, controllers, sprinkler heads, rain sensors, valves and backflow prevention.

2.     It is unacceptable to allow water to flow or be thrown or sprayed onto hardscapes such as the sidewalk, gutter, street, etc.

3.     The planting plans shall be based upon the proper plant selection and grouping of the plant materials being consistent with specific hydrozones. (3183-2/93, 3854-2/10)

 

14.52.050 Exceptions
Except as noted otherwise by special circumstances or by public hearing, the provisions of this chapter shall not apply to:

A.    Any project with a landscaped area less than 2,500 square feet installed prior to January 1, 2010, and those projects whose landscape improvements are not required to submit landscape plans;

B.     Interior remodels, tenant improvements, demolitions and changes of use;

C.     Registered historical sites;

D.    Ecological restoration projects that do not require a permanent irrigation system;

E.     Mined-land reclamation projects that do not require a permanent irrigation system;

F.     Replacement or repair or existing plant material or irrigation systems in conjunction with routine maintenance. (3183-2/93, 3854-2/10)

 

14.52.060 Plan Submittal Requirements and Implementation Procedures
A.    Conceptual Landscape Plan. All projects that are designated by the Planning Department as applicable to the provisions of this chapter will require a submittal of a conceptual landscape plan. This plan will be reviewed by the Planning and Public Works Departments to ascertain if the design complies with this chapter. The conceptual landscape plan shall be prepared by a California licensed landscape architect and shall indicate the design intent. It shall show and quantify the areas to be hydrozoned, indicate the proposed plant palate as it relates to each separate hydrozone area, provide an area estimate in square feet for each hydrozone and the percentage of each as it relates to the total landscaped area.

Other information relating to the compliance of the project to this chapter shall be submitted with the conceptual landscape plan, including but not limited to a water conservation statement and the type of irrigation system proposed for each hydrozone.

B.     “Working drawings” or a “landscape documentation package” shall include, but not be limited to, a landscape design plan which incorporates the following elements:

1.     The landscaped design plan shall be drawn on 24″ x 36″ sized project base sheets unless otherwise approved, at an approved scale that accurately and clearly identifies the proposed work to be done, including a north arrow, indication of scale, and any off-site design influencing features. The landscape design plan shall also include the following project information on the cover page:

a.     Date.

b.     Project name.

c.     Project address, parcel and/or lot number(s).

d.     Total landscape area (square feet) and rehabilitated landscape area (if applicable) and any special landscape areas.

e.     Project type (e.g., new, rehabilitated, public, private, cemetery, homeowner-installed).

f.      Checklist or index of all documents in the landscape document package.

g.     Project contacts to include contact information for the project applicant and property owner.

2.     Designation of all separate hydrozones and a hydrozone information table.

3.     Indicate graphically with symbols the location of all species of plant materials proposed.

4.     Type, location and quantity of all species of plant materials utilized such as trees, shrubs, groundcover, turf and other vegetation. Planting symbols shall be clearly drawn and plants labeled by botanical name, common name, container size, spacing and quantities of each group of plants indicated. If abbreviations or symbols are utilized for call outs, a legend shall be provided on each page of the planting plans.

5.     A calculation of the total turf area and its percentage of the total landscaped area.

6.     The location and percentage of the total landscaped area and types of mulch utilized.

7.     A plant materials legend that contains both scientific and common names, quantity, size, descriptive remarks and the percentage of low water use plants shall be provided on each planting plan sheet.

8.     Planting notes, tree staking, plant installation and soil preparation details, specifications and the provision for agricultural soil tests to determine soil amendments for both surface areas and plant backfill.

9.     A calculation of the total landscaped area.

10.   Natural features, including but not limited to, rock outcroppings, existing trees, shrubs that will remain.

11.   Other features that could impact the final design such as electrical transformers, power lines underground or aboveground, telephone wires, etc.

12.   Those items listed in the Arboricultural and Landscape Standards and Specifications and Guidelines for Implementation of the Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance.

13.   Designation of recreational area.

14.   Property lines and street names.

15.   Streets, driveways, walkways, and other paved areas.

16.   Pools, ponds, water features, fences, and retaining walls.

17.   Existing and proposed buildings and structures including finish floor elevations and pad elevations if applicable.

18.   Refer to Section 14.52.070(G) for detailed requirements.

C.     The “irrigation design plan” shall be drawn on 24″ x 36″ sized project base sheets, unless otherwise approved. It shall conform to Arboricultural and Landscape Standards and Specifications. It shall be separate from, but use the same format as, the landscape design plan. The scale shall be the same as that used for the landscape design plan, and the irrigation design plan shall accurately and clearly identify all of the following items:

1.     Location and size of separate water meters for the landscape with a designation of the type (e.g. potable, recycled, well).

2.     Irrigation systems shall be designed to be consistent with hydrozones.

3.     Irrigation plans indicating the layout of each system with the location, type and size of all components of the irrigation system including automatic controllers, main and lateral lines, points of connection, data on valve sizes, gallons per minute (G.P.M.), valve locations, the size and location of sleeves, all moisture sensing devices, flow controls, rain sensing devices, quick couplers, backflow prevention equipment, filters, pressure regulators, spray heads, drip heads, bubblers, etc., for both conventional and drip or microspray systems.

4.     Static water pressure at the point of connection to the public water supply.

5.     Flow rate (gallons per minute), application rate (inches per hour), and design operating pressure (PSI) for each station.

6.     Reclaimed water irrigation system as specified in this chapter.

7.     An irrigation legend on each plan sheet indicating all utilized equipment including adaptors, nozzle sizes, G.P.M., PSI, radius and other specific information.

8.     Irrigation notes, construction details of all assemblies and components and specifications.

9.     A recommended irrigation schedule and maintenance schedule.

10.   Grading design plan.

11.   Landscape architect’s professional stamp in the City’s format, landscape architect’s wet signature, contact information (email and phone), the date, and the certifying statement: The design of this project complies with the requirements of the City’s Water Efficient Landscape Requirements Ordinance (MC 14.52), and shall bear the wet signature of the landscape architect as required by law.

12.   Maximum applied water allowance (MAWA) and the estimated applied water use (EAWU), both expressed as annual totals.

a.     Water efficient landscape worksheet.

b.     Water budget calculations.

13.   A copy of the calculations clearly identifying all elements of the formula shall be submitted concurrently for maximum applied water allowance (MAWA), and estimated applied water use (EAWU).

14.   Refer to Section 14.52.070(H) for detailed requirements.

D.    Grading design plan, unless a precise grading plan is provided by a registered civil engineer for the project, or unless the project is limited to replacement planting and/or irrigation to rehabilitate an existing landscaped area.

E.     Soil management report and/or specifications, or a provision requiring soil testing and amendment recommendations and implementation to be accomplished after grading has been completed (in this instance, approvals of the landscape document package will not be done until soil testing and recommendations have been completed and are incorporated into the landscape document package). (3183-2/93, 3854-2/10)

 

14.52.070 Water Efficient Landscape Calculations, Alternatives and Design Guidelines
A.    The project applicant shall provide the calculated maximum applied water allowance (MAWA) and estimated applied water use (EAWU) for the landscape project area as part of the final landscape documentation package submittal to the City. The MAWA and EAWU shall be calculated based on completing the water efficient landscape worksheets (in accordance with the sample worksheets in Appendix B). All worksheets, calculations and other related items shall be incorporated onto the design plans within the landscape document package.

B.     The EAWU projected for the landscaped area shall not exceed the MAWA. The MAWA shall be calculated using an evapotranspiration adjustment factor (ETAF) of 0.7, except for the portion of the MAWA applicable to any special landscape areas within the project, which shall be calculated using an ETAF of 1.0. Where the design of the landscaped area can otherwise be shown to be equivalently water-efficient, the applicant may submit alternative or abbreviated information supporting the demonstration that the annual estimated applied water use is less than the maximum applied water allowance, for the review and approval by the City.

C.     Water budget calculations shall adhere to the following requirements:

1.     The maximum applied water allowance shall be calculated using the worksheet and equation presented in Appendix B. The example calculation is a hypothetical example to demonstrate proper use of the equation. All numbers used shall be shown in the equations.

2.     The estimated applied water use shall be calculated using the water efficient landscape worksheet and equation presented in Appendix B.

3.     For the calculation of the maximum applied water allowance (MAWA) and estimated applied water use (EAWU), a project applicant shall use the ETo value of 43 inches per year in Huntington Beach.

4.     For calculation of the EAWU, the plant water use factor shall be determined as appropriate to the project location from the Water Use Classification of Landscape Species (WUCOLS) species evaluation list. The plant factor is 0.1 for very low water use plants, 0.2 to 0.3 for low water use plants, 0.4 to 0.6 for moderate water use plants, and 0.7 to 1.0 for high water use plants.

5.     For calculation of the EAWU, the plant water use factor shall be determined for each valve hydrozone based on the highest-water-use plant species within the zone. The plant factor for each hydrozone may be required to be further refined as a “landscape coefficient” according to protocols defined in detail in the WUCOLS document, to reflect planting density and microclimate effects on water need, if required by the City landscape architect.

6.     For calculation of the EAWU, the area of a water feature shall be defined as a high water use hydrozone with a plant factor of 1.0.

7.     For calculation of the EAWU, a temporarily irrigated hydrozone area, such as an area of highly drought-tolerant native plants that are not intended to be irrigated after they are fully established, shall be defined as a very low water use hydrozone with a plant factor of 0.1.

8.     For calculation of the MAWA, the ET adjustment factor (ETAF) for special landscape areas shall be set at 1.0. For calculation of the EAWU, the ETAF for special landscape areas shall be calculated as the SLA plant factor divided by the SLA irrigation efficiency factor.

9.     Irrigation efficiency shall be calculated using the worksheet and equation presented in Appendix B.

D.    The Maximum Applied Water Allowance.

1.     A project’s maximum applied water allowance shall be calculated using the following formula:

 

 

MAWA =

(ETo) (0.7) (LA) (0.62) where:

MAWA =

Maximum applied water allowance (gallons per year)

ETo =

Reference evapotranspiration (inches per year) (43 inches per year in Huntington Beach)

0.7 =

ET adjustment factor

LA =

Landscaped area (square feet)

0.62 =

Conversion factor (to gallons per square foot)

 

2.     An example for calculations of the maximum applied water allowance is:

 

 

Project Site:

Landscaped area of 50,000 sq. ft. in Huntington Beach.

MAWA =

(ETo) (0.7) (LA) (0.62)

 

(43 inches) (0.7) (50,000 sq. ft.) (0.62)

 

Maximum applied water allowance (for this example) = 1,333,000 gallons per year (or 1,758 hundred-cubic-feet per year: 1,333,000 divided by 748 = 1758.6).

3.     It is conceivable that landscaped areas in public and private projects, including but not limited to, parks, playgrounds, sports fields, golf courses, cemeteries, or school yards where turf provides a playing surface or serves other recreational or approved passive purposes may require water in addition to the maximum applied water allowance. (Those special landscape areas shall have had the MAWA calculated utilizing an ET adjustment factor of 1.0.) If this is the case, a statement shall be included with the landscape design plan, designating areas to be used for such purposes and specifying any needed amount of additional water above the maximum applied water allowance. The applicant shall have tried to balance the additional water anticipated for the active turf areas with other areas that require substantially less water, such as those with a plant factor in the 0 to 0.3 range.

E.     Estimated Applied Water Use (EAWU).

1.     The estimated applied water use shall not exceed the maximum applied water allowance.

2.     A calculation of the estimated applied water use shall be submitted with the landscape documentation package. It may be calculated by summing the amount of water recommended in the irrigation schedule.

F.     Soil Management Report.

1.     In order to reduce runoff and encourage healthy plant growth, a soil management report shall be completed by the project applicant, or his or her designee, as follows:

a.     Submit soil samples to a certified agronomic soils laboratory such as Wallace Laboratories or Soil and Plant Laboratories for analysis and recommendations.

i.      Soil sampling shall be conducted in accordance with laboratory protocol, including protocols regarding adequate sampling depth for the intended plants.

ii.     The soil analysis shall at a minimum include soil texture; infiltration rate determined by an on-site percolation test, a laboratory test or soil texture infiltration rate table, pH, total soluble salts, sodium.

b.     Determination of soil texture, indicating the percentage of organic matter.

c.     A soil fertility and an agricultural suitability analysis shall be provided which includes but is not limited to a description analysis for half saturation percentage, pH, salinity, nitrate, nitrogen, ammonium nitrogen, phosphate phosphorus, potassium, calcium, magnesium, salinity boron and sodium absorption ratio. A descriptive narrative shall indicate procedures and provide soil recommendations for both general soil preparation and backfill mixes, and continuing maintenance fertilizer applications, and recommendations.

d.     The project applicant, or his or her designee, shall comply with one of the following:

i.      If significant mass grading is not planned, the soil analysis report shall be submitted to the City as part of the landscape documentation package.

ii.     If significant mass grading is planned, the soil analysis report shall be submitted to the City prior to initiating any construction. In this instance the requirement of approving precise grading plans and the landscape document package simultaneously will be waived to allow soil test results to be available to the landscape architect prior to his or her landscape document package being completed. The landscape document package will then be required prior to the first building inspection for foundations.

iii.    The soil analysis report shall be made available, in a timely manner, to the professionals preparing the landscape design plans, irrigation design plans and, if necessary, the precise grading plans to make any necessary adjustments to the design plans.

iv.    The project applicant, or his or her designee, shall submit documentation verifying implementation of soil analysis report recommendations to the City landscape architect prior to obtaining a final certificate of occupancy.

2.     A mulch of at least three inches shall be applied to all planting areas except turf and living ground coverings. Refer to Section 14.52.060(B) for basic plan requirements.

G.    Landscape Design Plan. For the efficient use of water, a landscape shall be carefully designed and planned for the intended function of the project. A landscape design plan meeting the following requirements shall be submitted as part of the landscape documentation package.

1.     Plant Selection and Grouping. Any plants may be used in the landscape, providing the estimated applied water use (EAWU) recommended does not exceed the maximum applied water allowance (MAWA) and that the plants meet the specifications set forth in the following paragraphs and the arboricultural and landscape standards and specifications.

a.     Protection and preservation of non-invasive water-conserving plant species and water-conserving turf;

b.     Selection of water-conserving plant species and water-conserving turf;

c.     Selection of plants based on disease and pest resistance;

d.     Selection of trees based on available planting area and special sub-surface construction provisions to allow maturity to occur without damaging infrastructure;

e.     Selection of plants from local and regional landscape program plant lists.

2.     Plants having similar water use shall be grouped together in distinct hydrozones.

3.     Plants shall be selected appropriately based upon their adaptability to the climatic, geologic, and topographic conditions of the site. Protection and preservation of native species and natural areas is encouraged. The planting of trees is encouraged wherever it is consistent with the other provisions of this chapter. To encourage the efficient use of water, the following is highly recommended:

a.     Use the Sunset Western Climate Zone System which takes into account temperature, humidity, elevation, terrain, latitude, and varying degrees of continental and marine influence on local climate;

b.     Recognize the horticultural attributes of plants (i.e., mature plant size, invasive surface roots) to minimize damage to property or infrastructure (e.g., buildings, sidewalks, and power lines); and

c.     Consider the solar orientation for plant placement to maximize summer shade and winter solar gain.

4.     Fire prevention needs shall be addressed in areas that are fire prone. Information about fire prone areas and appropriate landscaping for fire safety is available from the Fire Department. When conflicts between water conservation and fire safety design elements exist, the fire safety requirements shall have priority.

5.     Lawn or Turf Areas. Lawn areas shall be minimized. The amount of lawn area shall not exceed 25% of the total landscaped area on any project with the exception of high use facilities such as parks or play fields (special landscaped areas). Lawn areas less than 10 feet in any dimension are discouraged. Narrow strips of lawn areas are specifically discouraged. Lawn areas shall not exceed a four (horizontal length) to one (vertical height), or a 25% slope ratio on sloping sites or bermed areas.

6.     The use of artificial turf may be considered in certain instances where lawn is desired per the above, where lawn is specifically discouraged or where the lawn area exceeds the maximum allowed percentage of landscaped area. (Special installation requirements are required for public rights-of-way.)

7.     The use of invasive plant species and/or noxious plant species is not acceptable.

8.     The architectural guidelines of a common interest development, which include community apartment projects, condominiums, planned developments, and stock cooperatives, shall not prohibit or include conditions that have the effect of prohibiting the use of water efficient plant species as a group.

a.     Water Features.

i.      Recirculating water systems shall be used for water features.

ii.     Where available and consistent with public health guidelines, recycled water shall be used as a source for decorative water features.

iii.    The surface area of a water feature shall be included in the high water use hydrozone area of the water budget calculation.

iv.    Water evaporation from pools and spas is significant and covers are highly desirable and recommended.

b.     Mulch and Amendments.

i.      Minimum three-inch layer of mulch shall be applied on all exposed soil surfaces of planting areas except in turf areas, creeping or rooting groundcovers, or direct seeding applications where mulch is contraindicated.

ii.     Stabilizing/mulching products such as Excelsior matting or the approved equivalent shall be used on slopes.

iii.    The mulching portion of the seed/mulch slurry in hydro-seeded applications shall meet the mulching requirement.

iv.    Soil amendments shall be incorporated according to recommendations of the soil report and what is appropriate for the plants selected.

9.     The landscape design plan, at a minimum, shall:

a.     Delineate and label each hydrozone by number, letter, or other method;

b.     Identify each hydrozone as low, moderate, high water, or mixed water use. Temporarily irrigated areas of the landscaped area shall be included in the low water use hydrozone for the water budget calculation;

c.     Identify recreational areas;

d.     Identify areas permanently and solely dedicated to edible plants;

e.     Identify areas irrigated with recycled water;

f.      Identify areas irrigated with grey water;

g.     Identify type of mulch and application depth;

h.     Identify soil amendments, type, and quantity;

i.      Identify type and surface area of water features;

j.      Identify hardscapes (pervious and non-pervious);

k.     Identify location and installation details of any applicable stormwater best management practices that encourage on-site retention and infiltration of stormwater. Stormwater best management practices are encouraged in the landscape design plan and shall be designed to eliminate vector habitat concerns. Examples include, but are not limited to:

i.      Infiltration beds, swales, and basins that allow water to collect and soak into the ground,

ii.     Constructed wetlands and retention ponds that retain water, handle excess flow, and filter pollutants, and

iii.    Pervious or porous surfaces (e.g., permeable pavers or blocks, pervious or porous concrete, etc.) that minimize runoff.

l.      Identify any applicable rain harvesting or catchment technologies (e.g., rain gardens, cisterns, etc.);

m.    Contain the following statement: “I have complied with the criteria of the Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance and have applied them for the efficient use of water in the landscape design plan”; and

n.     Bear the wet signature of a California licensed landscape architect.

H.    Irrigation Design Plan and Criteria. For the efficient use of water, an irrigation system shall meet all the requirements listed in this section and the manufacturer’s recommendations. The irrigation system and its related components shall be planned and designed to allow for proper installation, management, and maintenance. An irrigation design plan meeting the following conditions shall be submitted as part of the landscape documentation package. Refer to Section 14.52.060(C) for basic plan requirements.

1.     Runoff and Overspray. Soil types and infiltration rate shall be considered when designing irrigation systems. All irrigation systems shall be designed to eliminate runoff, low head drainage, overspray, or other similar conditions where water flows onto adjacent property, non-irrigated areas, walks, roadways, or structures. Proper irrigation equipment and schedules, including features such as repeat cycles, shall be used to closely match application rates to the soil infiltration rates therefore eliminating runoff.

a.     Special attention shall be given to avoid runoff on slopes and to eliminate overspray in plant areas with a width less than 10 feet and in median strips.

b.     Narrow or irregularly shaped areas, including turf, less than eight feet in width in any direction shall be irrigated with subsurface irrigation or a low volume irrigation system, providing 100% coverage of the planting area with no overspray.

2.     Irrigation Efficiency. Average irrigation efficiency for the project shall be determined in accordance with the EAWU calculation sheet in Appendix B. Unless otherwise indicated by the irrigation equipment manufacturer’s specifications or demonstrated by the project applicant, the irrigation efficiency of the irrigation heads used within each hydrozone shall be assumed to be:

Pop-up stream rotator heads = 75%

Stream rotor heads = 75%

Microspray = 75%

Bubbler = 80%

Drip emitter = 85%

Subsurface irrigation = 90%

3.     The irrigation system shall be designed to ensure that the dynamic pressure at each emission device is within the manufacturer’s recommended pressure range for optimal performance.

a.     If the static pressure is above or below the required dynamic pressure of the irrigation system, pressure-regulating devices such as inline pressure regulators, booster pumps, or other devices shall be installed to meet the required dynamic pressure of the irrigation system.

b.     Static water pressure, dynamic or operating pressure, and flow reading of the water supply shall be measured at the point of connection. These pressure and flow measurements shall be conducted at the design stage. If the measurements are not available at the design stage, the measurements shall be conducted at installation.

4.     Water Meters. Separate landscape water meters shall be installed for all projects except for single-family homes; however, single-family homes with sub-potable or reclaimed water systems require a separate meter and additional preventative safety measures.

5.     Controllers. Automatic control systems shall be required for all irrigation systems and must be able to accommodate all aspects of the design utilizing either evapotranspiration or soil moisture sensor data, including dual programs and/or multiple repeat features and/or “smart” type controller technology.

a.     Valves. Plants which require different amounts of water shall be irrigated by separate valves as a part of the hydrozone requirement. If one valve is used for a given area, only plants with similar water use shall be used in that area. Anti-drain (check) valves shall be installed in strategic points to prevent low-head drainage and are required on all irrigation systems. Manual shut-off valves (such as a gate valve, ball valve, or butterfly valve) shall be required as close as possible to the point of connection of the water supply downstream from the backflow prevention device to minimize water loss in case of an emergency (such as a main line break) or routine repair.

b.     Backflow prevention devices shall be required to protect the potable water supply from contamination by the irrigation system. A project applicant shall refer to the applicable City code (i.e., the building department and/or public health) for additional backflow prevention requirements, and shall utilize City standards for installation.

6.     Sprinkler Heads. Heads and emitters shall have consistent application rates and matched precipitation rates within each control valve circuit. Sprinkler heads shall be selected for proper area coverage, application rate, operating pressure, adjustment capability, and ease of maintenance. Head-to-head coverage is recommended; however, sprinkler spacing shall be designed to achieve the highest possible distribution uniformity using the manufacturer’s recommendations and the types of plant materials used.

Swing joints or other riser-protection components are required on all risers subject to damage that are adjacent to high traffic areas.

7.     Rain Sensing Override Devices. Rain sensing override devices shall be required on all irrigation systems.

8.     Soil Moisture Sensing Devices. Soil moisture sensing devices are required to be used in lawn areas for projects with a total of 5,000 square feet and greater of total landscaped area. A minimum of one moisture sensing device shall be utilized per turf area. Soil moisture sensing devices shall be considered where appropriate for shrub areas.

9.     Flow Control Sensing Devices. Projects with 10,000 square feet or more of landscaped area are required to have one flow control valve per point of connection. All other sized systems are recommended to utilize flow control sensing devices.

10.   Relevant information from the soil management plan, such as soil type and infiltration rate, shall be utilized when designing irrigation systems so as to match the irrigation systems application rate to the infiltration rate of the soil.

11.   The design of the irrigation system shall conform to the hydrozones of the landscape design plan.

a.     It is highly recommended that the project applicant or landscape architect inquire with the water operations yard about peak water operating demands (on the water supply system) or water restrictions that may impact the effectiveness of the irrigation system.

b.     In mulched planting areas, the use of low volume irrigation is required to maximize water infiltration into the root zone. Refer to subsection (H)(10) of this section.

12.   Hydrozone.

a.     Each valve shall irrigate a hydrozone with similar site, slope, sun exposure, soil conditions, and plant materials with similar water use.

b.     Sprinkler heads and other emission devices shall be selected based on what is appropriate for the plant type within that hydrozone.

c.     Where feasible, trees shall be placed on separate valves from shrubs, groundcovers, and turf.

d.     Individual hydrozones that mix plants of moderate and low water use or moderate and high water use may be allowed if:

i.      The plant factor calculation is based on the proportions of the respective plant water uses and their respective plant factors; or

ii.     The plant factor of the higher water using plant is used for the calculations.

e.     Individual hydrozones that mix high and low water use plants shall not be permitted.

f.      On the landscape design plan and irrigation design plan, hydrozone areas shall be designated by number, letter, or other designation. On the irrigation design plan, designate the areas irrigated by each valve and assign a number to each valve.

13.   Overhead Irrigation. Overhead irrigation may not be acceptable for the areas within 24 inches of any non-permeable surface. There shall be NO overspray onto any hardscape or other non-permeable surfaces, nor shall there be any runoff allowed onto hardscape or other non-permeable surfaces. Allowable irrigation within the 24-inch setback from non-permeable surfaces may include drip, drip-line, surface-flow, or other low flow non spray technology.

These restrictions may be modified IF:

a.     The landscape area is adjacent to permeable surfacing and no runoff occurs; or

b.     The adjacent non-permeable surfaces are designed and constructed to drain entirely to landscaping; or

c.     The irrigation designer specifies an alternative design or technology, as part of the landscape document package and clearly demonstrates strict adherence to irrigation system design criteria in Section 14.52.070(H). Prevention of overspray and runoff must be confirmed during an irrigation system survey and physical test or possibly with an official irrigation audit if required by the City landscape architect or inspector.

14.   Slopes. Slopes greater than 25% shall not be irrigated with an irrigation system with a precipitation rate exceeding 0.75 inches per hour. This restriction may be modified if the landscape designer of the landscape project specifies an alternative design or technology, as part of the landscape documentation package, and clearly demonstrates no runoff or erosion will occur. Prevention of runoff and erosion must be confirmed during the irrigation system survey and physical test or possibly with an official irrigation audit if required by the City landscape architect or inspector.

15.   The irrigation design plan, at a minimum, shall contain:

a.     The location and size of separate water meters for landscape;

b.     The location, type, and size of all components of the irrigation system, including controllers, main and lateral lines, valves, sprinkler heads, moisture sensing devices, rain switches, quick couplers, pressure regulators, and backflow prevention devices;

c.     Static water pressure at the point of connection to the public water supply;

d.     Flow rate (gallons per minute), application rate (inches per hour), and design operating pressure (pressure per square inch) for each station;

e.     Irrigation schedule parameters necessary to program smart timers specified in the landscape design;

f.      The following statement: “I have complied with the criteria of the Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance and applied them accordingly for the efficient use of water in the irrigation design plan”; and

g.     The wet signature of a California licensed landscape professional.

I.      Irrigation Schedule Plan. The irrigation schedule plan, at a minimum, shall contain:

1.     An annual irrigation program with monthly irrigation schedules shall be required for the plan establishment period, for the established landscape, and for any temporarily irrigated areas.

2.     The irrigation schedule shall:

a.     Include run time (in minutes per cycle), suggested number of cycles per day, and frequency of irrigation for each station; and

b.     Indicate the amount of applied water (in hundred cubic feet, or gallons) recommended on a monthly and annual basis.

3.     The total amount of water for the project shall include water designated in the estimated total water use calculation plus water needed for any water features, which shall be considered as a high water using hydrozone.

4.     Recreational areas designated in the landscape design plan shall be highlighted and the irrigation schedule shall indicate if any additional water is needed above the MAWA (maximum applied water allowance), because of high plant factors (but not due to irrigation inefficiency).

5.     Irrigation scheduling shall incorporate the use of evapotranspiration data as available, such as those from the California Irrigation Management Information System (CIMIS) weather stations to apply the appropriate levels of water for different climates.

6.     Landscape irrigation shall be primarily scheduled between 2:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m. to avoid irrigating during times of high wind or high temperature.

J.      Grading Design Plan. Grading design plans satisfying the following conditions shall be submitted as part of the landscape documentation package.

1.     A grading design plan shall be drawn on 24″ x 36″ sized project base sheets, unless otherwise approved. It may be separate from but use the same format and scale as the landscape design plan.

2.     The grading design plan shall indicate finished configurations and elevations of the landscaped area, including the height of graded slopes, drainage patterns, pad elevations, and finish grade, and stormwater retention improvements, if applicable.

3.     To prevent excessive soil erosion and runoff, it is highly recommended that the project design professional do the following:

a.     Grade so that all irrigation and normal rainfall remains within property lines and does not drain on to non-permeable hardscapes;

b.     Avoid disruption of natural drainage patterns and undisturbed soil; and

c.     Avoid soil compaction in landscaped areas.

K.    Post-Installation Landscape and Irrigation Maintenance. Landscapes shall be maintained to ensure water use efficiency in accordance with existing Municipal Codes, the Zoning and Subdivision Ordinance, the Arboricultural and Landscape Standards and Specifications and this Water Efficient Landscape Requirements Ordinance.

For the efficient use of water, all irrigation schedules shall be developed, managed, and evaluated to utilize the minimum amount of water required to maintain plant health. Irrigation schedules shall meet the following criteria:

1.     Irrigation scheduling shall be regulated by automatic irrigation controllers.

2.     Overhead irrigation shall be scheduled in accordance with the City’s Water Conservation Ordinance. Operation of the irrigation system outside the normal watering window is allowed for plant establishment period of 90 to 365 days maximum, water auditing and system maintenance.

L.     Maintenance Schedules. A regular maintenance schedule satisfying the following conditions shall be submitted as part of the landscape documentation package:

1.     Landscapes shall be maintained to ensure water efficiency. A regular maintenance schedule shall include but not be limited to checking, adjusting, and repairing irrigation equipment; resetting the automatic controller; aerating and dethatching turf areas; replenishing mulch; fertilizing; pruning, and weeding in all landscaped areas.

2.     Whenever possible, repair of irrigation equipment shall be done with the originally specified materials or their equivalents.

M.    Landscape Irrigation Audit Schedules. A schedule of landscape irrigation audits, for all projects with a landscaped area of 10,000 square feet and larger, satisfying the following conditions shall be submitted to the City as part of the landscape documentation package.

1.     Refer to certification.

2.     At a minimum, audits shall be in accordance with the State of California Landscape Water Management Program as described in the Landscape Irrigation Auditor Handbook, the entire document, which is hereby incorporated by reference. See Landscape Irrigation Auditor Handbook, June 1990, version 5.5 (formerly Master Auditor Training).

3.     It is recommended that landscape irrigation audits be conducted by certified landscape irrigation auditors at least once every five years.

N.    Public Education. Signs shall be used to identify all model home complexes as an example of a water efficient landscape and featuring elements such as hydrozones, irrigation equipment and others which contribute to the overall water efficient theme. Information shall be provided about designing, installing, and maintaining water efficient landscapes. (3183-2/93, 3854-2/10)

 

14.52.080 Statutory Authority in Case of Conflicting Provisions
Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to affect, annul or abrogate any other laws or ordinances pertaining or applicable to the properties and areas affected by this chapter. (3183-2/93, 3854-2/10)

 

14.52.090 Effective Precipitation
If effective precipitation is included in the calculation of the estimated total water use, the effective precipitation disclosure statement, as depicted in Section 14.52.100 shall be completed, signed, and submitted with the landscape documentation package. No more than 25% of the local annual mean precipitation shall be considered effective precipitation in the calculation of the estimated total water use. (3183-2/93, 3854-2/10)

 

14.52.095 Provisions for Existing Landscapes
A.    Irrigation of all landscaped areas shall be conducted in a manner conforming to the rules and requirements and shall be subject to penalties and incentives for water conservation and water waste prevention, as determined and implemented by the City.

B.     The City may administer programs such as irrigation water use analyses, irrigation surveys, tiered water rate structures, water budgeting by parcel, or other approaches to achieve landscape water use efficiency community-wide to a level equivalent to or less than would be achieved by applying a MAWA calculated with an ETAF of 0.8 to all landscaped areas in the City over one acre in size.

C.     The architectural guidelines of a common interest development, including apartments, condominiums, planned developments, and stock cooperatives, shall not prohibit or include conditions that have the effect of prohibiting the use of low-water use plants as a group.

D.    Reclaimed Water. The installation of reclaimed water irrigation systems (dual distribution systems) shall be required to allow for the current and future use of reclaimed water, unless a written exemption has been granted by the Public Works Water Division, stating that reclaimed water meeting all health standards is not available and will not be available in the foreseeable future.

E.     The reclaimed water irrigation system shall be designed and operated in accordance with all codes, and shall include but not be limited to the use of purple pipe and fittings for the total reclaimed water system. Refer to the “Rules and Regulations for the Use of Reclaimed Water” (available at the Water Department) for more information.

F.     For single-family residential lots with reclaimed water, there shall be no hose bibbs, loose key or otherwise and no quick couplers installed on the reclaimed system. (3854-2/10)

 

14.52.098 Installation Completion, Certification and Acceptance
A.    Landscape project installation shall not proceed until the landscape documentation package has been approved by the City and any ministerial permits required are issued.

B.     The project applicant shall notify the City at the beginning of the installation work and at intervals, as necessary, for the duration of the landscape project work to schedule all required inspections.

C.     Certification shall be accomplished by completing the certificate of substantial completion as depicted in Section 14.52.100 and delivering it to the City Public Works Department, landscape architect and to the owner of record.

1.     A landscape installation certificate of completion in the form included in Section 14.52.100, which shall include: (a) certification by a landscape architect or licensed landscape contractor, or the property owner that the landscape project has been installed per the approved landscape documentation package; and (b) the following statement: “The landscaping has been installed in substantial conformance to the City-approved design plans, and complies with the provisions of the Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance for the efficient use of water in the landscape.”

2.     Documentation of the irrigation scheduling parameters used to set the controller(s).

3.     An irrigation audit report from a certified irrigation auditor, documentation of enrollment in regional water purveyor’s or the municipal water district of Orange County’s water conservation programs, and/or documentation that the MAWA and EAWU information for the landscape project has been submitted to the local utilities division, may be required at the option of the City.

D.    A licensed landscape architect and, if applicable, a certified/licensed irrigation designer, shall conduct a final field observation and shall provide a certificate of substantial completion of the entire landscaped area (per City approved plans) to the City prior to acceptance. The certificate shall specifically indicate that plants were installed as specified, that the irrigation system was installed as designed, and that an irrigation audit (if project size warrants it) has been performed, along with a list of any observed deficiencies.

E.     Upon completing the installation of the landscaping and the irrigation system, on project landscape installations totaling 10,000 square feet or greater, an irrigation audit shall be conducted by a certified landscape irrigation auditor prior to the final field inspection and acceptance.

F.     Certification of completion of the landscape planting and irrigation installations shall be obtained through a certificate of use and occupancy or a permit final. (3854-2/10)

 

14.52.100 Required Forms
 

CERTIFICATE OF SUBSTANTIAL COMPLETION

 

Project Site:

Planning Entitlement No.: _________

Project Location: _________

Tentative Tract No.: _________

Total Project Landscaped Area in Square Feet: ___________

 

Preliminary Project Documentation Submitted: (check indicating submittal)

        q     1.     Maximum Applied Water Allowance:

                        ___ gallons or cubic feet/year

                        ___ percent of the local annual mean precipitation

        q     2.     Estimated Applied Water Use:

                        ___ gallons or cubic feet/year

        q     3.     Estimated Total Water Use:

                        ___ gallons or cubic feet/year

        q     4.     Landscape Design Plan

        q     5.     Irrigation Design Plan

        q     6.     Irrigation Schedules

        q     7.     Maintenance Schedule

        q     8.     Landscape Irrigation Audit Schedule

        q     9.     Grading Design Plan

        q     10.   Soil Analysis

 

Post-Installation Inspection: (check indicating substantial completion)

        q     A.    Plants installed as specified

        q     B.     Irrigation system installed as designed

                        q dual distribution system for recycled water

                        q minimal runoff or overspray

        q     C.     Landscape Irrigation Audit performed

        q     Project submittal package and a copy of this certification has been provided to owner/manager                  and local water agency.

 

Comments: _________________________________________________________________________

 

I/we certify that based upon periodic site observations, the work has been substantially completed in accordance with the Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance and that the landscape planting and irrigation installation substantially conform with the City approved plans and specifications.

 

Landscape Architect                  Signature                  Date

State License No.

 

I/we certify that based upon periodic site observations, the work has been substantially completed in accordance with the Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance and that the landscape irrigation installation substantially conforms with the City approved plans and specifications.

 

Irrigation Design/Consultant                       Signature                  Date

State License No.

 

I/we certify that I/we have received all of the contract documents and that it is our responsibility to see that the project is maintained in accordance with the contract documents and the City of Huntington Beach Arboricultural and Landscape Standards, Specifications and the Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance.

 

Owner/Developer                      Signature                  Date

Title

 

LANDSCAPE WATER CONSERVATION CONCEPT STATEMENT

 

Project: _________

Planning Entitlement Number: _________

Public Works Plan Check Number: _________

Project Location: _________

Tentative Tract Number: _________

Landscape Architect/Irrigation Designer/Contractor: _________

Total Landscape Planting Area in Square Feet: _________

Total Special Landscape Area in Square Feet: _________

 

Included in Project Submittal Package Are: (check indicating completion; circle descriptive amount)

q     1.     Maximum applied water allowance: ___ gallons or cubic feet/year

q     2.     Estimated applied water use: ___ gallons or cubic feet/year

q     3.     Landscape Design Plan

q     4.     Irrigation Design Plan

q     5.     Irrigation Schedules

q     6.     Maintenance Schedule

q     7.     Landscape Irrigation Audit Schedule

q     8.     Grading Design Plan

q     9.     Soil Analysis

 

Description of Project: (brief description of planning and design actions intended to achieve conservation and efficiency in water use)

 

Prepared by:

Title:

CA License No.:

 

Date:

Appendix A

 

CERTIFICATION OF LANDSCAPE DESIGN

 

I hereby certify that:

1.     I am a professional Landscape Architect appropriately licensed in the State of California to provide professional landscape design services.

2.     The landscape design and water use calculations for the property located at _____________________

        __________________________________________________________________________________

        (provide street address or parcel number(s)) were prepared by me or under my supervision.

3.     The landscape design and water use calculations for the identified property comply with the requirements of the City of Huntington Beach Water Efficient Landscape Requirements Ordinance (Huntington Beach Municipal Code Chapter 14.52).

4.     The information I have provided in this Certificate of Landscape Design is true and correct and is hereby submitted in compliance with the City of Huntington Beach Guidelines for Implementation of the City of Huntington Beach Water Efficient Landscape Requirements.

 

 

Print Name

 

Date

 

 

 

Signature

 

License Number

 

 

 

Address

 

 

 

 

 

Telephone

 

E-mail Address

 

 

 

Landscape Design Professional’s Stamp
(if applicable)

 

 

 

 

 



A - 1

 

 

 

Appendix B

 

EXAMPLE WATER EFFICIENT LANDSCAPE WORKSHEET

 

This worksheet is filled out by the project applicant for each Point of Connection. Please complete all sections of the worksheet.

 

 

Point of Connection # 1

 

Maximum Applied Water Allowance (MAWA)

 

Total MAWA = (ETo x 0.7 x LA in Sq. Ft. x 0.62) + (ETo x 1.0 x SLA in Sq. Ft. x 0.62) = Gallons per year for LA+SLA

 

where:

MAWA = Maximum Applied Water Allowance (gallons per year)

ETo = Evapotranspiration (inches per year)

0.7 = Evapotranspiration Adjustment Factor (ETAF)

1.0 = ETAF for Special Landscaped Area

LA = Landscaped Area (square feet)

0.62 = Conversion Factor (to gallons per square foot)

SLA = Special Landscaped Area (square feet)

 

Example Calculation: a hypothetical landscape project in Huntington Beach, CA with an irrigated landscaped area of 40,000 square feet with 10,000 square feet of Special Landscaped Area. To calculate MAWA, the annual Reference Evapotranspiration value for Huntington Beach is 43.0 inches.

 

 

ETo

 

ETAF

 

LA or SLA (ft2)

 

Conversion

 

MAWA
(gallons/year)

MAWA for LA =

43.0

x

0.7

x

40,000

x

0.62

=

746,480

MAWA for SLA =

43.0

x

1.0

x

10,000

x

0.62

=

266,600

Total MAWA =

50,000

 

1,013,080
gallons/year for LA+SLA

 

 

B-1

 

Estimated Applied Water Use

 

 

EAWU = ETo x KL x LA x 0.62 ÷ IE = Gallons per year

Where:

 

 

KL = Ks x Kd x Kmc

EAWU = Estimated Applied Water Use (gallons per year)

 

ETo = Evapotranspiration (inches per year)

Ks = Species Factor (range = 0.1-0.9)

KL = Landscape Coefficient

(see WUCOLS list for values)

LA = Landscaped Area (square feet)

Kd = Density Factor (range = 0.5-1.3)

0.62 = Conversion Factor (to gallons per square foot)

(see WUCOLS for density value ranges)

IE = Irrigation Efficiency = IME x DU

Kmc = Microclimate Factor (range = 0.5-1.4)

IME = Irrigation Management Efficiency (90%)

(see WUCOLS)

DU = Distribution Uniformity of Irrigation Head

WUCOLS: www.owue.water.ca.gov/docs/wucols00.pdf

Example Calculation:

 

ETo

 

KL

 

LA

 

Conversion

 

IE

 

EAWU (gallons/year)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Special Landscaped Area

43.0

x

1.00

x

10,000

x

0.62

÷

0.75

=

355,467

Cool Season Turf

43.0

x

1.00

x

0

x

0.62

÷

0.71

=

0

Warm Season Turf

43.0

x

0.65

x

0

x

0.62

÷

0.71

=

0

High Water Using Shrub

43.0

x

0.70

x

0

x

0.62

÷

0.71

=

0

Medium Water Using Shrub

43.0

x

0.50

x

15,000

x

0.62

÷

0.65

=

307,615

Low Water Using Shrub

43.0

x

0.30

x

25,000

x

0.62

÷

0.75

=

266,600

Very Low Water Using Shrub

43.0

x

0.20

x

0

x

0.62

÷

0.71

=

0

Other

43.0

x

0.50

x

0

x

0.62

÷

0.71

=

0

Other

43.0

x

0.50

x

0

x

0.62

÷

0.71

=

0

Total EAWU =

50,000

 

929,682 (gallons/year)

Compare EAWU with MAWA.

The EAWU (929,682 gallons per year) is less than MAWA (1,013,080 gallons per year). For this example, the water budget complies with the MAWA.

 

B-2

 

List sprinkler heads, microspray, and drip emitters here along with average precipitation rate and distribution uniformity of irrigation head.

 

 

Sprinkler Head Types

Average Precipitation Rate

Distribution Uniformity of Irrigation Head

Drip

 

 

Microspray

Bubbler

 

B-3

 

WATER EFFICIENT LANDSCAPE WORKSHEET

 

This worksheet is filled out by the project applicant for each Point of Connection. Please complete all sections of the worksheet.

 

Point of Connection #______

 

Maximum Applied Water Allowance (MAWA)

 

Total MAWA = (ETo x 0.7 x LA in Sq. Ft. x 0.62) + (ETo x 1.0 x SLA in Sq. Ft. x 0.62) = Gallons per year for LA+SLA

 

Where:

 

MAWA = Maximum Applied Water Allowance (gallons per year)

ETo = Evapotranspiration (inches per year)

0.7 = Evapotranspiration Adjustment Factor (ETAF)

1.0 = ETAF for Special Landscaped Area

LA = Landscaped Area (square feet)

0.62 = Conversion Factor (to gallons per square foot)

SLA = Special Landscaped Area (square feet)

 

MAWA Calculation:

 

 

 

ETo

 

ETAF

 

LA or SLA (ft2)

 

Conversion

 

MAWA (gallons/year)

MAWA for LA =

 

x

0.7

x

 

x

0.62

=

 

MAWA for SLA =

 

x

1.0

x

 

x

0.62

=

 

Total MAWA =

 

 

 

 

 

B-4

 

Estimated Applied Water Use

 

 

EAWU = ETo x KL x LA x 0.62 ÷ IE = Gallons per year

 

 

 

 

KL = Ks x Kd x Kmc

Where:

 

 

Ks = Species Factor (range = 0.1-0.9)

EAWU = Estimated Applied Water Use (gallons per year)

(see WUCOLS list for values)

ETo = Evapotranspiration (inches per year)

Kd = Density Factor (range = 0.5-1.3)

KL = Landscape Coefficient

(see WUCOLS for density value ranges)

LA = Landscaped Area (square feet)

Kmc = Microclimate Factor

0.62 = Conversion Factor (to gallons per square foot)

(range = 0.5-1.4) (see WUCOLS)

IE = Irrigation Efficiency = IME x DU

 

IME = Irrigation Management Efficiency (90%)

WUCOLS:

DU = Distribution Uniformity of Irrigation Head

www.owue.water.ca.gov/docs/wucols00.pdf

 

EAWU Calculation:

 

 

 

ETo

 

KL

 

LA

 

Conversion

 

IE

 

EAWU

(gallons/year)

Special Landscaped Area

43.0

x

 

x

 

x

0.62

÷

 

=

 

Cool Season Turf

43.0

x

 

x

 

x

0.62

÷

 

=

 

Warm Season Turf

43.0

x

 

x

 

x

0.62

÷

 

=

 

Warm Season Turf

43.0

x

 

x

 

x

0.62

÷

 

=

 

High Water Using Shrub

43.0

x

 

x

 

x

0.62

÷

 

=

 

Medium Water Using Shrub

43.0

x

 

x

 

x

0.62

÷

 

=

 

Low Water Using Shrub

43.0

x

 

x

 

x

0.62

÷

 

=

 

Very Low Water Using Shrubs

43.0

x

 

x

 

x

0.62

÷

 

=

 

 

 

x

 

x

 

x

0.62

÷

 

=

 

 

 

x

 

x

 

x

0.62

÷

 

=

 

 

 

x

 

x

 

x

0.62

÷

 

=

 

Other

 

x

 

x

 

x

0.62

÷

 

=

 

Total EAWU =

 

 

 

 

B-5

 

List sprinkler heads, microspray, and drip emitters here along with average precipitation rate and distribution uniformity of irrigation head.

 

 

Sprinkler Head Types

Average Precipitation Rate

Distribution Uniformity of Irrigation Head

Drip

 

 

Microspray

 

 

Bubbler

 

 

Low precipitation rotating nozzles

 

 

Stream rotors

 

 

(3183-2/93, 3854-2/10)

 

14.52.110 Nuisance
It shall be deemed a public nuisance for any person to fail to comply with any of the requirements as described in the foregoing sections. (3854-2/10)

 

14.52.120 Violations—Misdemeanor
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such. (3854-2/10)

 

Chapter 14.54 SEWER SERVICE USER CHARGE
14.54.010 Short Title
This chapter may be cited as the “Sewer Service User Charge Ordinance.” (3504-10/01)

 

14.54.020 Intent and Purposes
Pursuant to California Health and Safety Code Section 5470 et seq., the City is authorized to adopt fees and charges for the acquisition, construction, reconstruction, maintenance, and operation of sewerage facilities. This chapter is intended to ensure that sufficient revenues are collected to adequately acquire, construct, reconstruct, maintain, and operate the City’s needed sewerage facilities. By imposing a charge that is reasonably related to the burdens imposed upon the sewerage facilities by sewer service customers, the City will be able to acquire and/or construct the required capital improvements to the sewerage facilities, undertake the needed reconstruction and maintenance of existing sewerage facilities, and operate the sewerage facilities in accordance with the goals, objectives and policies of the City’s integrated infrastructure management program. (3504-10/01)

 

14.54.030 Definitions
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms shall be defined as follows:

“City” shall mean the City of Huntington Beach.

“Public Works Director” shall mean the Public Works Director or the director’s designee.

“Sewer charge customer category” shall mean any of the specific use categories that have been listed in this chapter establishing sewer service user rates and charges pursuant to Section 14.54.040.

“Sewer service customer” shall mean the person obligated to pay the sewer service user charge or other fee(s) established pursuant to this chapter.

“Sewer service fund” shall mean the special fund established pursuant to this chapter into which all revenues from sewer service user charges will be deposited.

“Sewer service user charge” or “charge” shall mean the charge imposed on sewer service customers pursuant to this chapter.

“Sewer system” shall mean all sanitary sewer facilities owned or maintained by the City of Huntington Beach and used for the purpose of collecting and conveying sewage to the Orange County Sanitation District’s treatment and conveyance facilities.

“Water customer” shall mean any person with a City water utility account. (3504-10/01, 3795-1/08)

 

14.54.035 Maintenance and Repair
A.    Repair and maintenance of all sewer mains dedicated to the City shall be the responsibility of the City.

B.     Except as provided herein, repair and maintenance of all privately-owned sewer mains and all lateral lines, equipment and appurtenances connected to the City sewer mains shall be the responsibility of the owner/user, and shall meet the requirements contained in Title 12 of this Code.

C.     City will pay the cost of repair and maintenance of all lateral lines from the City-owned sewer main through the public right-of-way to the private property line. The owner is responsible for all costs of repair and maintenance of all lateral lines on private property not within the public right-of-way.

D.    The Public Works Director shall prepare administrative guidelines to implement the provisions of this section. The guidelines shall include administrative procedures, application and appeals forms and such other information that will assist City staff, decision makers, sewer service customers and the general public to understand how the provisions of this section are to be implemented. (3795-1/08)

 

14.54.040 Authority to Adopt Rates and Charges
A.    Pursuant to California Health & Safety Code Section 5470, et seq., including Sections 5471 and 5474, the City is authorized to adopt rates and charges for the acquisition, construction, reconstruction, maintenance, and operation of a sewerage system. This chapter is intended to ensure that sufficient revenues are collected to adequately acquire, construct, reconstruct, maintain, and operate the City’s needed sewer facilities. By imposing a Sewer Service User Charge that is reasonably related to the burdens imposed upon the sewer facilities by sewer service customers, the City will be able to acquire and/or construct the required capital improvements to maintain and improve sewer facilities.

B.     The City shall impose a Sewer Service User Charge. The Charge shall be set by a Resolution adopted by a two-thirds vote of the members of the City Council. The charge shall be imposed monthly and collected monthly.

C.     The City Council may include a schedule of adjustments, effective July 1 of each year, for up to five years as part of the Sewer Service User Charge it may authorize by Resolution. The adjustments may include an annual percentage adjustment reflecting the increase in the Consumer Price Index for all Urban Consumers (“CPIU”) in Los Angeles, Orange and Riverside Counties established by the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. Notice of any adjustment to the Sewer Service User Charge shall be provided by way of an insert in the monthly City water and sewer bill at least 30 days before the effective date of the Rate and Surcharge adjustment.

D.    Pursuant to Health & Safety Code Section 5472, any person may pay under protest the Sewer Service User Charge, and bring an action against the City in the Orange County Superior Court to recover money which the City refuses to refund. Any protest shall be filed with the City Clerk no later than prior to or concurrently with the date payment of the charge is due. (3504-10/01, 4158-5/18)

 

14.54.050 Sewer Service Fund Created
A.    The City hereby establishes a special fund within the City’s fiscal system to be known as the “sewer service fund.”

B.     All revenues from sewer service user charges and any related fees and charges shall be deposited to the sewer service fund.

C.     The interest earned on the sewer service fund shall accrue to that account only.

D.    The monies in the sewer service fund shall not be transferred, loaned or otherwise encumbered for any program except the acquisition, construction, reconstruction, maintenance, and operation of the City’s sewer system or as may be further authorized under state law in accordance with the provisions of Health and Safety Code Section 5471.

E.     Revenues derived pursuant to this chapter and placed into the sewer service fund shall not be used for the acquisition or construction of new local street sewers or laterals as distinguished from main trunk, interceptor and outfall sewers or as may be further prohibited under state law in accordance with the provisions of Health and Safety Code Section 5471. (3504-10/01)

 

14.54.060 Setting of Sewer Service User Rates and Charges
A.    The City Council shall by Resolution set the specific amount of the Sewer Service User Charges for all water meter customers in the City.

B.     The Sewer Service User Charge shall be based upon the Customer Category, and the number of dwelling units or commercial or industrial occupancies the water meter serves, all as further defined in the Resolution establishing the Charge. Public schools shall be charged based upon the student average daily attendance (“ADA”), with separate per student rates for kindergarten through eighth grade, and for high school. The Sewer Service User Charge shall not exceed the reasonable cost of providing the services, facilities or regulatory activity for which the charge is imposed. (3504-10/01, 4158-5/18)

 

14.54.070 Annual Program Review
The sewer service fund shall be subject to an annual review and performance audit by the Public Works Commission. The City Council periodically, at least annually, shall receive at a regularly scheduled meeting, oral and written presentations as recommended by the Public Works Commission, concerning fees, rates, and/or charges proposed to be modified or added to the sewer service user charge. Such public meeting and oral and written presentations shall be provided prior to the City Council taking any action on any new or modified sewer service user charges. At least one such public hearing shall be held annually, in conjunction with the City’s annual budget process and hearing. (3504-10/01)

 

14.54.080 Billing of Sewer Service User Charges
The billing of the sewer service user charge for water customers of the City shall be made at such time and frequency and such method as the City Council may deem appropriate by ordinance. (3504-10/01)

 

14.54.090 Payment and Collection of Sewer Service User Charges
All sewer service user charges, however billed, shall be subject to the payment, collection and enforcement procedures for water billings as set forth in Section 14.12.120. (3504-10/01)

 

14.54.100 Exemptions
A.    Exemption Categories. The following water customers shall be exempt from the requirements of this chapter:

1.     The City of Huntington Beach.

2.     Water customers with irrigation only accounts or meters as determined by the Public Works Director.

3.     Water customers who are not connected to the City sewer system.

B.     Claim for Exemption Required. Any claim of exemption under subsection (A)(3) of this section must be filed in the same manner and will be considered pursuant to the same procedure as for a sewer service user charge adjustment as provided in Section 14.54.110. (3504-10/01)

 

14.54.130 Preparation of Administrative Implementation Guidelines
Within 60 days after the effective date of the ordinance enacting this chapter, the Public Works Director shall prepare administrative guidelines to implement the provisions of this chapter. The guidelines shall include administrative procedures, example fee calculations, application and appeals forms and such other information that will assist City staff, decision makers, sewer service customers and the general public to understand how the provisions of this chapter are to be implemented. (3504-10/01)

 

Chapter 14.56 CONTROL AND REGULATION OF FATS, OILS AND GREASE
14.56.010 Definitions
Unless otherwise defined herein, terms related to water quality shall be as adopted in the latest edition of Standard Methods for Examination of Water and Wastewater, published by the American Public Health Association, the American Water Works Association and the Water Environment Federation.

Other terms not herein defined are defined as being the same as set forth in the latest adopted applicable editions of the California State Codes applicable to building construction as adopted by the Huntington Beach Municipal Code or Huntington Beach Zoning and Subdivision Ordinance.

Subject to the foregoing provisions, the following definitions shall apply in this chapter:

“Best management practices” shall mean schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures and other management practices to prevent or reduce the introduction of FOG to the sewer facilities.

“Discharger” shall mean any person who discharges or causes a discharge of wastewater directly or indirectly to a public sewer. Discharger shall mean the same as user.

“Establishment” shall mean commercial or industrial establishments, including but not limited to retail food service establishments, that may discharge fats, oils and grease.

“FOG” shall mean fats, oils and grease. Any substance such as a vegetable or animal product that is used in, or is a byproduct of, the cooking or food preparation process, and that turns or may turn viscous or solidifies with a change in temperature or other condition is included in this definition.

“Food grinder” shall mean any device installed in the plumbing or sewage system for the purpose of grinding food waste or food preparation by products for the purpose of disposing it in the sewer system. Also means a garbage disposal.

“Food service establishment” shall mean facilities defined in California Health and Safety Code Section 113285 or which has any process or device that uses or produces FOG, grease vapors, steam, fumes, smoke, or odors that are required to be removed by a Type I hood, as defined in Health and Safety Code Section 113285. A limited food preparation establishment is not considered a food service establishment nor are establishments that generate FOG when engaged only in reheating, hot holding or assembly of ready to eat food products and as a result, there is no wastewater discharge containing a significant amount of FOG. A limited food preparation establishment does not include any operation that changes the form, flavor, or consistency of food.

“Gravity grease interceptor (GGI) or grease trap” shall mean a water-tight receptacle receiving and retaining waste containing fats, oils, and grease from food service establishments, and in all cases shall be located outside a place of business or any structure. Minimum size shall be 750 gallons. Additional sizing criteria are set forth by the current adopted plumbing code.

“Grease control device” shall mean any gravity grease interceptor, hydromechanical grease trap or other approved mechanism, device, or process, which attaches to, or is applied to, wastewater plumbing fixtures and lines, the purpose of which is to trap or collect or treat FOG prior to it being discharged into the sewer system.

“Hydromechanical grease interceptor (HGI) or grease trap” shall mean a water-tight receptacle receiving and retaining waste containing fats, oils and grease from food service establishments. The HGI is generally located inside a business or structure. Sizing criteria are set forth by the current adopted plumbing code.

“Infiltration” shall mean water entering a sewer system, including sewer service connections, from the ground through such means as defective pipes, pipe joints, connections, or manhole walls.

“Inflow” shall mean water entering a sewer system through a direct stormwater runoff connection to the sanitary sewer, which may cause an almost immediate increase in wastewater flows.

“Manifest” shall mean that receipt which is retained by the generator of wastes for disposing recyclable wastes or liquid wastes as required by the City.

“New construction” shall mean any structure planned or under construction for which a sewer connection permit has not been issued.

“New food service establishment” shall mean any new or existing food service establishment that has undergone change in ownership or change in operation which would involve animal products in the cooking or food preparation process or as a byproduct of the cooking and preparation of food.

“Person” shall mean any individual, partnership, firm, association, corporation or public agency, including the State of California and the United States of America.

“Private sewer lateral” shall mean that part of the sewer lateral that is solely owned and required to be maintained by the property owner.

“Remodeling” shall mean a physical change or operational change causing the generation of the amount of FOG that exceeds the current amount of FOG discharge to the sewer system by the food service establishment in an amount that alone or collectively causes or creates a potential for sewer system overflows to occur; or exceeding a cost of $50,000.00 to food service establishments that requires a building permit, and involves any one or combination of the following:

1.     Under slab plumbing in the food processing area;

2.     A 30% increase in the net public seating area;

3.     A 30% increase in the size of the kitchen area;

4.     Any change in the size or type of food preparation equipment.

“Sample point” shall mean a location approved by the City, from which wastewater can be collected that is representative in content and consistency of the entire flow of wastewater being sampled.

“Sampling facilities” shall mean structure(s) provided at the user’s expense for the City or user to measure and record wastewater constituent mass, concentrations, collect a representative sample, or provide access to plug or terminate the discharge.

“Sewer or sewer system” shall mean any and all facilities used for collecting, conveying, pumping, treating, and disposing of wastewater and sludge. This definition includes but is not limited to any property belonging to the City used in the treatment, reclamation, reuse, transportation, or disposal of wastewater, or sludge.

“Sewer lateral” shall mean a building sewer as defined in the latest edition of the California Plumbing Code. It is the wastewater connection between the building’s wastewater facilities and a public sewer system.

“Sludge” shall mean any solid, semisolid or liquid decant, subnate or supernate from a manufacturing process, utility service, or pretreatment facility.

“Waste” shall mean sewage and any and all other waste substances, liquid, solid, gaseous or radioactive, associated with human habitation or of human or animal nature, including such wastes placed within containers of whatever nature prior to and for the purpose of disposal.

“Wastewater” shall mean the liquid and water-carried wastes of the community and all constituents thereof, whether treated or untreated, discharged into or permitted to enter a public sewer. (3688-12/04; 3979-7/13)

 

14.56.020 FOG Discharge Requirement
No establishment shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the sewer system FOG that accumulates and/or causes or contributes to blockages in the sewer system or at the sewer system lateral, which connects the establishment to the sewer system. (3688-12/04)

 

14.56.030 Enforcement of Chapter
The City’s Director of Public Works and the Director of Planning and Building or his/her designee is responsible for enforcement of this chapter and for all determinations of compliance with it. (3688-12/04; 3979-7/13)

 

14.56.040 Prohibitions
The following prohibitions shall apply to food service establishments that generate FOG:

A.    Installation of food grinders in the plumbing system of new construction of any food service establishments that generate FOG, is prohibited. Furthermore, all food grinders must be removed from existing food service establishments that generate FOG, as determined by the director, within 90 days of written notice to remove.

B.     Introduction of any additives into any establishment’s wastewater system for the purpose of emulsifying FOG is prohibited.

C.     Disposal of waste cooking oil into drainage pipes is prohibited. All waste cooking oils shall be collected and stored properly in receptacles such as barrels or drums for recycling or other acceptable methods of disposal.

D.    Discharge of wastewater from dishwashers to any grease trap or grease interceptor is prohibited.

E.     Discharge of wastewater with temperatures in excess of 140˚F to any grease control device, including grease traps and grease interceptors, is prohibited.

F.     The use of biological additives for grease remediation or as a supplement to interceptor maintenance is prohibited, unless written approval from the director is obtained.

G.    Discharge of wastes from toilets, urinals, wash basins, and other fixtures containing fecal materials to sewer lines intended for grease interceptor service, or vice versa, is prohibited.

H.    Discharge into the sewer system of any waste which has FOG as well as solid materials removed from the grease control device is prohibited. Grease removed from grease interceptors shall be wastehauled periodically as part of the operation and maintenance requirements for grease interceptors. Licensed wastehaulers or an approved recycling facility shall be used to dispose of FOG, including waste cooking oil. (3688-12/04; 3979-7/13)

 

14.56.050 FOG Wastewater Discharge
No person shall discharge, or cause to be discharged, any wastewater from any establishment, directly or indirectly into the sewer system without complying with this chapter. (3688-12/04)

 

14.56.060 FOG Fee
All food service establishments shall pay a monthly fee as set by resolution of the City Council to offset the costs of enforcing this chapter. (3688-12/04; 3979-7/13)

 

14.56.070 FOG Pretreatment Required
A.    All new food service establishments are required to install, operate and maintain an approved type and adequately sized grease control device necessary to maintain compliance with the objectives of this chapter. Existing food service establishments with no grease control device shall pay a FOG control fee surcharge, which shall be established by resolution of the City Council and shall be based on the estimated annual increase and costs of inspecting and monitoring the sewer system, resulting from the lack of a grease interceptor or grease-control device.

B.     The grease control device shall be adequate to separate and remove FOG contained in wastewater discharges from any establishment prior to discharge to the sewer system consistent with the grease interceptor requirements of this chapter. (3688-12/04; 3979-7/13)

 

14.56.080 Single Parcels
Property owners of commercial properties or their official designee(s) shall be responsible for the installation and maintenance of the grease interceptor serving multiple establishments that are located on a single parcel or for paying the FOG fee surcharge if there is no grease interceptor. (3688-12/04)

 

14.56.090 New Construction
This section shall not be interpreted to allow new construction, remodeling or change in operations without an approved gravity grease interceptor unless it is determined by the Building and Safety Division of the Planning and Building Department that it is impossible or impracticable to install or operate a gravity grease control interceptor for the subject facility under the provisions of this chapter. In instances whereby a gravity grease interceptor is impossible or impractical to install or operate, a properly sized hydromechanical grease interceptor can be installed in lieu of a gravity grease interceptor. (3688-12/04; 3979-7/13)

 

14.56.100 Sewer System Overflows and Cleanup Costs
Establishments found to have contributed to a sewer blockage, sewer system overflow (“SSO”), or any sewer system interferences resulting from the discharge of wastewater or waste containing FOG, may be ordered to install and maintain a grease interceptor, and may be subject to a plan to abate the nuisance and prevent any future health hazards created by sewer line failures and blockages, SSOs or any other sewer system interferences. If the City must act to contain and/or clean up an SSO caused by blockage of a private or public sewer lateral or system, or at the request of the property owner or operator of the establishment, or because of the failure of the property owner or establishment to abate the condition causing a threat to the health, safety, welfare, or property of the public, or because of an unauthorized discharge of FOG, the City’s costs for such abatement will be entirely borne by the property owner or operator of the establishment, and said cost will constitute a debt to the City and become due and payable upon the City’s request for reimbursement of such costs. Food facilities that experience two or more SSOs within a one-year period or three within a five-year period may be required at the behest of the Director of Public Works to install a FOG pretreatment unit if the food establishment does not have one or upgrade to a larger unit to prevent future SSOs. (3688-12/04; 3979-7/13)

 

14.56.110 Nuisance Declared
Sewer system overflows may cause threat and injury to public health, safety, and welfare of life and property and are hereby declared public nuisances. (3688-12/04)

 

14.56.120 Grease Interceptor Requirements
All grease interceptors must comply with all relevant City ordinances, and the current edition of the California Plumbing Code, if applicable.

A.    Grease interceptor sizing and installation shall conform to the current edition of the California Plumbing Code. Grease interceptors shall be constructed in accordance with the design approved by the City’s Director of Planning and Building and shall have a minimum of two compartments with fittings designed for grease retention and a sampling box.

B.     The grease interceptor shall be installed at a location where it shall be at all times easily accessible for inspection, cleaning, and removal of accumulated grease.

C.     Access manholes, with a minimum diameter of 24 inches, shall be provided over each grease interceptor chamber and sanitary tee. The access manholes shall extend at least to finished grade and be designed and maintained to prevent water inflow or infiltration. The manholes shall also have readily removable covers to facilitate inspection, grease removal, and wastewater sampling activities. (3688-12/04; 3979-7/13)

 

14.56.130 Grease Interceptor Maintenance Requirements
A.    Grease interceptors shall be maintained in efficient operating condition by periodic removal of the full content of the interceptor which includes wastewater, accumulated FOG, floating materials, sludge and solids.

B.     All existing and newly installed grease interceptors shall be maintained in a manner consistent with a maintenance frequency approved by the director pursuant to this section.

C.     No FOG that has accumulated in a grease interceptor shall be allowed to pass into any sewer lateral, sewer system, storm drain, or public right-of-way during maintenance activities.

D.    All establishments with grease interceptors may be required to submit data and information necessary to establish the maintenance frequency of the grease interceptors and shall be determined in one of the following methods:

1.     Grease interceptors shall be fully pumped out and cleaned at a frequency such that the combined FOG and solids accumulation does not exceed 25% of the total liquid depth of the grease interceptor. This is to ensure that the minimum hydraulic retention time and required available volume is maintained to effectively intercept and retain FOG discharged to the sewer system.

2.     All establishments with a grease interceptor shall maintain their grease interceptor not less than once every three months. Grease interceptors shall be fully pumped out and cleaned quarterly when the frequency described in paragraph 1 of this subsection has not been established. The maintenance frequency shall be adjusted when sufficient data have been obtained to establish an average frequency based on the requirements described in said paragraph. The City may change the maintenance frequency at any time to reflect changes in actual operating conditions. Based on the actual generation of FOG from an establishment, including food service establishments that generate FOG, the maintenance frequency may increase or decrease.

3.     If the grease interceptor, at any time, contains FOG and solids accumulation that does not meet the requirements described in paragraph 1 of this subsection, any establishment, including food service establishments generating FOG, shall be required to have the grease interceptor serviced immediately, such that all fats, oils, grease, sludge, and other materials are completely removed from the grease interceptor. If deemed necessary, the director may also increase the maintenance frequency of the grease interceptor from the current frequency.

4.     Food service establishments that operate on a seasonal basis can apply for a variance in writing to the Director of Public Works from the minimum grease interceptor service requirements provided that records for the past year indicate FOG accumulation levels of less than 25% of the total hydraulic volume of the grease interceptor. (3688-12/04; 3979-7/13)

 

14.56.140 Monitoring Facilities Requirements
A.    The City may require establishments to construct and maintain in proper operating condition at the establishment’s sole expense, flow monitoring, constituent monitoring and/or sampling facilities.

B.     The location of the monitoring or metering facilities shall be subject to approval by the director.

C.     Establishments may also be required by the director to submit waste analysis plans, contingency plans, and meet other necessary requirements to ensure proper operation and maintenance of the grease control device or grease interceptor and compliance with this chapter.

D.    Establishments shall not increase the use of water or in any other manner attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for treatment to achieve compliance with this chapter. (3688-12/04)

 

14.56.150 Best Management Practices Required
All establishments shall implement best management practices in its operation to minimize the discharge of FOG to the sewer system. (3688-12/04)

 

14.56.160 Requirements for Best Management Practices
A.    All establishments shall implement best management practices in accordance with the requirements and guidelines established by the City in an effort to minimize the discharge of FOG to the sewer system.

B.     All establishments shall be required, at a minimum, to comply with the following best management practices:

1.     Installation of Drain Screens. Drain screens shall be installed on all sanitary sewer drainage pipes in food preparation and kitchen areas.

2.     Segregation and Collection of Waste Cooking Oil. All employees must comply with all provisions of this chapter relating to segregation, disposal and recycling of FOG.

3.     Disposal of Food Waste. All food waste shall be disposed of directly into the trash or garbage, and not in sinks or toilets.

4.     Employee Training. Employees of the food service establishment shall be trained once every six months, and all new-hires must be trained within two weeks of employment, on the following subjects:

a.     How to “dry wipe” pots, pans, dishware and work areas before washing to remove grease.

b.     How to properly dispose of food waste and solids prior to disposal in trash bins or containers to prevent leaking and odors.

c.     The location and use of absorption products to clean under fryer baskets and other locations where grease may be spilled or dripped.

d.     How to properly dispose of grease or oils from cooking equipment into a grease receptacle such as a barrel or drum without spilling.

Training shall be documented and employee signatures retained indicating each employee’s attendance and understanding of the practices reviewed. Training records shall be available for review at any reasonable time by the director and/or his/her designee.

5.     Maintenance of Kitchen Exhaust Filters. Filters shall be cleaned as frequently as necessary to be maintained in good operating condition. The wastewater generated from cleaning the exhaust filter shall be disposed of properly.

6.     Kitchen Signage. Best management and waste minimization practices shall be posted conspicuously in the food preparation and dishwashing areas at all times. (3688-12/04; 3979-7/13)

 

14.56.170 Monitoring and Reporting Conditions
A.    Monitoring for Compliance with Ordinance and Reporting Requirements.

1.     The Director of Public Works may require of the establishment periodic reporting of the status of implementation of best management practices.

2.     The Director of Public Works may require visual monitoring at the sole expense of the establishment which generates FOG to observe the actual conditions of any establishments, including food service establishments that generate FOG, sewer lateral and sewer lines downstream.

3.     The Director of Public Works may require written reports from a certified laboratory for self-monitoring of wastewater constituents and FOG characteristics of the establishment needed for determining compliance with this chapter. Failure by the establishment to perform any required monitoring, or to submit monitoring reports required by the director constitutes a violation of this chapter and be cause for the City to initiate all necessary tasks and analyses to determine the wastewater constituents and FOG characteristics for compliance with any conditions and requirements specified in this chapter. The establishment shall be responsible for any and all expenses of the City in undertaking such monitoring analyses and preparation of reports.

4.     Other reports may be required such as compliance schedule progress reports, FOG control monitoring reports, and any other reports deemed reasonably appropriate by the director to ensure compliance with this chapter.

B.     Record Keeping Requirements. The establishment shall be required to keep all manifests, receipts and invoices of all cleaning, maintenance, grease removal of/from the grease control device, disposal carrier and disposal site location for no less than four years. The establishment shall, upon request, make the manifests, receipts and invoices available to the director or his/her designee. These records may include:

1.     A logbook of grease control device cleaning and maintenance practices.

2.     A record of best management practices being implemented including employee training.

3.     Copies of records and manifests of wastehauling interceptor contents and/or waste cooking oil disposal.

4.     Records of sampling data and sludge height monitoring for FOG and solids accumulation in the grease interceptors.

5.     Any other information deemed appropriate by the director to ensure compliance with this chapter.

C.     Falsifying Information or Tampering with Process. It shall be unlawful to make any false statement, representation, record, report, plan or other document that is filed with the City, or to tamper with or knowingly render inoperable any grease control device, monitoring device or method or access point required under this chapter. (3688-12/04; 3979-7/13)

 

14.56.180 Inspection and Sampling Conditions
A.    The Director of Public Works may inspect or order the inspection and sample the wastewater discharges of any establishment subject to this chapter to ascertain whether the intent of this chapter is being met and the establishment is complying with all requirements. The establishment shall allow the City access to the premises, during normal business hours, for purposes of inspecting the establishment’s grease control devices or interceptor, reviewing the manifests, receipts and invoices relating to the cleaning, maintenance and inspection of the grease control devices or interceptor.

B.     The Director of Public Works shall have the right to place or order the placement on the establishment’s property or other locations as determined by the director, such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling or metering operations. Where any establishment has security measures in force, the establishment shall make necessary arrangements so that representatives of the City shall be permitted to enter without delay for the purpose of performing their specific responsibilities.

C.     Persons or occupants of premises where wastewater is created or discharged shall allow the Director of Public Works, or City representatives, reasonable access to all parts of the wastewater generating and disposal facilities for the purposes of inspection and sampling during all times the discharger’s facility is open, operating, or any other reasonable time.

D.    In order for the Director of Public Works to determine the wastewater characteristics of the discharger for purposes of determining the annual use charge, the establishment shall make available for inspection and copying by the City all notices, monitoring reports, waste manifests, and records including, but not limited to, those related to wastewater generation, and wastewater disposal. All such records shall be kept for a minimum of four years.

1.     Sampling and inspection of any establishments, including food service establishments, that generate FOG shall be conducted in the time, place, manner, and frequency determined at the sole discretion of the director.

2.     Any sample taken from a sample point is considered to be representative of the discharge to the public sewer. (3688-12/04; 3979-7/13)

 

14.56.190 Right of Entry
No person shall interfere with, delay, resist or refuse entrance to City representatives attempting to inspect any facility involved directly or indirectly with a discharge of wastewater to the City’s sewer system. (3688-12/04)

 

14.56.200 Notification of Spill
A.    In the event an establishment is unable to comply with any permit condition or provision of this chapter due to a breakdown of equipment, accidents, or human error or the establishment has reasonable opportunity to know that his/her/its discharge will exceed the discharge provisions of this chapter, the discharger shall immediately notify the Utilities Division of the Public Works Department. If the material discharged to the sewer has the potential to cause or result in sewer blockages or SSOs, the discharger shall immediately notify the local health department or county, and the City.

B.     Confirmation of this notification shall be made in writing to the Director of Public Works no later than five working days from the date of the incident. The written notification shall state the date of the incident, the reasons for the discharge or spill, what steps were taken to immediately correct the problem, and what steps are being taken to prevent the problem from recurring.

C.     Such notification shall not relieve the establishment of any expense, loss, damage or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage or loss to the City or any other damage or loss to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the establishment of any fees or other liability which may be imposed by this chapter or other applicable law. (3688-12/04; 3979-7/13)

 

14.56.205 Private Sewer Lateral Maintenance Requirement
All private sewer laterals must be periodically cleaned at a minimum frequency that prevents SSOs from occurring or blockages of more than 25% of the flow capacity of the private sewer lateral. (3979-7/13)

 

14.56.210 Penalty Imposed on City by Regulatory Agencies
Any person who discharges a waste which causes or contributes to the City violating its discharge requirements established by any regulatory agency with jurisdiction over the City incurring additional expenses or suffering losses or damage to the facilities, shall be liable for any costs or expenses incurred by the City, including regulatory fines, penalties, and assessments made by other agencies or a court. (3688-12/04)

Title 15 HUNTINGTON BEACH OIL CODE
Chapter 15.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS
15.04.010 Title
This title shall be known and may be cited as the “City of Huntington Beach Oil Code.” “Code,” as referred to in this title, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, shall mean the City of Huntington Beach Oil Code, and it is incorporated into the Huntington Beach Fire Code pursuant to Section 17.56.450 of the Huntington Beach Municipal Code. (3037-5/90)

 

15.04.020 Purpose
It is hereby declared to be the purpose of this title to establish reasonable and uniform limitations, safeguards and controls for present and future operations related to drilling for and production of oil, gas, and other hydrocarbon substances within the City so that this activity may be conducted in harmony with other uses of land, thus protecting the people in the enjoyment and use of their property and providing for their comfort, health, safety and general welfare. (3037-5/90)

 

15.04.030 Administration
The Fire Chief, or his or her duly appointed representative, is hereby authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of this Code, except that requirements pertaining to fences, walls and gates, and idle wells shall be jointly enforced by the Fire Chief and the Director of Community Development, or their duly appointed representatives. (3037-5/90)

 

15.04.040 Oil Committee—Authorization and Duties
The City Council may from time to time appoint, on an ad hoc basis, an oil committee which shall include, but is not limited to, the following: a member of the City Council, a member of the Planning Commission, the City Attorney, Fire Chief, Director of Community Development, or the duly authorized agents of such members, a representative of the Western Oil and Gas Association, and a member of the Independent Oil Producers Association. A representative of the California DOGGR may be requested to serve as an ex officio member of the committee. The committee shall act as an advisory body to the City Council with regard to the contents of this Code and its revision. The City Councilmember serving on the committee shall serve as the committee chair. (3037-5/90, 4138-10/17)

 

15.04.045 Subsidence Committee—Authorization and Duties
The City Council may appoint a subsidence committee which shall include, but not be limited to, the following: a member of the City Council, a representative of the Huntington Beach Fire Department, a representative of the California DOGGR, a City geologic consultant, a representative of the Independent Oil Producers Association, and a representative from the major oil producing companies operating in the City and the subsidence areas. The City Councilmember may also serve as the chair of this committee. The committee will endeavor to make recommendations to the Fire Chief for the control of subsidence, and the Fire Chief will require mitigating actions to control subsidence and its negative effects. The City will endeavor to perform or cause to be performed on at least an annual basis a leveling survey of land within the City boundaries and the subsidence areas, and the results of this survey shall be provided to the subsidence committee members. This committee will evaluate the results of the surveys and the effectiveness of anti-subsidence measures which are in effect, and will formulate additional recommendations for subsidence control. (3037-5/90, 4138-10/17)

 

15.04.050 Right of Entry
A.    Whenever necessary to enforce any of the provisions of this Code, or whenever the Fire Chief has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building or upon any premises any condition contrary to the provisions of this Code, the Fire Chief, or his or her authorized representative, may enter such building or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed upon the Fire Chief by this Code. If such entry is refused, the Fire Chief shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry.

B.     No owner or occupant or any other person having charge, care, or control of any building or premises shall fail or neglect, after proper demand, to permit prompt entry therein by the Fire Chief for any purpose pursuant to this Code. (3037-5/90)

 

15.04.060 Operator’s Agent
Every operator of any well shall designate him or herself or an agent, or agents, who is a resident of the State of California, upon whom all orders and notices provided in this Code may be served in person, or by registered or certified mail. Every operator so designating such agent shall within 10 days notify the Fire Department in writing of any change in such agent or such mailing address unless operations within the City are discontinued. (3037-5/90)

 

15.04.070 Well Acquisition Notice
Every person who acquires any well, property, or site upon which oil operations exist, whether by purchase, transfer, assignment, conveyance, exchange, or otherwise, shall within 10 days after acquiring such well, property, or site, notify the Fire Department in writing of his or her ownership. The notice shall contain the following:

A.    The name and address of the person acquiring such well, property or site;

B.     The name and location of the well;

C.     The date of acquisition;

D.    A description of the properties and equipment transferred;

E.     The name and address of any person designated for service of notice. (3037-5/90)

 

15.04.080 Transfer of Operator
The operator of every well shall notify the Fire Department in writing of the transfer to another operator of such well for any purpose. Within 10 days after such transfer by reason of sale, assignment, transfer, conveyance or exchange, said notice shall be given and shall contain the following:

A.    The name and address of the person to whom such well was sold, assigned, transferred, conveyed or exchanged;

B.     The name and location of the well;

C.     The date of sale, assignment, transfer, conveyance or exchange;

D.    The date when possession was relinquished by the former operator, and a description of the properties and equipment transferred. (3037-5/90)

 

15.04.090 Inspections
The Fire Department may inspect annually, and at such other times as deemed by the Department to be necessary, each and every gas and oil well, whether producing, non-producing, or idle, and all injection wells. Such inspections shall be for the purpose of ascertaining compliance with the provisions of this Code and for initiating the corrective process for all violations encountered. (3037-5/90)

 

Chapter 15.08 DEFINITIONS
15.08.010 Definitions
The terms used in this title shall, unless the context indicates otherwise, have the respective meanings herein set forth.

“Abandonment” shall mean operations on any well which will bring the well to the level of compliance defined below under “properly abandoned well,” and the cleaning and restoration of the well site as required by the Huntington Beach Oil Code.

“Approved type” and “approved design” shall mean and include improvements, equipment or facilities of a type or design approved by the Community Development Department, Fire Department, or Public Works Department.

“Blowout preventer” shall mean a mechanical, hydraulic, pneumatic or other device or combination of such devices, secured to the top of a well casing, including valves, fittings, and control mechanism connected therewith which can be closed around the drill pipe or other tubular goods which completely closes the top of the casing and is designed for preventing blowout.

“Cellar” shall mean an excavation around and above the top joint of the casing of a well.

Completion of Drilling, Redrilling and Reworking. Drilling, redrilling and reworking is completed for the purpose of these regulations 30 days after the drilling, redrilling or reworking crew has been released through completion of its work or released by those so employing said crew.

“Department,” unless specified otherwise in this title, shall mean the Fire Department.

“Derrick” shall mean any portable framework, tower, mast, or structure which is required or used in connection with drilling, reworking, operating, or maintaining a well for the production of oil, gas, or other hydrocarbons from the earth.

“Desertion” shall mean the cessation of operation at a drill site without compliance with the provisions of this title relating to suspended operations, idle wells, or abandonment.

“Developed area” shall mean:

1.     Any area within 150 feet of an occupied residential, commercial, or office/professional structure which is itself within 100 feet of another occupied residential, commercial, or office/professional structure; or

2.     Any area within a public park, beach or recreation area which has been developed and opened for public use.

“DOGGR” shall mean the Division of Oil, Gas and Geothermal Resources of the Department of Conservation of the State of California.

“Drilling” shall mean digging or boring for the purpose of exploring for, developing, or producing oil, gas, or other hydrocarbons, or for the purpose of injecting water, steam or any other fluid or substance into the earth.

“Drilling equipment” shall mean the derrick, together with all parts of and appurtenances to such structure, every piece of apparatus, machinery, or equipment used or erected or maintained for use in connection with drilling.

“Drill site” shall mean the premises used during the drilling or reworking of a well or wells located thereon.

“Enhanced recovery” shall mean any production method which involves the injection of water, gas, steam, or any other substance into the earth for the purpose of extracting oil or other hydrocarbons.

“Fluids” shall mean any gas or liquid.

“Gas” shall mean any fluid, either combustible or noncombustible, which is produced in a natural state from the earth and which maintains a gaseous or rarefied state at standard temperature and pressure conditions. It shall also mean the gaseous components or vapors occurring in or derived from petroleum or natural gas.

“Injection well” shall mean a well or gas well used for the purpose of injecting water, wastewater, brine, hydrocarbons, steam or any other substance as a means of enhanced recovery, repressurization or disposal whether under pressure, gravity, or vacuum.

“Lessee” shall mean the person who has executed an oil or gas lease or sublease, or the owner of the land or minerals, or his or her heirs, or who conducts or carries on any oil or gas exploration, development and operation thereof, or any person so operating for him or herself or others.

“Lessor” shall mean the owner of surface or mineral rights who has executed a lease.

“Maintenance” shall mean and include the repair or replacement of machinery, equipment, apparatus, structure, facility, and parts thereof, used in connection with an oil operation site or drill site as well as any other work necessary to reduce fire hazards or any hazards to employees, public health, safety and welfare.

“Multiple well site” shall mean two or more wells within a fenced surface area primarily used for the drilling and production of oil. Where two wells are separated by a developable parcel, they will be considered separate sites unless both are enclosed by the same perimeter fence.

“New well” shall mean a new well bore or well hole established at the ground surface and shall not include redrilling or reworking of an existing well. An abandoned well shall be considered a new well for purposes of drilling, redrilling, or reworking.

“Oil field recovery heater” shall mean any steam generator, or air or water heater used in an oil field thermal recovery operation.

“Oil operation” shall mean the use or maintenance of any installation, facility or structure used, either directly or indirectly, to carry out or facilitate one or more of the following functions: drilling, redrilling, reworking and repair, production, processing, extraction, enhanced recovery, stimulation, abandonment, storage or shipping of oil or gas from the subsurface of the earth.

“Oil operation site” shall mean the physical location where oil operations are conducted except for any portion of the property which the surface owner is actively using for another purpose.

“Operator” shall mean any person drilling, maintaining, operating, pumping, or in control of any well. However, if the operator, as herein defined, is different from the lessee under an oil or gas lease of any premises affected by the provisions of this title, then such lessee shall also be deemed to be an operator. In the event that there is no oil or gas lease relating to any premises affected by this title, the owner of the fee estate in the premises shall also be deemed an operator.

Outer Boundary Line. Where several contiguous parcels of land in one or different ownerships are operated as a single oil or gas lease or operating unit, the term “outer boundary line” shall mean the exterior limits of the land included in the lease or unit. In determining the contiguity of any such parcel of land, no street, road or alley lying within the lease or unit shall be deemed to interrupt such contiguity.

“Owner” shall mean a person who owns a legal or equitable title in and to the surfaces of the drill site or oil operation site.

“Processing” shall mean the use of oil operations for gauging, recycling, compressor repressuring, injection, reinjection, dehydration, stimulation, separation (including but not limited to, separation of liquids from gas), shipping and transportation, and the gathering of oil, gas, other hydrocarbon substances, water or any combination thereof.

“Redrill” shall mean recompletion of an existing well by deepening or sidetrack operations extending more than 150 feet from the existing well bore.

“Reworking” shall mean recompletion of an existing well within the existing bore hole or by deepening or sidetrack operations which do not extend more than 150 feet from the existing well bore, or replacement of well liners or casings.

“Source of ignition” shall mean any flame, arc, spark or heated object or surface capable of igniting liquids, gases or vapors.

“Subsidence” shall mean the settling or sinking of the ground surface.

“Sump” shall mean any surface impoundment or excavated depression in the ground, lined or unlined, that is used for separating crude oil or other organic liquids, water, or solids. Sumps shall be classified as follows:

1.     Primary or first stage production sump is any sump which receives a stream of crude oil and produced water directly from oil production wells, field gathering systems, or tank systems.

2.     Secondary or second stage sump is any sump which receives a wastewater stream from one or more primary sumps, a free water knockout device, a wash tank, or from intermittent or emergency streams.

3.     Tertiary or third stage sump is any sump which receives a wastewater stream from the secondary sump or other separation process upstream of the tertiary sump.

“Tank” shall mean a container, covered or uncovered, used in conjunction with the drilling or production of oil, gas, or other hydrocarbons for holding or storing fluids.

“Well” shall mean any oil or gas well or well drilled for the production of oil or gas, or any well reasonably presumed to contain oil or gas. “Well” shall include injection wells used for the purpose of enhanced recovery, repressurization of the field, and disposal wells for the purpose of disposing of wastewater.

“Well servicing” shall mean the maintenance work performed within any existing well bore which does not involve drilling, redrilling or reworking. (3037-5/90, 4138-10/17)

 

Chapter 15.12 PERMITS AND FEES
15.12.010 Permit Required
Permits shall be obtained from the City of Huntington Beach for the oil operations, activities, or structures in the City limits of Huntington Beach, as required by this title. (3037-5/90)

 

15.12.020 Drilling or Redrilling Permit
Drilling or redrilling shall not be commenced unless or until:

A.    A copy of approval for such operations from the DOGGR is submitted to the Fire Chief; and

B.     A permit for such operations has been obtained from the Fire Department. Said permit is herein referred to as a “drilling permit.” (3037-5/90, 4138-10/17)

 

15.12.030 Renewal of Annual Permits
A.    On the first day of July after the issuance of a drilling permit and by the first day of July of each succeeding year, the well operator or his or her designated agent shall obtain an annual permit from the Fire Department until such time the well is abandoned as provided in this Code. Unless otherwise designated by the Fire Chief, this permit must be obtained in person, from Fire Department headquarters. This section applies to each and every oil and gas well, whether producing, non-producing, or idle, and to all injection wells. Acceptance of such permits grants to the Fire Department the right of entry to conduct routine inspections and to abate hazardous and emergency conditions.

 

B.     By accepting such permit, the applicant understands and agrees that the Fire Department reserves the right of entry to conduct routine inspections on the property and to abate hazardous and emergency conditions. (3037-5/90)

 

15.12.040 Annual Permit—Additional Requirements
A.    Fencing. Beginning July 1, 1983, an annual permit shall not be issued for any well in a developed area, as defined in this title, which is not enclosed by a fence which conforms to the specifications contained in Chapter 15.22 of this title, and the regulations of the DOGGR as contained in the California Administrative Code as they presently exist or may hereafter be amended. The Fire Chief may grant an extension of six months so that fencing requirements may be met if the area has become developed since the issuance of the last annual permit.

B.     Landscaping. Beginning July 1, 1983, an annual permit shall not be issued for any well in a developed area, as defined in this title, which has not been landscaped to conform to the requirements of this title and to a landscape plan, submitted for the review and approval of the Fire Chief and the Director of Community Development. The Fire Chief may grant an extension of six months so that landscaping requirements may be met if the area has become developed since the issuance of the last annual permit. Landscaping shall not be required for any well or tank which is not visible from a public street unless the well is within a public park, beach or recreation area which has been developed and open for public use. (3037-5/90, 4138-10/17)

 

15.12.050 Wastewater Annual Permit
Oil well wastewater shall not be discharged into the City’s sanitary sewer system unless a permit therefor is obtained each calendar year from the Public Works Department for every well discharging such wastewater into the system. (3037-5/90)

 

15.12.060 Reworking Permit
Reworking shall not be commenced unless or until:

A.    A copy of approval for such operation from the DOGGR is submitted to the Fire Chief; and

B.     A reworking permit for such operation has been obtained from the Fire Department. (3037-5/90, 4138-10/17)

 

15.12.070 Activation Permit
No idle well shall be activated without obtaining an activation permit in accordance with the provisions of this title. (3037-5/90)

 

15.12.080 Other Permits
Building, plumbing, electrical, mechanical, fire, demolition, and other permits shall be obtained from the appropriate department in accordance with the requirements of, and in the manner specified by Title 17 of the Huntington Beach Municipal Code. (3037-5/90)

 

15.12.090 Encroachment Permit
An encroachment permit shall be obtained from the Public Works Department when it is necessary to encroach over public property with any oil operation. (3037-5/90)

 

15.12.100 Fees Set by Resolution—Fee Payment Date
A.    Fees shall be required for the issuance of each of the permits required pursuant to this chapter. Such fees shall be set by resolution of the City Council. Said resolution shall also determine the conditions of payment and collection of the required fees.

B.     The annual inspection fee shall be due and payable on July 1st of each year and, if not paid, shall be delinquent on August 1st of the same year.

C.     The wastewater annual permit fee shall be due and payable on January 1st of each year and, if not paid, shall be delinquent on February 1st of the same year.

D.    The drilling, reworking, and activation fees shall be due and payable at the time of application therefor. (3037-5/90)

 

15.12.110 Permit Procedure
A use permit from the City’s Zoning Administrator must be obtained prior to application for a drilling or activation permit from the Fire Department. The use permit shall be filed with the Fire Department. The application for a use permit shall contain the following required information:

A.    The complete legal description of the property.

B.     Plans and engineering specifications of structures, drilling derricks, drilling masts, tank and high-pressure systems regulated by this Code. Applicant need not file plans and engineering specifications of standard derricks, masts and tanks when such standard plans and specifications are already on file and approved by the Fire Department.

C.     A plot plan showing the location of all oil facilities on the oil operation site including, but not limited to, wells, tanks, dikes, pipelines, heaters and storage sheds.

D.    The location of the nearest public road or alley, occupied residences and commercial structures within 500 feet of the well; also the location of all churches, hospitals, rest homes, schools, preschools, nurseries and places of public assembly within 500 feet of the well.

E.     An insurance policy in conformity with the provisions of this title.

F.     A landscape plan which meets the requirements of this title. Exemption: reworking permits and wells which are not in developed areas, as defined in this Code, shall be exempt from this requirement.

G.    A statement signed by the applicant under penalty of perjury declaring that he or she is duly authorized on behalf of the operator to sign and file the application certifying that the information contained in the application is true and correct.

H.    The permit application form shall contain, in bold face type, the following statement:

NOTICE

Any decision by the City on this application may be appealed to the City Planning Commission and to the City Council by the applicant, or by any interested person pursuant to the appeal procedure contained in the Huntington Beach Municipal Code.

(3037-5/90)

 

15.12.120 Permit Utilization
A.    No permit issued hereunder shall be valid unless utilization of the privileges granted thereby shall be commenced within 120 days from and after the date of issuance of the permit, or if after commencement, such activity is suspended or abandoned at any time for a period of 120 days.

B.     If no work has commenced and the 120-day commencement period has not expired, the permittee may request, in writing, an extension of 120 days, or a refund of 50% of the fees paid. No refund shall be allowed once a 120-day extension has been granted. (2491-7/81, 2708-12/84)

 

15.12.130 Additional Permits
The permits required by this title are in addition to and are not in lieu of any permit which may be required by any other provision of the Huntington Beach Municipal Code or by any other government agency. The Fire Department shall not issue any permit under this title until all other permits required by other municipal departments have been issued and all fees have been paid. (3037-5/90)

 

15.12.140 Persons Liable for Fees
Each of the persons whose duty it is to obtain any permit shall be declared and made to be jointly and severally liable for the payment of the fee required to be paid. (3037-5/90)

 

15.12.150 Penalty for Delinquency
Any delinquent fee shall be subject to a penalty in an amount equal to 10% of such fee. Such penalty shall be added thereto for each month for such delinquency, and shall be collected as part of such fee. (3037-5/90)

 

15.12.160 Grounds for Suspension or Revocation
The Fire Chief may suspend or revoke any permit issued by the Fire Department under the provisions of this Code upon finding any of the following:

A.    A permittee has failed, neglected or refused to perform, comply with or abide by any of the conditions of the permit;

B.     That permittee has failed or neglected or refused to comply with or abide by, or has in any way violated any of the provisions of this Code, or of any other ordinance of the City, or any other law, rule, or regulation either directly or indirectly, by reason of or in connection with or incidental to his or her conduct of oil operations;

C.     If any of the permittee’s operations or the continuance thereof upon the premises covered by the permit are a menace or hazard to public or private property, or to any interest of the City, or to the lives or safety of persons;

D.    Any of the permittee’s operations or the continuance thereof upon the premises covered by the permit constitutes a public nuisance as described in this title;

E.     Permittee has made a willful misrepresentation of facts in any application for any such permit, or in any report or record required by this Code to be filed or furnished by permittee.

The Fire Chief will set forth his or her findings in writing and send notice of the same to the permittee. Said notice will contain a date upon which the suspension or revocation takes effect. (3037-5/90)

 

15.12.170 Effect of Suspension or Revocation of Permit
No person shall carry on any operations performed under the terms of any permit during any period of permit suspension or revocation, or pending a judgment of the court of law upon any application for writ taken to review the decision or order of the City in suspending or revoking such permit; provided, however, that nothing therein contained shall be construed to prevent the performance of such operation as may be necessary in connection with a diligent and bona fide effort to cure and remedy the default or violation for which the suspension or revocation of the permit was ordered, or such operation as necessary for the safety of persons or as required by the DOGGR. (3037-5/90, 4138-10/17)

 

Chapter 15.16 INSURANCE
15.16.010 Type of Insurance
Operators shall maintain a general comprehensive insurance policy with sudden and accidental environmental pollution and spill clauses. The policy shall insure the City of Huntington Beach against all costs, charges and expenses incurred by it for clean up of oil or hydrocarbon substance spills, chemical spills, or other contamination to adjacent property resulting from operation of the well. The policy shall also insure against all costs, charges and expenses incurred for the clean up of spills or contamination on the well property if the Fire Chief determines the contamination to be a public nuisance or a damage to public health. The policy shall provide for a 30-day cancellation notice to the City in the event the policy will be terminated for any reason. Violation of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor punishable as set forth in Chapter 1.16 of the Huntington Beach Municipal Code. (3037-5/90)

 

15.16.020 Insurance Amount
The policy shall be in an amount equal to $500,000.00 per operator, or greater as specified by the City of Huntington Beach. (3037-5/90)

 

Chapter 15.20 DRILLING, OPERATION AND SAFETY REGULATIONS
15.20.010 Derricks
A.    All derricks and portable masts used for drilling or reworking shall meet the standards and specifications of the American Petroleum Institute as they presently exist or may be amended hereafter.

B.     All drilling, redrilling or reworking equipment shall be removed from the operation site within 30 days following the completion of drilling, redrilling or reworking unless otherwise permitted by the DOGGR. (3037-5/90, 4138-10/17)

 

15.20.020 Inspection
A.    If a well is to be drilled or reworked within 150 feet of any occupied structure or street right-of-way, after the operating equipment is securely in place and prior to commencement of drilling, the operator shall notify the Fire Department for the purpose of inspection. If an inspection is anticipated to be needed other than during normal working hours, the operator shall notify the Fire Department during a working day of the approximate time the operator will be ready for the inspection and shall not commence drilling until the Fire Department has made an inspection and given approval to commence. The Fire Department shall not approve the permit until all applicable provisions of the Huntington Beach Municipal Code have been met. The permit inspection shall be conducted within a reasonable time after receiving notice from the operator.

B.     Upon completion of drilling or reworking operations, the operator shall notify the Fire Department, and the Fire Department shall make an inspection of said drill site to ensure that provisions of this Code and/or any condition of the drilling or reworking permit have been met. (3037-5/90)

 

15.20.030 Well Setbacks
It shall be unlawful to drill any well, the center of which at the surface of the ground is located within 25 feet

A.    From any property boundary line, or

B.     From any recovery heater, oil storage tank, or source of ignition, or

C.     Within 100 feet of any building not necessary to the operation of the well, or

D.    Within 300 feet of any building used as a place of public assembly, institution or school, or

E.     Within 25 feet of any public street, road or highway or future street right-of-way. Setbacks shall conform to appropriate provisions of the Huntington Beach Municipal Code.

F.     The distances set out in subsections C, D and E of this section may be reduced if additional fire protection is provided in accordance with the requirements imposed by the Fire Chief. (3037-5/90)

 

15.20.040 Lights
No person shall permit or allow any lights located on any oil operation site to be directed in such a manner so that they shine directly on adjacent property or developed property in the general vicinity of the oil operation site. (3037-5/90)

 

15.20.050 Identification Signs
A.    An identification sign shall be prominently displayed and maintained in good condition on or in front of the perimeter fence next to the entrance of each well whether producing or not. Such sign shall be of durable material and unless otherwise required by the DOGGR, shall have a surface area of four square feet. The sign shall be lettered with minimum two inch letters and contain the following:

1.     Well name and number;

2.     Name of operator;

3.     Telephone number of two persons responsible for said well who may be contacted in case of an emergency.

B.     In the event the drill site or leasehold is fenced or walled, all entrances to said drill site or leasehold shall be posted with a like sign. In addition, a readily visible sign of durable material designating the well name and number shall be posted on or near each and every well within the drill site or leasehold. All freestanding signs and any sign larger than four square feet in surface area shall be subject to the provisions of Huntington Beach Municipal Code Article 961. (2491-7/81, 2759-5/85, 3037-5/90, 4138-10/17)

 

15.20.060 “No Smoking” Signs
“No smoking” signs of a durable material shall be posted and maintained in all locations approved or designated by the Fire Chief. Sign lettering shall be four inches in height and shall be red on a white background or white on a red background. (3037-5/90)

 

15.20.070 Waste Removal
Rotary mud, drill cutting, oil or liquid hydrocarbons and all other oil field wastes derived or resulting from, or connected with the drilling or reworking of any well shall be discharged into a portable steel tank. Waste materials shall be removed from the operation site within 30 days from the completion of drilling, and shall be processed or disposed of according to all applicable City, county, state, and federal regulations. (3037-5/90)

 

15.20.080 Unlined Sumps
Unlined sumps are prohibited. All such sumps shall be emptied, and all contaminated materials in and around the sump shall be excavated and processed or disposed of in accordance with all applicable City, county, state, and federal regulations. (3037-5/90)

 

15.20.085 Lined Sumps
A.    Primary lined sumps are prohibited, and all such sumps in use on the date of the adoption of this Code section shall be removed according to a program and time schedule approved by the Fire Department. Secondary and tertiary lined sumps are permitted if they have a minimum construction of three-inch thick reinforced concrete walls and bottom, and are maintained in sound condition.

B.     Covers for secondary and tertiary sumps, and wastewater separators shall meet all of the following requirements:

1.     The cover material shall be impermeable to volatile organic compounds and free from holes, tears, or openings.

2.     Drains on covers shall be provided with a slotted membrane fabric cover, or equivalent, over at least 90% of the open area.

3.     Gauging or sampling devices on the compartment cover shall be covered. The latter cover shall be kept closed, with no visible gaps between the cover and the compartment, except when the sampling device is being used.

4.     Hatches on covers shall be kept closed and free of gaps, except when required for inspection, maintenance or repair.

5.     The perimeter of a cover, except for rigid floating cover, shall form a seal free of gaps with the foundation to which it is attached.

C.     The provisions of this section shall not apply to pits or catch basins which exclusively receive, hold, or discharge rainwater, stormwater runoff, or non-contact cooling water, or to lined pits, cellars, and basins which are normally empty but used for the containment of spilled or leaked fluids. (3037-5/90)

 

15.20.090 Private Roads and Drill Sites
Prior to the commencement of any drilling operations, all private roads used for access to the drill site and the drill site itself shall be surfaced with crushed rock, gravel or decomposed granite and maintained to prevent dust and mud. The requirements governing surfacing of private roads may be altered at the discretion of the Fire Chief after consideration of: distances from public streets and highways; distances from adjoining and nearby property owners whose surface rights are not leased by the operator; the purpose for which the property of such owners is or may be used; topographical features; nature of the soil; and exposure to wind. (3037-5/90)

 

15.20.100 Oil Operations—Location—Time
A.    It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any work whatsoever on any oil operation site within 300 feet of a dwelling unit, church, hospital, rest home, school, preschool, nursery, or other place of public assembly, except in the following situations:

1.     When such work consists of minimum maintenance or surveillance on the oil operation site and such work is conducted between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.; or

2.     In case of emergency; or

3.     When so ordered by the DOGGR; or

4.     Where the work being so conducted is soundproofed and such soundproofing is approved by the Fire Chief.

B.     When operations are conducted beyond a distance of 300 feet from the aforementioned facilities, the Fire Chief may, in cases of disturbance such as excessive noise or vibration, require the oil operator to:

1.     Enclose the derrick and all drilling machinery used in connection with drilling of any well with fire resistant soundproofing material, which shall be maintained in a serviceable condition. No operations other than well logging shall be conducted outside the enclosure; or

2.     Enclose all drilling machinery used in connection with the drilling, redrilling, or reworking operations with fire resistant soundproofing material including the drilling mast or derrick, which shall be so enclosed on a minimum of three sides to a height of 20 feet, and conduct no operations between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. with the exception of circulation of fluids and well logging. The Fire Chief may allow other phases of the operation to continue during the restricted hours if, in his or her opinion, the noise is minimal, or if required by the DOGGR, or in the case of emergency. (3037-5/90, 4138-10/17)

 

15.20.110 Well Servicing Hours
It shall be unlawful to do any work between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in connection with pulling a well which is within 200 feet of any residential building, except where circulation in the well must be maintained, or the well would be endangered if the pulling work were not continued. (3037-5/90)

 

15.20.120 Wellhead Safety Equipment
On all wells there shall be connected to the casing string a two-inch steel valve with a rated working pressure equal to that of the corresponding casing head for the purpose of bleeding off casing pressure and for hookup to kill the well in case of an emergency. Violations of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor punishable as set forth in Chapter 1.16 of the Huntington Beach Municipal Code. (3037-5/90)

 

15.20.130 Blowout Prevention
In all cases protection shall be provided to prevent blowout during oil operations as required by and in conformance with the requirements of the DOGGR and the safety orders for drilling and production of the State Division of Industrial Safety. Violations of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor punishable as set forth in Chapter 1.16 of the Huntington Beach Municipal Code. (3037-5/90, 4138-10/17)

 

15.20.135 Belt Guards Required
Belt guards shall be required over all drive belts used on oil field equipment. Guarding shall be as required by Title 8 of the California Administrative Code, subchapter 14, Section 6622. (2708-12/84, 3037-5/90)

 

15.20.140 Cellars
The following regulations shall apply to cellars:

A.    Every cellar shall be constructed in accordance with the Huntington Beach Building Code and with the requirements as they now exist, or are hereafter amended, of the California Division of Industrial Safety.

B.     Except during drilling and servicing operations, such cellars shall be kept covered, free from water, oil drilling fluids, rubbish, debris, and other substances.

C.     All multiwell cellars exceeding three feet in depth and 25 feet in length shall have two separate means of exit or entrance. If the cellar exceeds 200 feet in length, a third means of entrance and exit shall be provided. The depth of such cellars shall be the vertical distance between the lowest point of the floor of such cellar and the adjacent ground level.

D.    Multiwell cellars shall have a steel grate or covering with no unobstructed openings in excess of three inches. (3037-5/90)

 

15.20.150 Fence Permit Required
No fence or wall shall be constructed to enclose any oil well site, oil operation site or drilling island site in whole or in part until a permit therefor shall have been issued by the Community Development Department. As a condition of issuing such permit, the Director of Community Development or the Fire Chief may impose thereon any conditions as are necessary in the interest of the public safety, and such fence or wall shall be constructed in accordance with such conditions. These fence, gate and wall standards may be modified subject to the approval of the DOGGR and the Fire Chief upon a determination by the Fire Chief that alternate means of restricting access have been provided and that said alternate means are as effective or more effective than these fence standards. The provisions relating to dedication of right-of-way and construction of improvements shall not be applicable to the issuance of such permit. All such enclosures shall be subject to the setback requirements contained in this title. (3037-5/90, 4138-10/17)

 

15.20.160 Fences
All oil operation sites, oil heaters and tanks, and idle wells shall be completely enclosed by a chain link fence, masonry wall, or other approved fencing material according to City requirements in combination with all applicable DOGGR requirements.

A.    All chain link fence enclosures shall have a minimum height of six feet, topped with three strands of barbed wire, spaced four inches apart.

B.     There shall be at least one gated opening for access, placed in a nonhazardous position and said gate(s) shall be kept locked at all times while left unattended by security or service personnel.

C.     There shall be no opening below the fence greater than four inches.

D.    Support posts shall be set in concrete and shall be imbedded into the ground to a depth sufficient to maintain the stability of the fence as approved by the Building Division, but in no event less than 12 inches.

E.     Fencing constructed of individual chain link panels shall be securely latched, pinned or hinged to prevent unauthorized persons from gaining access to such operation or drilling site.

F.     The chain link fabric shall be 11-gauge galvanized steel and may be coated with vinyl or plastic material.

G.    Posts and rails shall be standard galvanized, welded pipe. Fences constructed after January 1, 1984 shall use pipe of the following outside diameters:

 

 

 

End posts:

2 3/8

 

 

Line posts:

1 7/8

 

 

Top and bottom rails:

1 3/8

Movable panels around wells shall use 1 3/38 inch galvanized welded pipe for all frame members.

H.    All pipe and other ferrous parts, except chain link fabric, shall be galvanized inside and outside.

I.      Tension rods shall be 3/8 inch round steel bolt stock. Adjustable tighteners shall be turnbuckle or equivalent having a six inch minimum take-up. Tension bars shall have a minimum thickness of 1/4 x 3/4 inch. (3037-5/90, 4138-10/17)

 

15.20.165 Temporary Fences
Except for pulling rigs, all temporary and/or portable oil equipment shall be enclosed for the duration of the operation with temporary fencing to meet the standards contained in this chapter, except for support posts which need not be anchored in more than two locations. (3037-5/90)

 

15.20.170 Masonry Wall Specifications
All masonry walls used to enclose in whole or in part any oil well site, oil operation site or drilling island site shall be constructed in accordance with standard engineering practices and shall meet the following specifications:

A.    The wall shall be of a design compatible with the facilities, buildings and structures on and adjacent to the site.

B.     The wall shall be at least six feet in height, topped with three strands of barbed wire, spaced four inches apart.

C.     It shall be constructed in accordance with the provisions of the Huntington Beach Building Code.

D.    Barbed wire may be excluded from masonry perimeter walls if each individual pumping unit, oil heater, tank, and each piece of other oil operation equipment is protected with a fence that meets the standards of this Code. (3037-5/90)

 

15.20.180 Gate Specifications
For oil operations and drill sites, all chain link fences and masonry walls shall be equipped with at least one gated section. The gated section shall meet the following specifications:

A.    Each gated section shall be 12 feet wide and be composed of two gates, each of which is six feet wide, or one sliding gate 12 feet wide. The gates shall latch and lock in the center of the 12-foot span, and each gate shall be topped with three strands of barbed wire, spaced four inches apart.

B.     The gates shall be of chain link construction which meets the applicable specifications or of other approved materials which, for safety reasons, shall be at least as secure as chain link fence.

C.     The gates shall be provided with a combination catch and locking attachment device for a padlock, and shall be kept locked except when being used for access to the site.

D.    Hinges shall be heavy duty malleable iron or steel industrial service type with a 180 degree swing. Sliding gates must be made of heavy duty malleable iron or steel industrial service type. (3037-5/90)

 

15.20.190 Operation of Oil Field Recovery Heaters
All oil field recovery heaters shall have a valid State of California “permit to operate” and shall be equipped with and operated by safety controls which monitor certain essential operating conditions and which shall shut down the boiler and require manual restart when any of the essential conditions vary from prescribed limits. An emergency shutdown switch shall be installed a minimum of 50 feet from the oil field recovery heater and shall be identified as such by a sign with letters not less than three inches high. (3037-5/90)

 

15.20.200 Notification of Installation
Prior to the installation and operation of any oil field recovery heater, the person or entity proposing to install and operate such heater shall so notify the Fire Department. All heaters shall be installed and operated in compliance with the applicable provisions of this chapter. (3037-5/90)

 

15.20.210 Installation
The distance between oil field recovery heaters and residential, commercial, and public assembly buildings shall be as follows:

A.    Oil-fired recovery heaters: 500 feet. The distance may be reduced to 100 feet when the heater is enclosed by a six-foot high masonry wall.

B.     Gas-fired recovery heaters: 300 feet. The distance may be reduced to 50 feet when the heater is enclosed by a six-foot high masonry wall.

C.     All oil field recovery heaters shall be separated a minimum of 25 feet from any oil storage tank, wellhead or public right-of-way.

D.    Oil field recovery heaters being operated in a developed area, as defined in this title, shall be completely fenced, including the wellhead, with a six foot high chain link or other approved fence complete with two self-closing gates installed on opposite sides of the enclosure. Steam lines from the heater to the wellhead shall be buried to a depth of one foot or wrapped with a minimum of one-inch thick approved pipe insulation. (3037-5/90)

 

15.20.220 Soundproofing
Where an oil field recovery heater is operated within a developed area, the Fire Chief may, in cases of disturbance such as excessive noise or vibration, require the operator to:

A.    Enclose the heater with a fire-resistant, soundproofing material which shall be maintained in a serviceable condition; or

B.     In the case of emergency or when it has been determined by the Fire Chief that the noise or vibration is detrimental to the health, safety or welfare of the surrounding neighborhood, the Fire Chief may order the operator to cease operations. (3037-5/90)

 

15.20.225 Pumping Units
All pumping units located within a developed area shall be operated by electric motors. Electric motors shall be utilized on all other miscellaneous equipment necessary to the oil operation. Power for all electrical equipment shall be from the local electric utility distribution system and shall not be generated on site. (3037-5/90)

 

15.20.230 Muffling Exhaust
It shall be unlawful for any person, owner or operator to discharge into the open air the exhaust from any steam engine, internal combustion engine, stationary or mounted on wheels, used in connection with the drilling of any well or for use on any production equipment unless it is equipped with an exhaust muffler, or mufflers or an exhaust muffler box constructed of noncombustible materials sufficient to suppress noise and prevent the escape of obnoxious gases, fumes or ignited carbon or soot. (3037-5/90)

 

15.20.240 Public Nuisance Declared
The foregoing sections notwithstanding, no person shall conduct any oil operation in a manner that would create a noise, odor, or vibration detrimental to the health, safety or welfare of the surrounding neighborhood or any considerable number of persons. Such operation is hereby declared to constitute a public nuisance. (3037-5/90)

 

15.20.250 Fire Prevention—Sources of Ignition
A.    All electrical equipment used, installed or maintained within 50 feet of a drilling rig, or within 25 feet of any other oil operation shall be installed and maintained in accordance with all applicable state and municipal regulations.

B.     No boiler, pass-through boiler, steam generator, direct-fired heater, gas or oil-burning device, or other open flame shall be located closer than 25 feet to a wellhead or oil storage tank. (3037-5/90)

 

15.20.260 Oil Storage Tanks
All tanks used for the storage, production of oil, or the disposal of wastewater shall conform to the following:

A.    A.P.I. Specifications. All tanks shall conform to American Petroleum Institute (A.P.I.) specifications unless other specifications are approved by the Fire Chief.

B.     Structural Requirements. If, as determined by the Fire Chief, any structure used or operated in connection with any oil operation is structurally unsound to the point of being hazardous, he or she may order the person in charge of such oil operation to provide licensed civil or structural engineers’ analysis pertaining to the adequacy of said structure.

C.     Dikes and Capacity Requirements. All persons owning, operating or having control of storage tanks, clarifying tanks or tanks used in connection with the production of oil shall construct and maintain dikes around said tanks. Drainage dikes and walls shall be constructed and maintained to meet the standards of the National Fire Protection Association as they presently exist or may hereafter be amended. (3037-5/90)

 

15.20.270 Tank Setbacks
All new tanks, replacement tanks, and permanent structures shall be set back pursuant to the standards of the National Fire Protection Association as they presently exist or may hereafter be amended, but in all cases shall be at least a minimum of 25 feet from an ultimate right-of-way as defined in the Huntington Beach Municipal Code.

EXCEPTION: the replacement of existing oil storage tanks which pose a hazard of bursting or of severe leakage or of any other danger to persons or other property, and which cannot meet the required setback limits, may be authorized by the Fire Chief, but in no case may the replacement tank be of a larger capacity, diameter, or height than the existing tank. (3037-5/90)

 

15.20.280 Setbacks—General
A.    With the exception of pumping units, no oil production equipment over 42 inches high shall be located or relocated within the safety-sight angle at street intersections.

B.     The safety-sight angle shall be triangular and formed by measuring to a point 25 feet along the front and exterior side lot lines of a corner lot from the point of intersection of said lines and striking a hypotenuse between the two points, as illustrated in the diagram included herein. (3037-5/90)



 

15.20.290 Removal of Portable Pulling Masts and Gin Poles
All well servicing equipment, including portable pulling masts and gin poles, shall be removed from the leasehold, oil operation site or drill site within seven days after completion of a well servicing operation. (3037-5/90)

 

15.20.300 Pipelines
Within six months after adoption of this chapter, all pipelines in developed areas, as defined in this title, which are not enclosed within a fence shall be placed underground or covered with materials approved by the Fire Chief. Such covering shall be maintained in a neat, orderly, secure manner. (3037-5/90)

 

15.20.310 Storage of Equipment
A.    Developed Areas. In “developed areas,” equipment which is not essential to the everyday operation of an oil production, storage, or shipping site shall not be stored upon the site unless the following conditions are met:

1.     The site is provided with complete perimeter screening which shields the equipment from public view, and

2.     Such storage is a permitted use in the base zoning of the site, and

3.     A minimum 25-foot clear space is maintained around the perimeter of all active equipment tanks, pumps, and pipelines within the site, and

4.     Unobstructed fire equipment road access is maintained within 100 feet of all active equipment, tanks, pumps, and pipelines within the site.

B.     Undeveloped Areas. In “undeveloped areas,” equipment which is not essential to the everyday operation of an oil production, storage, or shipping site shall not be stored upon the site unless the following conditions are met:

1.     The site is completely enclosed by a fence which conforms to the provisions of this Code, and

2.     Such storage is a permitted use in the base zoning of the site, and

3.     A minimum 25-foot clear space is maintained around the perimeter of all active equipment, tanks, pumps, and pipelines within the site, and

4.     Unobstructed fire equipment road access is maintained within 100 feet of all active equipment, tanks, pumps, and pipelines within the site. (3037-5/90)

 

15.20.320 Plot Plan of Pipeline Locations
Within six months after adoption of this chapter, each operator shall submit to the Fire Department a plot plan indicating the approximate location of all active onshore pipelines used in his or her operation which are located off the leasehold, including wastewater, and trunk and gathering lines to transport crude oil or petroleum products. (3037-5/90)

 

15.20.350 Emergency Actions
The Fire Chief may authorize any actions deemed necessary to abate or control hazardous conditions on oil or natural gas operation sites, including the emergency shutdown of all types of wells and equipment. (3037-5/90)

 

15.20.400 Noise Control
Chapter 8.40 of the Huntington Beach Municipal Code is adopted and incorporated into this Code by reference, and its provisions are enforceable as part of this Code in all operations related to oil production, storage, processing and transportation. (3037-5/90)

 

Chapter 15.22 SCREENING AND LANDSCAPING
15.22.010 Screening—Developed Areas
On or before July 1, 1983, all oil wells and tanks located in developed areas, as defined in this title, shall be screened by a fence enclosure constructed of one of the following materials:

A.    A solid masonry wall.

B.     A chain link fabric with three and one-half inch mesh interwoven with redwood slats. The Director of Community Development may approve the use of other opaque materials for use with chain link fabric if he or she finds such materials are compatible with surrounding uses and effectively screen the oil operation.

C.     Any other material, compatible with surrounding uses, which effectively screens the oil operation site, approved by the Director of Community Development.

D.    All fencing, masonry walls, redwood slatting, or other comparable materials for use with chain link fabric shall be of a solid neutral color, compatible with surrounding uses, and maintained in a neat, orderly, and secure condition. Neutral colors shall include sand, grey, and unobtrusive shades of green, blue and brown, or other colors approved by the Fire Chief. (3037-5/90)

 

15.22.020 Screening—Drilling, Redrilling and Activation
Within 60 days of completion of drilling or redrilling, or within 60 days of activation of an idle well if such well is located in a developed area, as defined in this title, such well shall be screened by a fence enclosure which conforms to the requirements of this chapter, the provisions set out elsewhere in this Code, and the regulations of the DOGGR contained in the California Administrative Code as they presently exist or may hereafter be amended. (3037-5/90, 4138-10/17)

 

15.22.030 Screening Setbacks
Minimum setbacks for all screening shall meet the provisions of the Huntington Beach Municipal Code applicable to the oil operation site but in no case shall be less than five feet from the ultimate right-of-way of any public street. The Director of Community Development may reduce such required setbacks where an oil well or other necessary equipment is or must be located in the setback areas, in which case special landscaping requirements for screening purposes may be imposed. (3037-5/90)

 

15.22.040 Landscaping for Developed Areas—Drilling and Activation
Prior to the issuance of any drilling or activation permit, a landscaping plan which meets the requirements of this chapter shall be submitted for review and approval by the Fire Chief and the Director of Community Development. Within 60 days after completion of drilling or redrilling or within 60 days after activation of an idle well, any oil operation site in a developed area, as defined in this title, shall be landscaped in conformance with the plan submitted and approved according to the specifications contained in this chapter. Landscaping shall not be required for any well which is not visible from a public street unless the well is within a public park, beach or recreation area which has been developed and open for public use. (3037-5/90)

 

15.22.045 Landscape Irrigation
When landscaping is required by this Code, the landscaped areas are to be irrigated by an automatic watering system which provides complete coverage to all landscaped areas. All supply and distribution piping shall be located underground. All landscaping shall be maintained in a neat, clean, and healthy condition. Maintenance shall include proper pruning, mowing, disease and rodent control, weeding, litter removal, fertilizing, watering, and plant replacement as necessary. (3037-5/90)

 

15.22.050 Landscaping—Minimum Area
The minimum area required to be landscaped at an oil operation site shall be the front and exterior side yard setbacks for the district. Any area enclosed by a fence meeting the requirements of this title shall be excluded from the minimum area to be landscaped. (2491-7/81, 2708-12/84)

 

15.22.060 Landscaping—Minimum Requirements
A.    The minimum number of trees and shrubs per square foot shall be as follows:

 

Square Footage of
Minimum Landscape

Minimum Trees

Minimum Shrubs

0-149

1

3

150-249

2

6

250-349

3

9

350-449

4

12

450-549

5

15

550-649

6

18

650-749

7

21

750-849

8

24

850-949

9

27

950-1499

10

30

l500-1999

12

36

2000 -

As determined by the Director of Community Development

 

B.     The Director of Community Development may reduce the number of trees and shrubs if, in his or her opinion, the topography, configuration or existing vegetation on a site warrants such reduction.

C.     Trees shall be at least 15 gallon size, and shrubs shall be at least five gallon size. Minimum landscaping shall also include suitable ground cover. An automatic irrigation system may be required by the Fire Chief when it is necessary to sustain and promote healthy plant life.

D.    The following plants are acceptable for use in landscaping, provided, however, that the Director of Community Development may approve other plants which he or she finds adaptable to the particular site and provide effective screening of the oil operation:

1.     Trees. Eucalyptus Camaldulensis (Red River gum); Eucalyptus Sideroxylon (Red Iron bark); Metrosideros Tomentosa (New Zealand Christmas tree); Myoporum Laetum (Myoporum tree).

2.     Shrubs. Nerium Oleander (oleander); Escallonia Fradesi (Pink Princess); Metrosideros Tomentosa (New Zealand Christmas tree—bush form); Myoporum Laetum (Myoporum—bush form); Photinia Fraseri (Red Leaf Photinia); Raphiolepis Indica Springtime (Pink Indian hawthorn); Carissa Grandiflora (natal plum); Moraea Irioidies (fortnight lily); hemerocallis hybrids (day lily); Agapanthus Africanus (Lily of the Nile); Liriope Gigantea (turf lily).

3.     Groundcover. Mesembryanthemum (ice plant); Osteospermum; Fruticosum (African daisy); Gazania Splendens (Gazania); Hedera Helix Hahnil (needle point ivy).

E.     When feasible, all plant holes shall be twice normal size, and the planting medium shall be of good quality, imported soil. All landscaping shall be maintained in a neat, healthy condition.

F.     Dead vegetation and litter shall not be allowed to gather. The replacement of dead trees and other vegetation shall be made in conformance with the approved plan within 30 days of written notice. (2491-7/81, 2708-12/84)

 

Chapter 15.24 CLEANUP AND MAINTENANCE
15.24.010 Cleanup After Well Servicing
After completion of well servicing or abandonment operations, the responsible party shall pump out the cellar, clean the drill site area and repair all damage to public property caused by such servicing or abandonment operations. (3037-5/90)

 

15.24.020 Oil Spill Plans Required
An oil spill contingency plan or spill plan shall be required for every oil operation site, and available for inspection by the Fire Chief at any time. Plans prepared pursuant to applicable provisions of the California Administrative Code as they presently exist, or may hereafter be amended, shall satisfy the requirements of this section. (3037-5/90)

 

15.24.030 Cleanup After Spills, Leaks and Malfunctions
After any spill, leak or malfunction, the responsible party shall remove or cause to be removed to the satisfaction of the Fire Chief all oil and waste materials from any public or private property affected by such spill, leak or malfunction. (3037-5/90)

 

15.24.040 Releasing of Fluids
A.    No person shall deposit, place, discharge or cause or permit to be placed, deposited or discharged any oil, naphtha, petroleum, asphaltum, tar, hydrocarbon substances, or any refuse including wastewater and brine from any oil operation, or the contents of any container used in connection with an oil operation in, into, or upon a public right-of-way, a storm drain, ditch or sewer; a sanitary drain or sewer; any portion of the Pacific Ocean or any body of water; or any private property in this City. Violations of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor punishable as set forth in Chapter 1.16 of the Huntington Beach Municipal Code.

B.     Exception. Treated wastewater and brine may be discharged either into a sanitary sewer if a permit is obtained for such discharge in accordance with the provisions of this title, or into an outfall approved by the Regional Water Quality Control Board. (3037-5/90)

 

15.24.050 Freedom From Debris
All property on which an oil operation site is located, and the area immediately adjacent thereto and under the control of the oil operator, shall at all times be kept free of the following:

A.    Debris;

B.     Pools of oil, water or other liquids;

C.     Weeds;

D.    Brush;

E.     Trash, or other waste material. (3037-5/90)

 

15.24.060 Painting
A.    All production equipment on the oil operation site shall be kept painted and maintained at all times, including pumping units, storage tanks, heaters, and buildings or structures. Paint shall be of a neutral color, compatible with surrounding uses. Neutral colors shall include sand, grey and unobtrusive shades of green, blue and brown, or other colors approved by the Fire Chief. All production equipment shall be painted a neutral color, as defined herein, within six months after the adoption of this chapter.

B.     Exceptions. The color requirements of this section shall not apply where there are continuing and ongoing multiple drilling operations which:

1.     Do not have public access;

2.     Are not adjacent to existing residential property or property that is generally planned or zoned for residential use; and

3.     Are screened from public view. (3037-5/90)

 

15.24.070 Gas Emission or Burning Prohibited
No person shall allow or cause or permit gases from production operations to be vented into the atmosphere or to be burned by open flame except as provided by law or as permitted by the DOGGR and the appropriate air pollution control district. (3037-5/90, 4138-10/17)

 

15.24.080 Performance of Maintenance and Repair
Maintenance and repair of oil operation equipment and sites shall be performed in a timely and workmanlike manner after notice. (3037-5/90)

 

Chapter 15.28 WASTEWATER SYSTEM
15.28.010 Wastewater System
For the purpose of handling industrial wastes from oil and gas wells, including wastewater and brine, the Public Works Department shall issue a sewer connection permit whenever such waste is to be deposited into the City’s sanitary sewer system, provided such industrial waste does not contain more than 100 milligrams/liter of any crude, distilled or refined petroleum products, mud, rotary mud, oils, or other residual products mentioned in Orange County Sanitation District discharge regulations. Such industrial waste shall be processed through a clarification system approved by the Fire Department. At no time shall discharge water be over 140 degrees Fahrenheit at point of entry to the sewer. Violations of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor punishable as set forth in Chapter 1.16 of the Huntington Beach Municipal Code. (3037-5/90)

 

15.28.020 Sewer Connection Permit—Application Fee
No connection shall be made to the City’s sanitary sewer system until a sewer connection permit has been obtained from the Public Works Department. An application for such sewer connection permit shall be filed with the department together with a fee per sewer connection, as established by resolution of the City Council. (3037-5/90)

 

15.28.030 Contents of Application—Property Description
Said application shall contain a description of the property upon which said water or wastewater is located, the name of the owner of the property, the point where the water will be discharged into said sanitary sewer, the location of the clarifying plant, type of plant to be used, including plans and specifications approved by the Public Works Department and the method of clarifying and settling the objectionable substances from said water, including plans and specifications of wastewater settling systems. (3037-5/90)

 

15.28.040 Damages
The permittee shall be responsible for all damages to City property. (3037-5/90)

 

15.28.050 Discharge Line
The discharge line shall have an approved gate valve and shall be provided with an approved method of observing or testing the wastewater for impurities. (3037-5/90).

 

15.28.060 Rules for Laying Drainpipe to Sanitary Sewer
The method of installation for the discharge line from the clarifying tank, including all pipe and fittings, shall be in accordance with the provisions of the Huntington Beach Plumbing Code. No sewer connection to the City’s sanitary sewer system shall be made by other than a licensed plumbing contractor. (3037-5/90)

 

Chapter 15.32 NONPRODUCING AND IDLE WELLS
15.32.010 Production Report—Filing Dates
All well operators shall file with the Fire Department, during the first 30 days of each quarter, for the last preceding calendar quarter, a statement in such form as the Fire Chief may designate, showing:

A.    The amount of oil and gas produced from each well during the period indicated and the number of days during which fluid was produced from each well.

B.     The number of wells drilling, reworking, producing, idle, and owned or operated by such person.

C.     In lieu of the above, the operators may submit to the Fire Chief copies of State of California DOGGR Form 110 report, as submitted to the State DOGGR.

D.    Owners or operators of all oil and/or natural gas wells, oil or natural gas storage facilities, or oil or natural gas transportation equipment shall be required to meter fluids produced or transported as ordered by the Fire Chief to verify production of wells under the jurisdiction of the City of Huntington Beach.

E.     The Fire Chief may require any additional actions he or she determines necessary for verification of well production. (3037-5/90, 4138-10/17)

 

15.32.020 Production Report—Failure
Failure to report production as required in this chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor punishable as set forth in Chapter 1.16 of the Huntington Beach Municipal Code. (3037-5/90)

 

15.32.030 Production Report—False
Filing a false, fraudulent, or intentionally inaccurate report shall constitute a misdemeanor punishable by fine, imprisonment or both. (3037-5/90)

 

15.32.035 Production Standards
A.    Any well which does not produce in any calendar quarter at least 90 barrels of crude oil or other hydrocarbon substances, or at least 100,000 cubic feet of natural gas, shall be declared “nonproducing.” If such well fails to produce the required amounts for two successive calendar quarters, it shall be declared idle. The following classifications of wells are EXEMPTED from these minimum production requirements:

1.     Wells which are part of an identified and legitimate “enhanced recovery project”;

2.     Wells which are part of a City authorized consolidated recovery project;

3.     Wells utilized for the injection of fluids;

4.     Wells deemed by the Fire Department and the DOGGR to be necessary to prevent the dangerous repressurization of a mineral field;

5.     Wells which, to the satisfaction of the Fire Chief, are demonstrated to have a legitimate future use as a part of an enhanced recovery project or consolidation project.

B.     The Fire Chief may suspend minimum production requirements during periods of extremely low market prices for crude oil or natural gas. Wells will be exempt from production standards for each calendar quarter or portion thereof for the duration of such periods.

C.     All wells which are exempted from production standards for any reason must be shown to be mechanically sound, patent, and operable. (3037-5/90, 4138-10/17

 

15.32.050 Idle Wells
When a well is determined to be an “idle” well, the surface area of the well site shall be cleaned pursuant to the following:

A.    Notice shall be sent by the Fire Chief, by registered or certified mail, to the owner of the fee simple interest in the land on which such well is situated as shown on the last equalized assessment roll, and to the owner of the mineral rights on which such well is situated as shown on the last equalized assessment roll, and to the operator of such well as indicated on either the records of the State DOGGR, Department of Conservation or the records of the Fire Department. Once the notice is sent, the well or wells specified therein may not be activated unless the requirements of Chapter 15.40 of this Code are adhered to and satisfied.

B.     The notice shall indicate the name and location of the well in question and a statement by the Fire Chief of the reasons why such well is an idle well, as defined in this title. (3037-5/90, 4138-10/17)

 

15.32.060 Site Restoration—Procedure
Within 30 days after notice has been mailed, the parties to whom the notice has been sent shall clean and restore the drill site and surface in conformity with the following requirements:

A.    The derrick and all appurtenant equipment thereto existing above the surface of the ground level shall be removed from the drill site.

B.     The drilling and production equipment, tanks, towers and other surface installations shall be removed from the drill site or tank farm site.

C.     All concrete, pipe (except tubing head), wood and other foreign materials existing above or on the surface of the ground level shall be removed from the drill site or tank farm site.

D.    All oil, waste oil, refuse or waste material including debris, junk, trash and accumulated piles of miscellaneous material shall be removed from the drill site or tank farm site.

E.     The rat hole and all holes, depressions, and sumps shall be cleaned out of all foreign material (except well cellar walls) regardless of depth and filled and packed with clean compactable soil.

F.     All materials removed pursuant to the requirements set forth in this section shall be processed or disposed of in compliance with all City, county, state and federal regulations.

G.    The wellhead shall be capped with a blind flange and a minimum of two-inch or larger steel bleeder valve shall be installed which can be locked in a closed position. (3037-5/90)

 

15.32.085 Abandonment
The operator of any well that has been declared idle shall abandon said well within six months of receiving an order from the Fire Chief to abandon. (3037-5/90)

 

15.32.090 Abandonment Requirements—Development or Redevelopment
A.    No building or grading permit may be issued for property upon which there are any active or abandoned Wells without the approval of the Fire Code Official. To obtain the approval of the Fire Code Official, the property owner or designee must submit an application to the Fire Department for review and approval prior to issuance of any building or grading permit. The Fire Code Official will not approve the application unless:

1.     Each Well on the property is abandoned or reabandoned to current DOGGR standards, except as provided at Subsection (B) below; and

2.     Each Well on the property complies with all Federal, State and City laws, including Fire Department City Specification No. 422, dated June 2017.

B.     If DOGGR determines that the Well cannot be abandoned to its current standards, the Fire Code Official may still authorize issuance of the building and/or grading permit for the property if the Official finds each of the following for each abandoned Well:

1.     The property owner shall obtain, at his sole cost, a report from a California licensed professional engineer or geologist qualified and experienced with oil well abandonment. Prior to obtaining the report, the property owner shall obtain written approval from the Fire Code Official of the engineer or geologist charged with drafting the report. The engineer’s or geologist’s report shall advise at a minimum that:

a.     As abandoned, the Well will not pose any significant risk to the public health, safety or welfare.

b.     The Well is a safe distance for any existing or proposed structures or improvements.

c.     Any abandonment or mitigation conditions that should be imposed on the Well abandonment as conditions of development of the property.

2.     The Well owner has constructed and installed any venting plan and/or additional measures the engineer or geologist recommends to protect the public health, safety and welfare.

3.     The Well complies with Fire Department City Specification No. 422, dated June 2017.

4.     The Owner has executed and recorded against the property an environmental disclosure, release and indemnity agreement providing that the property owner and his assignees, release, indemnify and hold harmless the City against any and all claims, obligations, and causes of action of any kind or nature whatsoever, known or unknown, for personal injury or death, property damage, economic loss, and fines and penalties. The City Attorney shall approve the form of the disclosure and indemnity agreement.

C.     Existing producing Wells which will remain in service after the completion of the development or redevelopment of the property are exempt from these requirements. (3037-5/90, 4138-10/17)

 

15.32.100 Abandonment Procedures
The procedures set forth in Huntington Beach City Specification No. 422, dated June 2017 shall be followed throughout the abandonment process. In addition to these requirements, the responsible party must submit an application to the Fire Department for review and approval for each well which is to be abandoned. Such application shall contain the date the abandonment work will commence. Once all necessary permits and approvals have been obtained, abandonment work may commence on or subsequent to the date so stated. (3037-5/90, 4138-10/17)

 

Chapter 15.36 NUISANCE OIL WELLS AND SITES
15.36.010 Notice and Hearing
A.    Whenever the Fire Chief determines that a public nuisance, as described in this Code, exists on any property or in connection with any well, drill site or lease, he or she shall give notice to the property owner, the lessee of surface or mineral rights, the oil operator and the occupants of any such property to abate such nuisance.

B.     The notice shall also state that in the event the nuisance is not abated as directed, the objectionable material or condition may be removed and the nuisance abated by the City, and the cost of removal assessed upon the lands and buildings from or in front of which the nuisance is removed and such cost shall constitute a lien upon such land until paid.

C.     The notice shall also specify a date and time within 30 days of the date of the notice when the City Council will hold a public hearing to afford those so notified an opportunity to be heard concerning the determination of the Fire Chief and the notice to remove or eliminate the nuisance conditions. The City Council may direct the Fire Department to proceed with the work necessary to remove the objectionable conditions or materials and to take such other action as is necessary to abate the nuisance. (3037-5/90)

 

15.36.020 Work—Costs Report—Hearing on Assessment
The work shall proceed under the direction of the Fire Chief and may be done by City forces or private contractor. The individual in charge of the work shall keep a record and account of the costs of abatement. Upon completion of the work, a report shall be filed with the City Clerk who shall set a hearing before the City Council. The parties to be assessed shall receive by first class, prepaid mail a notice of a public hearing on the assessment. (3037-5/90)

 

15.36.030 Notice of Lien Filed to Pay Assessment
A.    If the cost of assessment is approved by the City Council after the hearing thereof, a notice of lien shall be filed in the office of the County Recorder for each parcel of land involved, and when recorded, shall be delivered by the Fire Chief to the County Controller and Assessor who is expressly authorized to enter the amount thereof in the County Assessment book opposite the description of said parcels, and thereafter such amount shall be collected at the time and in the same manner as ordinary municipal taxes are collected, and shall be subject to the same penalties and the same procedures under foreclosure and sale in case of delinquency, as provided for ordinary municipal taxes.

B.     Notice to pay the assessment shall be sent to the parties liable to be assessed. (3037-5/90)

 

15.36.040 Additional Remedies
As to any lots or property declared to be a nuisance hereunder, the City Attorney of the City of Huntington Beach may proceed to abate the same by filing a civil action to abate a nuisance against the owners, or oil operators, or lessees or occupants thereon. (3037-5/90)

 

Chapter 15.40 ACTIVATION OF IDLE WELLS
15.40.010 Activation Permit Required
No person shall activate or put into production any oil well that is an idle well pursuant to this Code, or any well whose drill site has been cleaned and restored in accordance with this Code, unless an activation permit has been first obtained pursuant to the provisions of this title. (3037-5/90)

 

15.40.020 Application and Fee
A.    An application, on a form provided by the Fire Department, shall be filed with the Fire Department together with the required permit fee. The application shall include a plot plan and such other information necessary to show that the property and the oil operation will comply with the provisions of this title and the Huntington Beach Municipal Code.

B.     No activation permit application shall be accepted by the Fire Department unless the property on which the well is located may be lawfully used for oil operations in accordance with the provisions of the Huntington Beach Municipal Code and the required permit application fee is paid. Such fee shall not be refundable. (3037-5/90)

 

15.40.030 Action by Fire Chief and Director of Community Development
Within 10 working days after such application is filed, the Fire Chief and the Director of Community Development shall review the application. If the Fire Chief finds that activation of the well as requested in the application and the property on which the oil operation is to be located meets all of the requirements of this title, and if the Director of Community Development determines that all applicable provisions of the Huntington Beach Municipal Code have been met, the Fire Chief shall issue the activation permit. If the Director of Community Development is unable to find compliance with the applicable provisions of the Huntington Beach Municipal Code, the Fire Chief shall deny the permit and shall give notice to the applicant of such denial. (3037-5/90)

 

15.40.040 Expiration of Permit
Any activation permit issued under the provisions of this title shall expire by limitation and become null and void if the oil operation authorized by such permit is not commenced within 120 days from the date of issuance of such permit. (3037-5/90)

 

15.40.050 Test Permit
A.    At the request of the applicant and prior to the issuance of the activation permit, the Fire Chief may grant a test permit for a period not to exceed 90 days. This test permit is to authorize the applicant to operate the well on a test basis to determine if said well is capable of producing in the quantities specified in this Code.

B.     The test permit shall not be issued unless the drill site and oil operation is in compliance with all the provisions of this title and other applicable provisions of the Huntington Beach Municipal Code except that equipment, materials and operations necessary for the conducting of the test shall be permitted.

C.     Should the well fail to produce oil, gas or other hydrocarbon substances within the 90 day period in a manner sufficient to demonstrate that it is capable of producing the quantities specified in this Code, the applicant shall abandon the well within 180 days from the issuance of the test permit in accordance with the regulations of the DOGGR and this title. (3037-5/90, 4138-10/17)

 

15.40.060 Cease and Desist Order
If, at any time, any operator is in violation of any of the provisions of this title, the Fire Chief may order compliance and set a reasonable period of time for same. If compliance is not obtained within the time period specified, the Fire Chief shall order the operator to cease and desist operation of the well immediately. The operator shall immediately comply with the order of the Fire Chief to cease and desist and shall not resume any operation at the site affected unless and until the written approval of the Fire Chief is obtained. (3037-5/90)

 

Chapter 15.50 CONSOLIDATION PROJECTS
15.50.010 Purpose
The purpose of the consolidation of oil operations shall be to attain the following objectives:

A.    To consolidate oil operations onto specified locations, replacing equipment and/or wells currently spread throughout an area.

B.     To obtain the abandonment and replacement of outdated and hazardous wells and tanks.

C.     To eliminate or substantially lessen significant environmental effects through mitigation measures.

D.    To offset unavoidable environmental effects created by the consolidation project with overriding improvements in other areas.

E.     To minimize the visual impacts resulting from the project by design features, maximum feasible screening, walls, and landscaping.

F.     To protect the public from damage and nuisance due to noise, smoke, odor, dust, vibration, contamination, fire and excessive traffic.

G.    To maintain consistency with the goals and objectives of the General Plan, with no substantial public purpose served by denial of the consolidation project.

H.    To provide an overall higher level of safety and protection for the public. (3037-5/90)

 

15.50.020 Abandonments
The sealing and abandonment of existing wells which will be replaced by the project shall be completed within 18 months of the date of commencement of drilling operations for the consolidation project. All abandonments shall be done according to the requirements of the DOGGR and the City of Huntington Beach. (3037-5/90, 4138-10/17)

 

15.50.030 Interior Ground Surfaces
All interior ground surfaces shall be a minimum grade of “all weather surfaces” as defined by the Public Works Department. (3037-5/90)

 

15.50.040 Noise Standards
All operations shall conform to the noise level standards established in Chapter 8.40 of the Huntington Beach Municipal Code. The City may require noise attenuation equipment wherever and whenever it deems necessary. (3037-5/90)

 

15.50.050 Brine Water
Brine water produced from the formation zones shall not be released into the sewer system unless such discharge is performed under current and valid permits from the City and the Orange County Sanitation District. (3037-5/90)

 

15.50.060 Drilling Rigs
All drilling rigs shall be operated by electric motors. Electric motors shall be utilized on all other miscellaneous equipment necessary to the operation. Power for all electrical equipment shall be from the local electric utility distribution system, and shall not be generated on site. (3037-5/90)

 

15.50.070 Service Rigs
Service rigs shall be erected only during necessary maintenance operations. (3037-5/90)

 

15.50.080 Storage Tanks
All tanks utilized as a part of the project shall comply with the requirements for vapor emissions established by the South Coast Air Quality Management District, and vapor recovery equipment shall be installed as required. (3037-5/90)

 

15.50.090 Oil Transportation
All oil produced from the site shall be shipped via pipeline. (3037-5/90)

 

15.50.100 Fire Protection Requirements
On-site fire protection shall be installed in all consolidation facilities in compliance with all requirements set forth by the Fire Department, and as a minimum shall include the following:

A.    All cellars shall be equipped with:

1.     A hydrogen sulfide detection system.

2.     Fire extinguishers which are located within 75 feet of travel from any location.

3.     Open metal grates over the tops.

B.     All storage tanks shall be equipped with:

1.     A pre-plumbed fixed foam delivery system.

2.     Dike protection with an engineered drainage system. Plans for emergency discharge to the City’s storm drain system shall be approved by the Regional Water Quality Control Board.

C.     On-site foam storage shall be provided in the specified quantity.

D.    Adequate fire hydrants shall be provided.

E.     All gate openings must be a minimum of 24 feet in width, and installation must comply with Fire Department Specification #403. (3037-5/90)

 

15.50.110 Additional Requirements
The Fire Chief may impose additional requirements or modify requirements as is determined necessary to provide an adequate level of safety for the consolidation operations. (3037-5/90)

Title 16 RESERVED

Title 17 BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION
Note
*       Note: Chs. 17.02, 17.16 and 17.20 repealed by Ord. 3791-12/07; Ch. 17.36 repealed by Ord. 3022-12/89; Ch. 17.66 repealed by Ord. 3945-8/12.

 

Chapter 17.02 CALIFORNIA ADMINISTRATIVE CODE
17.02.010 Adoption
The 2019 California Administrative Code (codified in Part 1 of Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations), as published by the International Code Council and the California Building Standards Commission, is hereby adopted by reference, subject to the amendments, deletions or additions set forth in this chapter and incorporated in the Huntington Beach Building and Construction Code.

Such code, and amendments thereto, are hereby adopted and incorporated, pursuant to California Government Code Section 50022.2 et seq., and Health and Safety Code Section 18941.5, as fully as though set forth at length herein, for the purpose of regulating and administering the erection, construction, enlargement, alteration, repair, moving, removal, conversion, demolition, occupancy, equipment, use, height, area, and maintenance of buildings or structures in the City of Huntington Beach, and repealing all ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict herewith. From the date on which this chapter takes effect the provisions of such code, together with amendments thereto shall be controlling within the corporate limits of the City of Huntington Beach. (4190-12/19)

 

Chapter 17.04 BUILDING CODE
17.04.010 Adoption
The 2019 California Building Code Volumes 1 and 2, and the whole thereof, including Appendix I entitled “Patio Covers” and all national codes and standards referenced therein (codified in Part 2 of Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations), as published by the International Code Council and the California Building Standards Commission, is hereby adopted by reference, subject to the amendments, deletions or additions set forth in this chapter and incorporated in the Huntington Beach Building and Construction Code.

Such code, and amendments thereto, are hereby adopted and incorporated, pursuant to California Government Code Section 50022.2 et seq., and Health and Safety Code Section 18941.5, as fully as though set forth at length herein, for the purpose of regulating and administering the erection, construction, enlargement, alteration, repair, moving, removal, conversion, demolition, occupancy, equipment, use, height, area, and maintenance of buildings or structures in the City of Huntington Beach, and repealing all ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict herewith. From the date on which this chapter takes effect the provisions of such code, together with amendments thereto shall be controlling within the corporate limits of the City of Huntington Beach. (2747-2/85, 2976-12/88, 3022-12/89, 3147-7/92, 3305-12/95, 3422-7/99, 3573-10/02, 3789-1/08, 3892-12/10, 3993-11/13, 4106-12/16, 4190-12/19)

 

17.04.020 CBC Section [A] 101.1—Amended
CBC Chapter 1, Section [A] 101.1 is hereby amended to read as follows:

[A] 101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the Building Code of Huntington Beach, may be cited as such, and hereinafter referred to as “this code.”

(2747-2/85, 3422-7/99, 4190-12/19)

 

17.04.030 CBC Chapter 1, Section [A] 103.1 Creation of enforcement agency—Amended
CBC Chapter 1, Section [A] 103.1 Creation of enforcement agency is hereby amended to read as follows:

[A] 103.1 Creation of enforcement agency. Department of Community Development Building Division is hereby created and the official in charge thereof shall be known as the building official.

(4190-12/19)

 

17.04.040 CBC Chapter 1, Subsection [A] 104.10.1 Flood hazard areas—Amended
CBC Chapter 1, Section [A] 104.10.1 Flood hazard areas is hereby amended to read as follows:

104.10.1 Flood hazard areas. The Building Official shall not grant modifications to any provision required in flood hazard areas unless a determination has been made in accordance with the Floodplain Overlay District portion of the Huntington Beach Zoning Code Chapter 222.

(4190-12/19)

 

17.04.050 CBC Chapter 1, Section [A] 105.2 Work Exempt From Permit—Amended
Section [A] 105.2 Work Exempt from Permit is amended to read in its entirely as follows:

[A] 105.2 Work exempt from permit. Exemptions from permit requirements of this Code shall not be deemed to grant authorization for any work to be done in any manner in violation of the provisions of this Code or any other laws or ordinances of this jurisdiction. Permits shall not be required for the following:

Building:

1.     One-story detached accessory structures used as tool and storage sheds, playhouses, pagodas, gazebos and similar uses, provided the floor area does not exceed 120 square feet. Such structures shall comply with setback and height requirements of the Zoning Subdivision Ordinance and the Fire Code.

2.     Masonry or concrete fences not over 42 inches in height above lowest adjacent grade and all other fences not exceeding 6 feet in height above the lowest adjacent grade and not within required zoning setbacks or subject to review by the Fire Department.

Exception: Walls and fences less than 6 feet in height that are required as a condition of project approval, subject to review by the Fire Department, guard system or pool barrier system are required to have permits.

3.     Oil derricks and tanks.

4.     Retaining walls that are not over 4 feet in height measured from the bottom of the footing to the top of the wall, unless supporting a surcharge or impounding Class I, II or IIIA liquids.

5.     Water tanks supported directly on grade if the capacity does not exceed 5,000 gallons and the ratio of height to diameter or width does not exceed 2:1.

6.     Sidewalks, platforms, decks and driveways not more than 30 inches above adjacent grade, and not over any basement or story below and not part of an accessible route.

7.     Painting, papering, tiling, carpeting, cabinets, counter tops and similar finish work.

8.     Prefabricated swimming pools accessory to a Group R-3 occupancy that are less than 18 inches deep, are not greater than 5,000 gallons and are installed entirely above ground.

9.     Temporary motion picture, television and theater stage sets and scenery.

10.   Shade cloth structures constructed for nursery or agricultural purposes, not including service systems.

11.   Swings, other playground equipment and similar type recreational structures accessory to detached one- and two-family dwellings.

12.   Window awnings in Group R-3 and U occupancies, supported by an exterior wall that do not project more than 54 inches from the exterior wall and do not require additional support.

13.   Nonfixed and movable fixtures, cases, racks, counters and partitions not over 5 feet 9 inches in height.

14.   Flag poles, light poles and TV dishes in connection with a Group R, Division 3 occupancy and not exceeding 15 feet in height.

15.   Re-roofing an area smaller than 100 square feet while satisfying all applicable application requirements.

16.   Replacement doors and windows when the waterproofing membrane is not altered and emergency egress dimensions are equal to or better than the original permitted layout.

17.   New roof penetrations less than 14″ by 14″ when no framing modifications or additions are required.

Unless otherwise provided by this Code, separate plumbing, electrical and mechanical permits will be required for the above-exempted items.

Any of the above items that are located in a Floodplain Overlay District, Environmentally Sensitive Area or subject to a discretionary Planning Division approval or as otherwise required by the Planning Division or any other authority/agency is not exempt from permits.

Electrical:

1.     Repairs and maintenance: Minor repair work, including the replacement of lamps or the connection of approved portable electrical equipment to approved permanently installed receptacles.

2.     Radio and television transmitting stations: The provisions of this Code shall not apply to electrical equipment used for radio and television transmissions, but do apply to equipment and wiring for a power supply and the installations of towers and antennas.

3.     Temporary testing systems: A permit shall not be required for the installation of any temporary system required for the testing or servicing of electrical equipment or apparatus.

4.     Temporary decorative lighting.

5.     Replacement of attachment plug receptacles, but not the outlets therefor.

6.     Replacement of general use snap switches.

7.     Repair or replacement of any overcurrent device of the required capacity in the same location.

8.     Repair or replacement of electrodes or transformers of the same size and capacity for signs or gas tube systems.

9.     The wiring for temporary theater, motion picture or television stage sets.

10.   Electrical wiring, devices, appliances, apparatus or equipment operating at less than 25 volts and not capable of supplying more than 50 watts of energy.

11.   Low-energy power, control and signal circuits of Classes II and III as defined in the electrical code.

12.   Non-vehicle-mounted portable generators.

13.   Replacement of any minor part that does not alter approval of equipment or make such equipment unsafe.

Gas:

1.     Portable heating appliance.

2.     Replacement of any minor part that does not alter approval of equipment or make such equipment unsafe.

3.     Portable cooking or clothes drying appliance.

4.     Portable fuel-cell appliances that are not connected to a fixed piping system and are not interconnected to a power grid.

Mechanical:

1.     Portable heating appliances.

2.     Portable ventilation equipment or appliances.

3.     Portable cooling unit.

4.     Steam, hot or chilled water piping within any heating or cooling equipment regulated by this Code.

5.     Replacement of any part that does not alter its approval or make it unsafe.

6.     Portable evaporative cooler.

7.     Self-contained refrigeration system containing 10 pounds (4.54 kg) or less of refrigerant and actuated by motors of one horsepower (746 W) or less.

8.     Portable fuel-cell appliances that are not connected to a fixed piping system and are not interconnected to a power grid.

Plumbing:

1.     The stopping of leaks in drains, water, soil, waste, or vent pipe, provided, however, that if any concealed trap, drain pipe, water, soil, waste or vent pipe becomes defective and it becomes necessary to remove and replace the same with the new material, such work shall be considered as new work and a permit shall be obtained and inspection made as provided in this Code.

2.     The clearing of stoppages or the repairing of leaks in pipes, valves or fixtures and the removal and reinstallation of water closets, provided such repairs do not involve or require the replacement or rearrangement of valves, pipes, or fixtures.

3.     Repair or replacement of any plumbing fixture or appliance of the same type and size and in the same location. Exception: electric and fuel gas water heaters.

4.     Replacement of any part that does not alter its approval or make it unsafe.

(3789-1/08, 3892-12/10, 4190-12/19)

 

17.04.060 CBC Chapter 1, Division II, Section [A] 105.3.2 Time Limitation of Application—Amended
CBC Chapter 1, Division II, Section [A] 105.3.2 Time Limitation of Application is amended in its entirely as follows:

[A] 105.3.2 Time limitation of application. Applications for which no permit is issued within 180 days following the date of application shall expire automatically, and plans and other data submitted for review may thereafter be returned to the applicant or destroyed by the building official. The building official may extend the time for action by the applicant in increments of 180 days subject to the following conditions:

1.     The applicant shall submit an application every 180 days, accompanied by a plan review extension fee, established by resolution of the City Council.

2.     Any plans that remain in plan review over 360 days shall meet all construction standards that are adopted at the time the permit is issued.

3.     Plans may not remain in plan review more than 720 days except under extreme situations as approved by the building official

(3789-1/08, 3892-12/10, 4190-12/19)

 

17.04.070 CBC Chapter 1, Division II, Section [A] 105.5 Expiration—Amended
CBC Chapter 1, Division II, Section [A] 105.5 Expiration is amended in its entirely as follows:

[A] 105.5 Expiration. Every permit issued shall become invalid unless the work on the site authorized by such permit is commenced within 12 months after its issuance, or if the work authorized on the site by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of 180 days after the time the work is commenced. Work shall be considered suspended or abandoned if substantial approval of one of the required progress inspections is not accomplished every 180 days. Before such work can be recommenced, a new permit shall be first obtained, and the fee therefor thereof shall be one-half the amount required for a new permit for such work, provided no changes have been made or will be made in the original plans and specifications for such work; and provided further that such suspension or abandonment has not exceeded one year. In order to renew action on a permit after one year, the permittee shall pay a new full permit fee. The building official is authorized to grant, in writing one or more extensions of time, for periods not more than 180 days each. The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated.

Time limitation for permit expiration as the result of code enforcement shall be as per notice of violation or as otherwise determined by the Building Official.

(3789-1/08, 3892-12/10, 4190-12/19)

 

17.04.080 CBC Chapter 1, Division II, Section [A] 107 Submittal Documents—Added
CBC Chapter 1, Division II, Section [A] 107 Submittal Documents—A new Subsection [A] 107.2.1.1 is added to read in its entirely as follows:

 

[A] 107.2.1.1 Building security. The construction drawings shall show conformance with the Building Security provisions in Building Code Chapter 23 as amended in 17.04.160.

(4190-12/19)

 

17.04.090 CBC Chapter 1, Division II, Section [A] 107 Submittal Documents—Added
CBC Chapter 1, Division II, Section [A] 107 Submittal Documents—A new Subsection [A] 107.2.1.2 is added to read in its entirely as follows:

[A] 107.2.1.2 Methane Overlay District. New building construction in the defined methane overlay districts shall comply with the Building Code Chapter 55 as amended in Section 17.04.170 and with the Huntington Beach Fire Code.

(4190-12/19)

 

17.04.100 CBC Chapter 1, Division II, Section [A] 107 Submittal Documents—Added
CBC Chapter 1, Division II, Section [A] 107 Submittal Documents—A new Subsection [A] 107.2.9 is added to read in its entirely as follows:

[A] 107.2.9 Soils report. A Soil report shall be submitted with all permit applications for new construction and additions. Soil reports shall be prepared by a professional engineer licensed by the State to prepare such reports. The Building Official may waive this requirement if he/she finds that the scope of work applied for does not necessitate a soil report.

(4190-12/19)

 

17.04.110 CBC Chapter 1, Division II, Section [A] 109 Fees—Amended
CBC Chapter 1, Division II, Section [A] 109 Fees amended in its entirely as follows:

[A] 109.1 Payment of fees. A permit shall not be valid until the fees prescribed by law have been paid, nor shall an amendment to a permit be released until the additional fee, if any, has been paid. The building official may allow temporary exceptions.

[A] 109.1.1 Plan review fees. When a plan or other data is required to be submitted a plan review fee shall be paid. This fee shall be paid at the time of submitting plans and specifications for plan review. Said plan review fees shall be as established by resolution of the City Council.

[A] 109.1.2 Permit fees. The fee shall be paid at permit issuance. The standard for determination of value or valuation of the project shall be made by the building official and as established by resolution of the City Council.

[A] 109.1.3 Miscellaneous service fees. Whenever an application is made for all other services, a fee for the service in an amount established by resolution of the City Council shall be paid to the City.

[A] 109.2 Schedule of permit fees. On buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical, and plumbing systems or alterations requiring a permit, a fee for each permit shall be paid as required, in accordance with the schedule as established by resolution of the City Council.

[A] 109.3 Building permit valuations. The applicant for a permit shall provide an estimated permit value at time of application. Permit valuations shall include total value of work, including materials and labor, for which the permit is being issued, such as electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing equipment and permanent systems. If, in the opinion of the building official, the valuation is underestimated on the application, the permit shall be denied, unless the applicant can show detailed estimates to meet the approval of the building official. Final building permit valuation shall be set by the building official and as established by resolution of the City Council.

[A] 109.4 Work commencing before permit issuance. Any person who commences any work on a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system before obtaining the necessary permits shall be subject to an investigation fee established by resolution by the City Council that shall be in addition to the required permit fees.

[A] 109.5 Related fees. The payment of the fee for the construction, alteration, removal or demolition for work done in connection to or concurrently with the work authorized by a building permit shall not relieve the applicant or holder of the permit from the payment of other fees that are prescribed by law.

[A] 109.6 Refunds. The building official may authorize the refund of any fee paid hereunder for work that was not performed or for fees that were collected erroneously as established by resolution of the City Council.

(3789-1/08, 3892-12/10, 4190-12/19)

 

17.04.120 CBC Chapter 1, Division II, Section [A] 113.1 Board of Appeals general—Amended
CBC Chapter 1, Division II, Section [A] 113.1 is hereby amended to read in its entirely as follows:

[A] 113.1 General. In order to hear and decide appeals of the orders, decisions or determinations made by the building official relative to the application and interpretation of this code, there shall be and hereby created a board of appeals. The board of appeals shall be appointed by the City Council and shall hold office at its pleasure. The board shall adopt rules of procedure for conducting its business, and shall render all decisions and findings in writing to the appellant with a duplicate copy to the building official. Depending on the subject of the appeal, specialized expertise may be solicited for the purpose of providing input to the appeals board.

(4190-12/19)

 

17.04.130 CBC Chapter 9 Fire Protection Systems, Section 901.1 Scope—Amended
CBC Chapter 9 Fire Protection Systems, Section 901.1 Scope amended to read as follows:

Section 901.1 Scope. The provisions of this chapter shall specify where fire protection systems are required and shall apply to the design, installation and operation of fire protection systems. For amended sprinkler requirement, see Huntington Beach Municipal Code, Chapter 17.56 of this Code.

(2747-2/85, 3022-12/89, 3305-12/95, 3422-7/99, 3789-1/08, 3892-12/10, 4190-12/19)

 

17.04.140 CBC Chapter 15, Table 1505.1—Amended
CBC Chapter 15, Table 1505.1in Subsection 1505.1 of Section 1505 is hereby amended to read as follows:

TABLE 1505.1a

MINIMUM ROOF COVERING CLASSIFICATION

FOR TYPES OF CONSTRUCTION

 

IA

IB

IIA

IIB

IIIA

IIIB

IV

VA

VB

B

B

B

B

B

B

B

B

B

         For SI: 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 square foot = 0.0929 m2.

         a. Unless otherwise required in accordance with Chapter 7A.

(4190-12/19)

 

17.04.150 CBC Chapter 15 Subsection 1505.1.3 —Amended
Subsection 1505.1.3 is amended, by the deletion of the entire section and the addition of a new section thereto, to read as follows:

1505.1.3 Roof coverings within all other areas. The entire roof covering of every existing structure where more than 50 percent of the total roof area is replaced within any one-year period, the entire roof covering of every new structure, and any roof covering applied in the alteration, repair or replacement of the roof of every existing structure, shall be a fire-retardant roof covering that is at least Class B.

(4190-12/19)

 

17.04.160 Chapter 36 Building Security—Added a New Chapter
The Building Code is hereby amended by adding thereto new Chapter 36 entitled “Building Security,” to read as follows:

§ 3601. Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to establish minimum standards of construction for protection against unlawful entry.

§ 3602. Alternative security provisions. When approved by the building official, site security systems may be provided in lieu of the specific security provisions of Section 3608, “Garages—Multiple dwellings.”

§ 3603. Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, certain terms used herein are defined as follows:

“Cylinder guard” means a hardened ring surrounding the exposed portion of the lock cylinder or other device which is so fastened as to protect the cylinder from wrenching, prying, cutting or pulling by attack tools.

“Deadlocking latch” means a latch in which the latch bolt is positively held in the projected position by a guard bolt, plunger or auxiliary mechanism.

“Dead bolt” means a bolt which has no automatic spring action and which is operated by a key cylinder, thumb turn, or level, and is positively held fast when in the projected position.

“Latch” means a device for automatically holding a door shut after being closed.

“Light” means any glazed opening whether glazed with glass, plastic, metal, wood or composition sheets or panels, or similar materials, and shall include windows, skylights, view ports or view panels and similar openings.

§ 3604. Entry vision. All main or front entry doors to R occupancies shall be arranged so that the occupant has a view of the area immediately outside without opening the door. Such view may be provided by a door viewer or view port or by window or other opening located and constructed as required by this chapter. Such area shall be provided with a light.

§ 3605. Doors.

A.    General. A door forming a part of the enclosure of a dwelling unit or of an area of a building occupied by one tenant shall be constructed, installed, and secured as set forth in this section.

B.     Swinging doors.

1.     Swinging wooden doors which can be opened from the inside without using a key shall be of solid core construction. Lights in doors shall be as set forth in this chapter.

2.     A single swinging door, the active leaf of a pair of doors, and the bottom leaf of Dutch doors shall be equipped with a dead bolt and deadlocking latch. The dead bolt and latch may be activated by one lock or by individual locks. Dead bolts shall contain hardened inserts, or equivalent, designed to repel cutting tool attack. The lock or locks shall be key operated from the exterior side of the door and engaged or disengaged from the interior side of the door by a device which requires no key, special knowledge or effort.

3.     A straight dead bolt shall have a minimum throw of one inch and the embedment shall be not less than five-eighths inch into the holding device receiving the projected bolt. All dead bolts of locks which automatically activate two or more dead bolts shall embed at least one-half inch but need not exceed three- fourths inch into the holding devices receiving the projected bolts.

4.     A deadlocking latch shall be provided with a bolt projecting not less than five-eighths inches from the edge of the door in which it is installed.

5.     The inactive leaf of a pair of doors and the upper leaf of Dutch doors shall be equipped with a dead bolt or dead bolts as set forth in subsection (B)(2) above.

EXCEPTIONS:

a.     The bolt or bolts need not be key operated but shall not be otherwise activated, from the exterior side of the door.

b.     The bolt or bolts may be engaged or disengaged automatically with the dead bolt or by another device on the active leaf or lower leaf.

c.     Manually-operated hardened bolts at the top and bottom of the leaf and which embed a minimum of one-half inch into the device receiving the projected bolt may be used when not prohibited by the Building Code or other laws and regulations.

6.     Doorstops on wooden jambs for in-swinging doors shall be of one piece construction with the jamb or joined by a rabbet.

7.     Nonremovable pins shall be used in pin-type hinges which are accessible from the outside when the door is closed.

8.     Cylinder guards shall be installed on all mortise or rim-type cylinder locks installed in doors whenever the cylinder projects beyond the face of the door or when otherwise accessible to gripping tools.

9.     Unframed glass doors shall be of fully tempered glass not less than one-half inch thick.

10.   Narrow-framed glass doors shall be of fully tempered glass not less than one-quarter inch thick.

C.     Sliding glass doors. Sliding glass doors shall be equipped with locking devices. Cylinder guards shall be installed on all mortise or rim-type cylinder locks installed in doors whenever the cylinder projects beyond the face of the door or is otherwise accessible to gripping tools.

 

§ 3606. Windows, or other openings.

A.    General. Windows, or other similar openings shall be constructed, installed and secured as set forth in this section.

B.     Materials. Only fully-tempered glass or approved metal bars, screens, or grills shall be used for any opening in which glass is utilized which is located within 40 inches of the locking device on a door.

C.     Locking devices. All windows or other openings which are designed to be opened shall be provided with locking devices.

§ 3608. Garages—Multiple dwellings. Whenever a development includes three or more dwelling units, all covered parking required by other provisions of the Huntington Beach Municipal Code shall be provided by fully-enclosed garages. Garage space for each tenant shall be separated by partitions of three-eighths-inch plywood or any approved equivalent with studs set not more than 24 inches apart on one side. Doors and windows in such garages shall be constructed, equipped and secured as required by this chapter.

(2747-2/85, 2787-9/85, 2976-12/88, 3022-12/89, 3305- 12/95, 3422-7/99, 3573-10/02, 4190-12/19)

 

17.04.170 Chapter 55 Methane District Regulations – Added a new Chapter
The Building Code is hereby amended by adding thereto new Chapter 55 entitled “Methane District Regulations” to read as follows:

§ 5501. Purpose. This Division sets forth the minimum requirements of the City of Huntington Beach for new building construction in the defined methane overlay districts. It is also the purpose of this chapter to reduce the hazards presented from accumulations of methane gas by requiring the appropriate testing and mitigation measures for all new buildings in the methane overlay districts.

§ 5502. Definitions. For the purposes of this division, the following definitions shall also be applied.

A.    Flammable Gas shall mean any gaseous substance capable of sustaining combustion or explosion.

B.     Gas Detection System shall mean one or more electrical devices capable of continuous monitoring for the presence of flammable gasses and containing an audible alarm capable of alerting occupants that a hazardous atmosphere exists. A part of the system shall be subject to building the system and all devices which are department and Fire Department approved.

C.     Methane Gas shall mean the hydrocarbon substance commonly known as “natural gas,” chemical formula CH4. For the purposes of definition in this chapter, natural gas from the distribution system of a utility company is exempted and excluded from the scope of the application of the provisions of this chapter.

D.    Methane Gas Overlay District shall mean those districts within the City of Huntington Beach as defined in Section 5503.

E.     Qualified Engineer shall mean a civil engineer currently registered in the State of California and possessing experience in the design of subsurface gas control systems.

F.     Vent System shall mean a system or device which gathers or collects flammable gasses and releases these gasses in a specified manner and location.

§ 5503. Overlay Districts. Boundaries of the districts set forth herein are measured from centerline to centerline of indicated streets unless otherwise described, and are graphically depicted by the copy of the map designated “Methane Overlay Districts,” which is on file with the Fire Department.

The Methane District boundaries are as follows. Note that the directions of north, south, east, west, and similar directions are general in nature only.

District One: Saybrook Lane south from Edinger Avenue to Davenport Drive to Algonquin Street, south on Algonquin Street to Warner Avenue, east on Warner Avenue to Bolsa Chica Street, north on Bolsa Chica Street to Edinger Avenue, west on Edinger Avenue to Saybrook Lane.

District Two: All land on both sides of Pacific Coast Highway northwest from the City Boundary at the Santa Ana River to the City Boundary at the Bolsa Chica Bluffs, then following the City Boundary northeast to Edwards Street, Edwards Street north to Slater Avenue, Slater Avenue east to Gothard Street, Gothard Street south to Ellis Avenue, Ellis Avenue east to Newland Street, Newland Street south to Adams Avenue, Adams Avenue east to the City Boundary at the Santa Ana River, City Boundary south along the Santa Ana River to Pacific Coast Highway.

§ 5504. Plan Required. All proposed subdivisions, divisions of land, developments of property, and new buildings within the methane overlay districts shall be reviewed by the Fire Department. The Fire Chief may require a plan for the testing of site soils for the presence of methane gas. Such plan shall be subject to the approval of the Fire Department, and may include, but shall not be limited to, hammer probes, pneumatically driven probes, and core hole samples with monitoring for the presence of methane gas. The Fire Chief may require other actions as deemed necessary to ensure the safety of the development or building site.

§ 5505. Testing Required. Testing for the presence of methane gas shall be required to be carried out in accordance with the approved plan. Results of such testing shall be submitted to the Fire Department for review and analysis.

§ 5506. Mitigation Required. Anomalously high levels of methane gas in the near surface or subsurface soil layers may require mitigation before any grading, development, or building construction is allowed to take place. Such mitigation may include, but is not limited to, the venting of abandoned oil wells, underground gathering and collection systems for gasses, vent systems, and flared vent systems. Other systems, devices, or components may be required as deemed necessary by the Fire Chief in order to ensure the safety of the development and buildings.

If the mitigation measure does not reduce the soil concentrations of methane to an acceptable level, or if other contaminants are present in the methane at a level which poses a threat to health and safety, further development may be halted until such time as the site is rendered safe from these hazards.

§ 5507. Isolation Barriers Required. New buildings which fall under the provisions and requirements of this article may require the installation of a continuous, flexible, permanent, and non-permeable barrier, and shall be a type approved by the Fire Department.

§ 5508. Access. All methane gas mitigation systems required by this article shall be made accessible to City personnel for the purposes of monitoring, maintenance, and evaluation for effectiveness.

§ 5509. Areas Outside of Established Methane Overlay District Boundaries. Upon the determination of the Fire Department that hazard may exist from methane intrusion at a geographical location or area outside the boundaries established in Section 5503 above, the Fire Department may enforce any or all of the provisions of this article as deemed necessary by the Fire Chief to preclude potential hazards from fire or explosion from methane gas accumulations.

§ 5510. Additional Remedial Measures. If the concentration of flammable gas in any building in the City reaches or exceeds 25% of the minimum concentration which form an ignitable mixture with air at ambient temperature and pressure, the owner of such building shall hire a qualified engineer to investigate, recommend, and implement mitigating measures. Such measures shall be subject to the approval of the Fire Department.

(3004-8/89, 3022-12/89, 3422-7/99, 4190-12/19)

 

Chapter 17.05 GRADING AND EXCAVATION CODE
17.05.010 Title
This chapter shall be known as and may be cited as the “City of Huntington Beach Grading and Excavation Code.” “Code” as referred to in this chapter, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, shall mean the “City of Huntington Beach Grading and Excavation Code.” (3259-12/94)

 

17.05.020 Scope
This code sets forth rules and regulations to control excavation, grading, and earthwork construction, including fills and embankments, and establishes administrative requirements for issuance of grading permits and approval of plans and inspection of grading construction in accordance with requirements for grading and excavation as contained in the Uniform Building Code then in effect as adopted and modified by City ordinance as well as water quality requirements relevant to activities subject to this chapter. (3259-12/94, 3621-12/03)

 

17.05.030 Grading Manual
The Director of Public Works (“Director”) shall formulate and modify as necessary such rules, procedures, and interpretations as may be necessary or convenient to administer this chapter. Such rules, procedures and interpretations shall be referred to as the “City of Huntington Beach Grading Manual” or the “Grading Manual.” In the event of any conflict between the Grading Manual and this Code, the provisions of this Code shall govern. The provisions of the Grading Manual shall include provisions to ensure that the water quality requirements of this chapter apply to all such activities and, to the extent that they are made conditions of any permit by the director, be binding on the permittee. (3259-12/94, 3621-12/03)

 

17.05.040 Definitions
“Approval,” unless otherwise specified, shall mean a written engineering or geological opinion by the responsible engineer or geologist of record or responsible principal of the engineering company concerning the progress and completion of the work.

“Approved plans” shall mean the current grading plans which bear the signature of approval of the Director, Planning Director, and Fire Chief, or their designees.

“Approved testing agency” shall mean a facility whose testing operations are controlled and monitored by a registered Civil Engineer and which is equipped to perform and certify the tests required by this Code, or the Grading Manual, as determined by the director.

“Borrow” shall mean earth material acquired from an off-site location for use in grading on a site.

“City engineer” shall mean the City engineer of the City of Huntington Beach or a duly delegated representative.

“City inspector” shall mean an inspector duly authorized by the Director of Public Works to perform inspection of grading, concrete placement and related constructed work or other grading related work approved by the director.

“Civil engineer” shall mean a professional engineer currently registered in the State of California to practice in the field of civil engineering.

“Civil engineering” shall mean the application of the knowledge of the forces of nature, principles of mechanics, and the properties of materials for the evaluation, design, and construction of civil engineering works for the beneficial uses of mankind.

“Clearing, brushing, and grubbing” shall mean the removal of vegetation (grass, brush, and similar plant types) by mechanical means. Trees to be removed must be accompanied by a City-approved arborist report and may require replacement(s).

“Commercial coach” shall mean a vehicle with or without motive power, designed and equipped for human occupancy for industrial, professional, or commercial purposes, and shall include a trailer coach.

“Compaction” shall mean the densification of a fill by mechanical means.

“Director” shall mean the Director of the City of Huntington Beach Public Works Department or a duly delegated representative.

“Earth material” shall mean any rock, natural soil fill, or any combination thereof.

“Engineering geologist” shall mean a geologist certified in the State of California to practice engineering geology.

“Engineering geology” shall mean the application of geologic knowledge and principles in the investigation and evaluation of naturally occurring rock and soil for use in the design of civil works.

“Erosion” shall mean the wearing away of the ground surface as a result of the movement of wind, or water.

“Erosion control system” shall mean a combination of desilting facilities and erosion protection including effective planting, to protect adjacent private property, watercourses, public facilities and receiving waters from any abnormal deposition of sediment or dust.

“Excavation” shall mean the manual or mechanical removal of earth material.

“Fill” shall mean a deposit of earth material placed by artificial means.

“Grade” shall mean the vertical location of the ground surface.

1.     “Natural grade” is the ground surface unaltered by artificial means.

2.     “Existing grade” is the ground surface prior to grading.

3.     “Rough grade” is the stage at which the grade approximately conforms to the approved plan.

4.     “Finished grade” is the final grade of the site which conforms to the approved plan.

“Grading” shall mean any excavating or filling or combination thereof.

“Grading contractor” shall mean a contractor licensed and regulated by the State of California who specializes in grading work or is otherwise licensed to do grading work.

“Grading permit” shall mean an official document or certificate issued by the Director of Public Works or delegated representative authorizing grading activity as specified by approved plans and specifications.

“Hillside site” shall mean a site which entails cut and/or fill grading of three feet or more in vertical height below or above natural ground; or a combination fill-over-cut slope equal to or greater than five feet in vertical height; or where the existing grade is 20% or greater; and which may be adversely affected by drainage and/or stability conditions within or from outside the site, or which may cause any adverse effect on adjacent property.

“Mobile home” shall mean a structure, transportable in one or more sections, designed and equipped to contain not more than two dwelling units to be used with or without a foundation system. Mobile home does not include recreational vehicle, commercial coach, or factory-built housing.

“Owner” shall mean any person, agency, firm, or corporation having a legal or equitable interest in a given real property.

“Permanent erosion control devices” shall mean improvements which remain throughout the life of the development; they include terrace drains, down drains, slope landscaping, channels, and storm drains.

“Precise grading permit” shall mean a permit that is issued on the basis of approved plans which must show all proposed improvements and site drainage to the degree required by the director.

“Rough grading permit” shall mean a permit that is issued on the basis of approved plans which do not show a structure location, but must show interim site drainage patterns to the degree required by the director.

“Semi-permanent erosion control devices” shall mean devices which are used primarily during construction and are not relocatable. They include earthen berms, concrete spillways, desilting basins, and riser/outlet pipes.

“Site” shall mean any lot or parcel of land or contiguous combination thereof, under the same ownership, where grading is performed or permitted.

“Slope” shall mean an included ground surface, the inclination of which is expressed as a ratio of horizontal distance to vertical distance.

“Soil” is naturally occurring surficial deposits overlying bedrock.

“Soil engineer” shall mean a civil engineer currently registered in the State of California whose field of expertise is soil mechanics.

“Soil engineering” shall mean the application of the principles of soil mechanics in the investigation, evaluation, and design of civil works involving the use of earth materials and the inspection and testing of the construction thereof.

“Stockpile” shall mean earth material in excess of 50 cubic yards stored for a temporary period of time upon a lot as permitted by the director.

“Stormwater permits” shall mean any permits issued by a local, state or federal regulatory agency regulating stormwater flow over and from any project subject to this article including but not limited to NPDES permits and state general permits as defined in Chapter 14.25.

“Temporary erosion control devices” shall mean devices which are removable and can rarely be salvaged for subsequent reuse. In most cases, they will last no longer than one rainy season. They include sandbags, gravel bags, plastic sheeting (visqueen), silt fencing, straw bales, and similar items.

“Terrace” shall mean a relatively level step constructed in the face of a graded slope surface for drainage and maintenance purposes.

“Water quality requirements” shall mean the requirements relevant to activities that are subject to this chapter and found in the City Stormwater and Urban Runoff Management Ordinance, Chapter 14.25, and the current County of Orange Drainage Area Management Plan (DAMP) including all appendices and guidance documents included in the DAMP, as well as requirements relevant to the activities that are subject to this chapter found in stormwater permits. (3259-12/94, 3621-12/03)

 

17.05.050 Grading Permits
No person shall conduct any grading, clearing, brushing, or grubbing on natural or existing grade that is preparatory to grading, without first having obtained a grading permit from the director. Exceptions to this requirement are as follows or as otherwise determined by the director:

A.    An excavation below finished grade for basements and footings of a building, mobile home, retaining wall, or other structure authorized by a valid building permit or construction permit. This shall not exempt any fill made with the material from such excavation nor exempt any excavation having an unsupported height greater than five feet after the completion of such structure. This shall not prohibit a minimum fee grading permit or soil or geologic report from being required for foundation design and inspection purposes when, in the opinion of the director, soil stability or flooding considerations warrant such inspection.

B.     Cemetery graves.

C.     Refuse disposal sites controlled by other regulations.

D.    Earthwork construction regulated by the federal, state, county, or City governments, or by any local agency as defined by Government Code Sections 53090 through 53095 (special districts), pipeline or conduit excavation and backfill conducted by local agencies or public utilities, earthwork construction performed by railway companies on their operating property. This exemption, however, shall apply only when the earthwork construction takes place on the property, dedicated rights-of-way, or easements of the above agencies.

E.     Excavation and backfill for installation of underground utilities by public utilities or companies operating under the authority of a franchise or public property encroachment permit.

F.     Mining, quarrying, excavating, processing, stockpiling of rock, sand, gravel, aggregate or clay where established and provided for by law, under other agency permit(s), provided such operations do not affect the lateral support or increase the stresses in or pressures upon any adjacent or contiguous property.

G.    Exploratory excavations under the direction of soil engineers or engineering geologists, provided all excavations are properly backfilled as required by the director. All such excavations and trenches are subject to the applicable sections of Title 8 of the State Orders, Division of Industrial Safety.

H.    An excavation which does not exceed 50 cubic yards on any one site and which is less than two feet in vertical depth, or which does not create a cut slope greater than five feet in vertical height and steeper than two to one vertical (2:1).

I.      A fill less than one foot in depth placed on natural grade with a slope flatter than five horizontal to one vertical (5:1), which does not exceed 50 cubic yards on any one site and does not obstruct a drainage course.

J.      A fill less than three feet in depth, not intended to support structures or mobile homes which does not exceed 50 cubic yards on any one site and does not obstruct a drainage course. (3259-12/94, 3621-12/03)

 

17.05.060 Grading Permits—Paving
No person shall construct pavement surfacing in excess of 3,000 square feet, on natural or existing grade without a valid grading permit unless waived by the director, or unless a separate improvement plan for such paving is approved by the director. Resurfacing or maintenance of paved surfaces shall be exempt from this requirement. (3259-12/94)

 

17.05.070 Grading Permit—Watercourse Alteration
No person shall alter an existing watercourse, channel, or revetment by excavating, or placing fill, rock protection, or structural improvements without a valid grading permit unless waived by the director or performed as interim protection under emergency flood fighting conditions. (3259-12/94)

 

17.05.075 Grading Permit—Construction
No person shall perform any construction, for which a building permit is required, without a valid grading permit unless waived by the director. The following building categories shall be exempt from this requirement, provided that such construction does not alter an existing watercourse, channel or revetment: roofing, block walls, swimming pools, patio covers, driveways or on-site paving less than 3,000 square feet in area, patio enclosures less than 400 square feet in area, and building additions less than 400 square feet in area. (3259-12/94)

 

17.05.080 Temporary Stockpile Permit
A.    The City may issue a temporary stockpile permit, in lieu of a grading permit, to stockpile soil on a lot or parcel upon the submission of an application for a temporary stockpile permit by the owner of such lot, or by the owner’s authorized agent. A stockpile plan of the lot prepared by a licensed civil engineer or as otherwise approved by the director shall be submitted for approval. The stockpile plan shall show the area(s) in which the stockpiles are to be placed, the approximate amount of soil to be stockpiled, along with the stockpile height restriction noted, shall be required.

B.     Soil so stockpiled shall not be disturbed or leveled until a regular grading permit has been obtained for such work. The placement of the stockpile shall not adversely affect the safety, use, or stability of any structure, nor create a nuisance because of dust or erosion therefrom, nor block a public way or drainage course; nor shall such placement of stockpile material constitute a hazard to public welfare or endanger property. Stockpiling in a residential zone may be permitted under this section for purposes of providing fill material to be used on-site only. Stockpiling in residential zones for purposes of selling of material shall be prohibited.

C.     The temporary permit shall expire one year after issuance thereof. A new permit shall be required annually.

D.    The permit fee for stockpiling shall be established by resolution of the City Council. (3259-12/94, 3621-12/03)

 

17.05.090 Types of Grading Permits
Either a rough grading permit or a precise grading permit may be issued for grading work upon completion of an application in accordance with the Grading Manual and approval by the director. The rough or precise grading permit is the option of the permittee provided that the plans satisfy the requirements of the Grading Manual. Building permits shall not be issued for a site graded under a rough grading permit until a precise grading permit has been issued or as otherwise approved by the director. (3259-12/94, 3621-12/03)

 

17.05.100 Enforcement
Whenever any building or grading work is being done contrary to the provisions of this Code or the grading permit, the director may order the work stopped by notice, in writing, served on any persons engaged in the doing or causing such work to be done; and any such persons shall forthwith stop such work until authorized by the director to proceed with the work. (3259-12/94)

 

17.05.110 Violations and Penalties
A.    It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to do grading in the City of Huntington Beach, or cause the same to be done, contrary to or in violation of any of the provisions of this Code.

B.     The issuance of a building permit, performance of building permit inspections, or issuance of a certificate of use and occupancy, may be withheld for property on which a violation of the provisions of this Code exists, including work performed not in accordance with approved grading plans, until such violation has been corrected or mitigated to the satisfaction of the director. The director shall consult, as appropriate, with the Director of Community Development.

C.     Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the provisions of this Code shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and each such person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of this Code is committed, continued, or permitted, and upon conviction of any such violation, such person shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $500.00 or by imprisonment for not more than six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment for each offense. (3259-12/94)

 

17.05.120 Hazardous Conditions
A.    Existence. Hazardous conditions exist when the state of any natural ground, natural slopes, excavation, fill, or drainage device, all of which exist on public or private property, is a menace to life or limb, or a danger to public safety, endangers or adversely affects the safety, usability or stability of adjacent property, structures, or public or private facilities.

B.     Examination. The director may examine or cause to be examined every condition reported as hazardous as set forth in subsection A of this section.

C.     Notice of Hazardous Condition Hearing. In any case where a hazardous condition is found by the director, the director shall give notice, setting forth the finding to all owners of the property affected by the hazardous condition, authorized representative of the owners or a permittee under any active permit which gives permittee control of the property issued pursuant to this Code, hereinafter referred to as “owner”, of such required corrective work. The notice may state the time and place of a hearing to be held if the owner fails to comply with any demand for corrective work or reports. The purpose of the hearing would be for the presentation of evidence concerning the hazardous conditions and demand for corrective work or submission of reports. The notice shall set forth the right of the owner to be present at the hearing and introduce such relevant evidence on the issues. If the time and place of any hearing scheduled for the presentation of evidence is not included in the initial notice(s), it shall be included in a subsequent notice.

D.    Evidence. At the time and place so specified for the hearing, evidence shall be submitted as to the facts of any condition as to reasonably establish its existence, and the director or designee, as hearing officer, shall determine whether the facts presented reasonably establish the existence of a hazardous condition to the satisfaction of the hearing officer.

E.     Order, Finality, and Appeal. If the hearing officer determines the existence of a hazardous condition, the hearing officer shall determine whether such hazards are subject to corrective work and/or the need for more analysis through the preparation of reports and shall order such work or reports and specify a completion time.

1.     Finality of Order. The determination and order may be made orally at the hearing and shall be written and transmitted to the owner within a reasonable time. The determination and order shall become final within five days, excluding Saturdays, Sundays, and holidays, from the time it is first rendered. In the event that the owner was not present at the hearing, within five days of the mailing of the order to the last known address of said owner.

2.     Appeal. The owner may, at any time prior to the determination and order becoming final, appeal in writing the decision of the hearing officer to the City Council.

F.     Completion of Work. The owner shall, following the finality of the determination and order of the hearing officer, or if appealed, the determination and order of the City Council, commence the corrective action ordered or preparation of reports; and such work or submissions shall be completed within the specified time.

G.    Failure to Complete Work. If the owner neglects or fails to complete the corrective work or submit the reports ordered by the hearing officer or City Council within the specified time, the director may:

1.     Cause the work to be performed or reports to be prepared, or

2.     Advise the owner of the need for corrective work and warn him or her that in the absence of such corrective work, subsequent future hazards may occur which could result in an order to vacate the premises.

Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to limit the type of remedy or relief which the director may have under any other provision of law.

H.    Costs. Costs incurred by the City to perform any corrective work or prepare reports under subsection G of this section, shall be charged to the owner. The director may apply to the City Council to cause the costs to be paid and levied as a special assessment against the property and collected in a manner provided for special assessments.

I.      Vacation of Property. If necessary, the notice and order in subsection C or E of this section shall include the requirement that the property, a portion thereof, or adjacent sites be vacated within a specified time, in the interest of public safety, pending the finality of any determination and order for completion of corrective work.

J.      Notice. The director shall cause the property to be posted at conspicuous locations with a notice containing at least the following:

 

UNSAFE TO OCCUPY DO NOT ENTER

 

Director of Public Works

CITY OF HUNTINGTON BEACH

 

Date Posted _____________________

 

Said posted notice may also contain the date, time, and place of the hearing and the name, address, and telephone number of the office of the director where additional information may be obtained. Such posted notices shall remain posted until any necessary corrective work is completed. Such posted notices shall not be removed without written permission of the director, and no person shall enter the property except for the purpose of making the required corrections or preparing reports.

K.    Service of Notices. The notices and order required by subsections C and E of this section may be served either:

1.     By mailing a copy by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the owner’s address as designated on papers, applications, or permits on file with the City of Huntington Beach; or

2.     By personally delivering a copy to the owner’s address as designated on papers, applications, or permits on file with the City of Huntington Beach; or

3.     If the owner is absent from his or her place of residence and from his or her usual or designated place of business, by leaving a copy with some person of suitable age and discretion at either place, and sending a copy by certified mail, return receipt requested, addressed to the owner or authorized representative at his or her place of residence; or

4.     If such place of residence and business cannot be ascertained, or a person of suitable age or discretion there cannot be found, then by affixing a copy in a conspicuous place on the property, building or structure and also delivering a copy to a person there residing, if any, or to the person in charge, if any; and also sending a copy by certified mail, return receipt requested, addressed to the owner at the place where the property, building or structure is situated, or to the owner at his or her last known or designated address, or both. (3259-12/94)

 

17.05.130 Application for Permit
A.    To obtain a grading permit, the applicant must first file an application in writing on a form furnished by the director. The permit application shall be accompanied by information required by the director and as specified in the Grading Manual.

B.     Applications for which no permit is issued within 180 days following the date of application shall expire by limitation, and plans submitted for checking may thereafter be returned to the applicant or destroyed by the director. The director may extend the time for action by the applicant for a period not exceeding 180 days upon written request by the applicant, showing that circumstances beyond the control of the applicant have prevented action from being taken. In order to renew action for an application, after expiration, the applicant shall resubmit plans and pay a new plan check fee. (3259-12/94)

 

17.05.140 Plans and Specifications
A.    Each application for a grading permit shall be accompanied by plans and specifications, and supporting data consisting of soil engineering and engineering geology reports when required by the director.

B.     Plans and specifications shall be prepared and signed by a civil engineer, unless otherwise approved by the director. (3259-12/94)

 

17.05.150 Soils and Geology Reports
A.    A soil engineering and engineering geology report shall be required for grading projects, unless otherwise waived by the director. The reports shall include information appropriate for the site including any information required by the director. Recommendations included in the reports and approved by the director shall be incorporated in the grading plans or specifications.

B.     Soils clean up must comply with Huntington Beach Fire Code Section 17.56.165 (CFC Section 8001.5.2.5) and Fire Department Specification No. 431-92, responsibility for clean up of contaminated soil. (3259-12/94, 3621-12/03)

 

17.05.160 Issuance, Expiration and Renewal
Every permit issued shall be valid for a period of two years from the date of issuance, except as specified in subsections A and B below:

A.    Every permit issued shall expire by limitation and become void if the work authorized by such permit is not commenced within 180 days from the date of such permit, or if the work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned at any time after the work is commenced for a period of 180 days. The director may extend the 180-day expiration time limit on permits not to exceed two successive periods of 180 days each, upon written request by the applicant showing that circumstances beyond the control of the applicant have prevented action from being taken.

B.     A permit issued hereunder shall expire upon a change of ownership if the grading work thereon, for which said permit was issued, has not been completed, and a new permit shall be required for the completion of the work. If the time limitation of subsection A of this section is not applicable, and if no changes have been made to the plans and specifications last submitted to the director, no charge shall be made for the issuance of the new permit under such circumstances. If, however, changes have been made to the plans and specifications last submitted to the director, fees based on the valuation of the additional work, additional yardage, and necessary plan checking shall be charged to the permit applicant.

The director may require that grading operations and project designs be modified if delays occur which include weather related problems not considered at the time the permit was issued, and further subject to the provisions of Section 17.05.170, Denial of Permit, of this Code. If the permittee is unable to complete the work by the end of a two year period, the director may renew the grading permit on an annual basis for a fee of one-half the amount required for the original permit for such work, provided no changes have been made in the original plans and specifications for such work. (3259-12/94)

 

17.05.170 Denial of Permit
A.    The director shall not issue a permit in any case where it is found that the work as proposed by the applicant is liable to constitute a hazard to property or result in the deposition of debris on any public or private way or interfere with any existing drainage course. If it can be shown to the satisfaction of the director that the hazard can be essentially eliminated by the construction of retaining structures, buttress fills, drainage devices or by other means, the director may issue the permit with the condition that such work be performed.

B.     If, in the opinion of the director, the land areas for which grading is proposed are subject to geological or flood hazard to the extent that no reasonable amount of corrective work can eliminate or sufficiently reduce the hazard to human life or property, the grading permit shall be denied.

C.     The director may require plans and specifications to be modified in order to mitigate anticipated adverse environmental effects of proposed grading projects. The director may, under circumstances where the significant adverse environmental effects of the proposed grading project cannot be mitigated, deny the issuance of a grading permit.

D.    The director may require plans and specifications to be modified in order to make them consistent with the City of Huntington Beach General Plan, specific plans, Zoning Code or other rules, regulations, or conditions applicable to the project. The grading permit may be denied if the proposed project cannot be designed in accordance with these rules, regulations, or conditions. (3259-12/94)

 

17.05.180 Time of Grading Operations
Grading operations shall not be conducted between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. nor on Sundays and federal holidays. The director may, however, permit grading or equipment operations during specific hours after 8:00 p.m. or before 7:00 a.m. and on Sundays and federal holidays if it is determined that such operations are not detrimental to the health, safety, or welfare of the area residents. Permitted hours of operation may be shortened by the director’s finding of a previously unforeseen effect on the health, safety, or welfare of the surrounding community. However, no permit that has been issued, nor any provision of this section, shall be construed to be a waiver of the applicability of the provisions set forth in Chapter 8.40 of the Huntington Beach Municipal Code relating to noise control. (3259-12/94)

 

17.05.190 Responsibility of Permittee
It shall be the responsibility of the permittee to be knowledgeable of the conditions and restrictions of the grading permit as outlined in applicable sections of this Code, the Grading Manual, and as contained on the approved grading plans and in the approved soil and geology reports. The permittee shall also be responsible to maintain, in an obvious and accessible location on the site, a copy of the grading plans bearing the stamp of approval of the director. (3259-12/94)

 

17.05.200 Protection of Adjoining Property
Each adjacent owner is entitled to the lateral and subjacent support which his or her land receives from the adjoining land, subject to the right of the owner of the adjoining land to make proper and usual excavations on the same for purposes of construction or improvements as provided by law. (3259-12/94)

 

17.05.210 Import and Export of Earth Material
Where an excess of 5,000 cubic yards of earth per project site is moved on public roadways from or to the site of an earth grading operation, all the following requirements shall apply:

A.    Either water or dust palliative or both must be applied for the alleviation or prevention of excessive dust resulting from the loading or transportation of earth from, to, or within the project site on public roadways. The permittee shall be responsible for maintaining public rights-of-way used for handling purposes in a condition free of dust, earth or debris attributed to the grading operation.

B.     Loading and transportation of earth from or to the site must be accomplished within the limitations established in Section 17.05.180, Time of Grading Operations, of this chapter.

C.     Access roads to the premises shall be only at points designated on the approved grading plan.

D.    The last 50 feet of the access road, as it approaches the intersection with the public roadway, shall have a grade not to exceed three percent and be constructed of gravel or equivalent material to prevent mud and debris from dropping from wheels onto street travel lanes. There must be 300 feet clear, unobstructed sight distance to the intersection from both the public roadway and the access road. If the 300 feet sight distance cannot be obtained, flaggers shall be posted.

E.     A stop sign conforming to the requirements of the California Vehicle Code shall be posted at the entrance of the access road to the public roadway.

F.     An advance warning sign must be posted on the public roadway 400 feet on each side of the access intersection, carrying the words “Truck Crossing.” The sign shall be diamond shaped, each side being 30 inches in length, shall have a yellow background, and the letters thereon shall be five inches in height. The sign shall be placed six feet from the edge of the pavement, and the base of the sign shall be five feet above the pavement level. The advance warning sign shall be covered or removed when the access intersection is not in use.

G.    If the grading project includes the movement of earth material to or from the site in an amount considered substantial by the director, the permittee shall submit the haul route for review and approval by the director. The director may require, as a special condition of the grading permit, alternate routes or special requirements in consideration of the possible impact on the adjacent community environment or effect on the public right-of-way. (3259-12/94)

 

17.05.220 Grading Plan Check Fees
The applicant shall pay a plan check fee as established by resolution of the City Council and as provided in the Grading Manual at the time an application for a grading permit is made. (3259-12/94)

 

17.05.230 Grading Permit Fees
A fee for each grading permit shall be paid prior to issuance of a grading permit as established by resolution of the City Council and as provided in the Grading Manual. (3259-12/94)

 

17.05.240 Cost Recovery Fees
If the City performs emergency work on private property, the property owner shall be charged all direct and indirect costs which are necessary to complete the work to the director’s satisfaction. In addition, the director may charge a mobilization cost equal to 10% of the cost for performing the work. (3259-12/94)

 

17.05.250 Security
A.    A grading permit shall not be issued unless the permittee shall first post with the director security in a form and amount set forth in the Grading Manual. The security is required to ensure that the work, if not completed in accordance with approved plans and specifications, will be corrected to eliminate hazardous conditions and/or correct conditions that pose a threat to environmental resources including but not limited to a threat to water quality. This requirement may be waived at the discretion of the director if it is determined that:

1.     No hazardous situation is likely to occur as a result of incomplete or improper grading; and

2.     No adverse effect is likely to occur to subject property, adjacent property, or an existing or proposed structure thereon as a result of incomplete or improper grading; and

3.     No significant drainage, erosion, flooding, or siltation problems will exist as a result of incomplete or improper grading; and

4.     No adverse geological or environmental impacts will occur as a result of incomplete or improper grading; and

5.     No conditions of the permit warrant a financial guarantee to ensure their satisfactory completion.

B.     Multiple Projects. On developments where progressive individual grading projects or several concurrent projects are being constructed by one owner, a continuing (blanket) form of security which will cover all such projects may be accepted and the amount determined by the director.

C.     Additional Security. Additional security in an amount determined by the director may be required to ensure the completion of finish grading under the permit as a condition of occupancy and energizing utilities. Security in an amount determined by the director may be required for permits involving temporary earthen stockpiles to ensure their timely removal.

D.    Failure to Complete Work. In the event of failure to comply with all of the conditions and terms of the permit, the director may order the work authorized by the permit to be completed or put in a safe condition.

E.     Default in Performance of Conditions. Whenever the director finds or determines that a default has occurred in the performance of any requirement of a condition of a permit, or there is a failure to comply with an order issued pursuant to subsection D of this section, written notice thereof shall be given to the permittee and, when applicable, to the surety on the bond or other security. Such notice shall specify the work to be done, the estimated cost thereof, and the period of time deemed by the director to be reasonably necessary for the completion. After receipt of such notice, the permittee and, if applicable, surety, shall within the time specified, cause or require the work to be performed. If the work is not performed, the estimated cost of performing the work shall be demanded from the surety or, if there is no surety, obtained from the security, and the director shall cause such work to be performed and completed. The cost of the work shall include a mobilization charge as specified in Section 17.05.240. (3259-12/94, 3621-12/03)

 

17.05.260 Cuts
Cut slopes shall be no steeper than two horizontal to one vertical (2:1) unless otherwise recommended in the soil engineering or engineering geology report and approved by the director. The slope of cut surfaces shall be no steeper than is safe for the intended use. (3259-12/94)

 

17.05.270 Fills
Fill slopes shall be no steeper than two horizontal to one vertical (2:1) unless otherwise recommended in the soil engineering or engineering geology report and approved by the director. The slope of fill surfaces shall be no steeper than is safe for the intended use. (3259-12/94)

 

17.05.280 Setbacks
Structures shall be set back from the tops and toes of slopes as specified in the Grading Manual. (3259-12/94)

 

17.05.290 Drainage and Terracing
Drainage facilities and terracing shall conform to the provisions of the Grading Manual unless otherwise approved by the director and delineated on the approved grading plan. (3259-12/94)

 

17.05.300 Asphalt Concrete Pavement
A.    Asphalt concrete pavement for surfacing of parking lots, private streets, or other similar uses shall conform to the provisions of the Grading Manual unless otherwise approved by the director.

B.     The site soil engineer or special inspector shall inspect the construction of asphalt paved areas and verify to the director that the work was performed in compliance with the provisions of this section. (3259-12/94)

 

17.05.310 Erosion Control and Water Quality Requirement Systems
A.    The faces of cut and fill slopes and the project site shall be prepared and maintained to control against erosion in accordance with this Code. Where cut slopes are not subject to erosion due to erosion-resistant character of the materials, such protection may be omitted upon approval by the director.

B.     Where necessary, temporary or permanent erosion control devices such as desilting basins, check dams, riprap, or other devices or methods as approved by the director, shall be employed to control erosion and provide safety during the rain season, from October 1st to April 30th.

C.     No grading work in excess of 200 cubic yards will be allowed between October 1st and April 30th on any single grading site under permit unless an erosion control system has been approved or waived by the director.

D.    Paved streets, sidewalks, and other improvements shall be maintained in a neat and clean condition free of loose soil, construction debris, and trash. Street sweeping or other equally effective means shall be used on a regular basis to prevent storm flows from carrying sediment and debris outside the project boundaries. Watering shall not be used to clean streets except for fine material not otherwise removed by sweeping or other mechanical means.

E.     Unless otherwise approved by the director, the owner shall be required to retain a civil engineer who will be responsible for the design of all erosion control improvements and initial approval of the installation of permanent and semi-permanent erosion control devices during each rainy season, until the work authorized by the permit is given final approval. The owner shall retain the civil engineer to periodically review the field condition and modify, as needed, the design of the permanent and semi-permanent erosion control devices during the rainy season. Installation and maintenance of all erosion control devices shall be the responsibility of the owner.

F.     Desilting facilities shall be provided and maintained by the owner at drainage outlets from the graded site.

G.    Desilting basins shall be designed to provide a minimum desilting capacity equal to the current City of Huntington Beach standards.

H.    Desilting basins shall be constructed around the perimeter of projects whenever feasible when it provides improved maintenance access from paved roads during wet weather.

I.      Equipment and workers for emergency work shall be made available at all times during the rainy season. Necessary materials shall be available on-site and stockpiled at convenient locations to facilitate rapid construction of temporary devices when rain is imminent.

J.      Erosion protection shall consist of effective planting of all slopes in excess of three feet high unless otherwise approved by the director. Slopes exceeding five feet in height may require an adequate sprinkler system, as determined by the director. Protection for slopes shall be installed as soon as practicable. Effective planting shall be installed, fully germinated, and effectively cover the required slopes prior to final approval, unless otherwise approved by the director.

K.    Design or erosion control provisions shall consider drainage patterns during present and future phases of grading throughout the rain season.

L.     All removable protective devices shown shall be in place at the end of each working day when the five-day rain probability forecast exceeds 40%.

M.    Graded areas around the project site perimeter shall drain away from the face of slopes at the conclusion of each working day.

N.    In addition to the requirements specified above, the permittee shall perform all work in accordance with the water quality requirements.

O.    Any violation of an applicable federal or state-issued stormwater permit, or failure to conform to the City’s water quality requirements prepared pursuant to such a permit or pursuant to this chapter or to the City’s Stormwater and Urban Runoff Management Ordinance, Chapter 14.25, and current County of Orange DAMP, or failure to comply with stormwater related provisions of a City-issued grading permit or of a grading plan prepared to secure such a permit, is also a violation of this chapter. (3259-12/94, 3621-12/03)

 

17.05.320 Erosion Control Plans
Erosion control plans prepared by the engineer of record and in accordance with provisions of the Grading Manual shall be submitted to the director for approval by September 15th of each year for projects under grading permit. The erosion control plan may be waived for grading projects on single residential lot projects providing that an erosion control system, meeting the approval of the director, has been installed, placed, planted, or constructed before October 1st. (3259-12/94, 3621-12/03)

 

17.05.330 Erosion Control Maintenance
A.    After each rainstorm the owner shall ensure that silt and debris is removed from check berms and desilting basins and that basins are pumped dry.

B.     After each rainstorm, the performance of the erosion control system shall be evaluated and repaired as necessary.

C.     Devices shall not be moved or modified without the approval of the director.

D.    The owner shall take necessary precautions to prevent public trespass onto areas where impounded water creates a hazardous condition.

E.     The owner shall be responsible for continual maintenance of the devices during the rain season. In the event of failure or refusal by the owner to properly maintain the devices, the director may cause emergency maintenance work to be done to protect the adjacent private and public property. The cost shall be charged to the owner and shall include an initial mobilization cost, and the cost of doing the work.

F.     In the event the director must cause emergency maintenance work to be done, the director may revoke the grading permit in writing. The grading permit shall not be renewed until an erosion control system and/or other systems necessary to comply with water quality requirements approved by the director are installed and a fee of one-half the amount required for the original grading permit paid by the owner. The director may waive installation of an erosion control system after April 30th.

G.    If any grading subject to Section 17.05.050, Grading Permits, of this Code is commenced on private property without a valid grading permit, the owner may be required to prepare and implement an erosion control plan as well as other plans required under the water quality requirements which has been approved by the director. In the event of failure by the owner to install an approved erosion control system, and/or other systems necessary to comply with water quality requirements, the director may cause emergency work to be done to protect adjacent private and public property. The procedures of Section 17.05.120, Hazardous Conditions, of this Code, need not apply for emergency erosion control work between October 1st and April 30th. The cost shall be charged to the owner in accordance with subsection E of this section.

H.    All landscaping that is considered erosion control shall be continually maintained and shall be controlled by an automatic time clock system. (3259-12/94, 3621-12/03)

 

17.05.340 Inspection Authority
All grading operations for which a permit is required shall be subject to inspection by the director. (3259-12/94)

 

17.05.350 Engineer of Record Responsibility
A.    It shall be the responsibility of the civil engineer of record who prepares the grading plan approved by the director, to incorporate all recommendations from the soil engineering and engineering geology reports into the grading plan. The engineer of record shall be responsible for the professional inspection and approval of the grading within his or her other area of technical specialty. This responsibility shall include, but need not be limited to, inspection and approval line, grade, and drainage of the development area. The engineer of record shall be responsible for the preparation or coordination of revised plans, erosion control plans, and the submission of as-graded grading plans, when required by the director upon completion of the work.

B.     The soil engineer’s area of responsibility shall include, but need not be limited to, the professional inspection and approval concerning the preparation of ground to receive fills, testing for required compaction, stability of all finish slopes, design of buttress fills, subdrain installation, and incorporation of data supplied by the engineering geologist.

C.     The engineering geologist’s area of responsibility shall include, but need not be limited to, professional inspection and written approval of the adequacy of natural ground for receiving fills, the stability of cut slopes with respect to geological matters, and the need for subdrains or other groundwater drainage devices. The engineering geologist shall report findings to the soil engineer and the civil engineer for engineering analysis.

D.    The director may inspect the project at various stages of work requiring approval to determine that adequate control is being exercised by the responsible professionals. (3259-12/94, 3621-12/03)

 

17.05.360 Notification of Noncompliance
If, in the course of fulfilling their responsibility under this Code, the civil engineer, the soil engineer, the engineering geologist, or the testing agency finds that the work is not being done in conformance with the provisions of the approved specifications and grading plans, the discrepancies shall be reported immediately in writing to the person in charge of the grading work and to the director. Recommendations for corrective measures, if necessary, shall be submitted to the owner. The owner shall submit two copies of all recommendations and reports to the director. (3259-12/94)

 

17.05.370 Transfer of Responsibility for Approval
If the civil engineer, the soil engineer, the engineering geologist, the testing agency, or the grading contractor of record are changed during the course of the work, the work shall be stopped unless:

A.    The owner submits a letter of notification to the director verifying the change of the responsible professional; and

B.     The new responsible professional submits in writing to the director that he or she has reviewed all prior reports and plans (specified by date and title) and work performed by the prior responsible professional and that he or she concurs with the findings, conclusions, and recommendations, and is satisfied with the work performed. (3259-12/94)

 

17.05.380 Site Inspection by the City Inspector
A.    Prior to the approval of any building or grading plans and specifications, the City inspector may inspect the site to determine that the plans and specifications are current and reflect existing conditions.

B.     The contractor or agent shall notify the City inspector and Fire Department if, during the course of grading operations, contaminated soil is uncovered.

C.     The permittee or agent shall notify the City inspector when the grading operations for which inspection is required are ready for inspection.

D.    If the inspector finds the soil or other conditions not as stated in the approved plans and soil or geology reports, or as in additional information which was required for issuance of the grading permit, the inspector may refuse to allow further work until approval is obtained for a revised grading plan which will conform to the conditions.

E.     The provisions of Section 104.2.4, Stop Orders, of the California Building Code, shall apply to all grading work, and whenever the City inspector determines that any work does not comply with the terms of a permit, or this Code, or that the soil or other conditions are not as stated on the permit, the inspector may order the work stopped by notice in writing served on any persons engaged in doing or causing of such work to be done and any such persons shall forthwith stop such work until authorized by the City inspector to proceed with the work. (3259-12/94, 3621-12/03)

 

17.05.390 Special Inspections
The director may establish special inspection requirements in accordance with Section 1701, Special Inspections of the California Building Code, as amended for special cases involving grading or paving related operations. Special cases may apply to work, where in the opinion of the director, it is necessary to supplement the sources or expertise available for inspection. (3259-12/94, 3621-12/03)

 

17.05.400 Final Reports
Upon completion of the rough grading work and at the final completion of the work, the director may require the written approvals, reports, drawings, and supplements thereto specified in the Grading Manual. (3259-12/94)

 

17.05.410 Notification of Completion
The permittee or agent shall notify the City inspector when the grading operation is ready for final inspection. All work, including installation of all drainage facilities and their protective devices and all erosion control measures, must be completed in accordance with the final approved grading plan and the required reports approved by the director before final approval of the grading permit may be given by the City inspector. (3259-12/94)

 

Chapter 17.07 RESIDENTIAL CODE
17.07.010 Adoption
The 2019 California Residential Code, and whole thereof, including Appendix H, entitled “Patio Covers,” Appendix V, entitled “Swimming Pool Safety Act,” and all national codes and standards referenced therein (codified in Part 2.5 of Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations), as published by the International Code Council and the California Building Standards Commission, is hereby adopted by reference, subject to the amendments, deletions or additions set forth in this chapter and incorporated in the Huntington Beach Building and Construction Code.

Such code, and amendments thereto, are hereby adopted and incorporated, pursuant to California Government Code Section 50022.2 et seq., and Health and Safety Code Section 18941.5, as though fully set forth at length herein, for the purpose of regulating and administering the erection, construction, enlargement, alteration, repair, moving, removal, conversion, demolition, occupancy, equipment, use, height, area, and maintenance of residential one- and two-family dwellings or structures in the City of Huntington Beach, and repealing all ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict herewith. From the date on which this chapter takes effect the provisions of such code, together with amendments thereto shall be controlling within the corporate limits of the City of Huntington Beach. (3894-12/10, 3995-12/13, 4108-12/16, 4190-12/19)

 

17.07.020 CRC Section R101.1—Amended
CRC Chapter 1, Section R101.1 is hereby amended to read as follows:

R101.1 Title. These provisions shall be known as the Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings of Huntington Beach, may be cited as such, and will be referred to herein as “this Code.” (3894-12/10, 4190-12/19)

 

17.07.030 CRC Chapter 1, Division II, Section R103.1 Enforcement Agency—Amended
CRC Chapter 1, Division II, Section R103.1 Enforcement Agency is hereby amended to read as follows:

R103.1 Enforcement Agency. The Department of Community Development Building Division is hereby created and the official in charge thereof shall be known as the building official. (3894-12/10, 4108-12/16, 4190-12/19)

 

17.07.040 CRC Chapter 1, Division II, Section R105.2 Work Exempt From Permit—Amended
CRC Chapter 1, Division II, Section R105.2 Work Exempt From Permit is hereby amended to read as follows:

R105.2 Work exempt from permit. Exemptions from permit requirements of this Code shall not be deemed to grant authorization for any work to be done in any manner in violation of the provisions of this Code or any other laws or ordinances of this jurisdiction. Permits shall not be required for the following:

Building:

1.     One-story detached accessory structures used as tool and storage sheds, playhouses, pagodas, gazebos and similar uses, provided the floor area does not exceed 120 square feet. Such structures shall comply with setback and height requirements of the Zoning Subdivision Ordinance and the Fire Code.

2.     Masonry or concrete fences not over 42 inches in height above lowest adjacent grade and all other fences not exceeding 6 feet in height above the lowest adjacent grade and not within required zoning setbacks or subject to review by the Fire Department.

Exception: Walls and fences less than 6 feet in height that are required as a condition of project approval, subject to review by the Fire Department, guard system or pool barrier system are required to have permits.

3.     Oil derricks and tanks.

4.     Retaining walls that are not over 4 feet in height measured from the bottom of the footing to the top of the wall, unless supporting a surcharge or impounding Class I, II or IIIA liquids.

5.     Water tanks supported directly on grade if the capacity does not exceed 5,000 gallons and the ratio of height to diameter or width does not exceed 2:1.

6.     Sidewalks, platforms, decks and driveways not more than 30 inches above adjacent grade, and not over any basement or story below and not part of an accessible route.

7.     Painting, papering, filing, carpeting, cabinets, counter tops and similar finish work.

8.     Prefabricated swimming pools accessory to a Group R-3 occupancy that are less than 18 inches deep, are not greater than 5,000 gallons and are installed entirely above ground.

9.     Temporary motion picture, television and theater stage sets and scenery.

10.   Shade cloth structures constructed for nursery or agricultural purposes, not including service systems.

11.   Swings, other playground equipment and similar type recreational structures accessory to detached one- and two-family dwellings.

12.   Window awnings in Group R-3 and U occupancies, supported by an exterior wall that do not project more than 54 inches from the exterior wall and do not require additional support.

13.   Nonfixed and movable fixtures, cases, racks, counters and partitions not over 5 feet 9 inches in height.

14.   Flag poles, light poles and TV dishes in connection with a Group R, Division 3 occupancy and not exceeding 15 feet in height.

15.   Re-roofing an area smaller than 100 square feet while satisfying all applicable application requirements.

16.   Replacement doors and windows when the waterproofing membrane is not altered and emergency egress dimensions are equal to or better than the original permitted layout.

17.   New roof penetrations less than 14″ by 14″ when no framing modifications or additions are required.

Unless provided by this Code, separate plumbing, electrical and mechanical permits will be required for the above-exempted items.

Any of the above items that are located in a Floodplain Overlay District, Environmentally Sensitive Area or subject to a discretionary Planning Division approval or as otherwise required by the Planning Division or any other authority/agency is not exempt from permits.

Electrical:

1.     Repairs and maintenance: Minor repair work, including the replacement of lamps or the connection of approved portable electrical equipment to approved permanently installed receptacles.

2.     Radio and television transmitting stations: The provisions of this Code shall not apply to electrical equipment used for radio and television transmissions, but do apply to equipment and wiring for a power supply and the installations of towers and antennas.

3.     Temporary testing systems: A permit shall not be required for the installation of any temporary system required for the testing or servicing of electrical equipment or apparatus.

4.     Temporary decorative lighting.

5.     Replacement of attachment plug receptacles, but not the outlets therefor.

6.     Replacement of general use snap switches.

7.     Repair or replacement of any overcurrent device of the required capacity in the same location.

8.     Repair or replacement of electrodes or transformers of the same size and capacity for signs or gas tube systems.

9.     The wiring for temporary theater, motion picture or television stage sets.

10.   Electrical wiring, devices, appliances, apparatus or equipment operating at less than 25 volts and not capable of supplying more than 50 watts of energy.

11.   Low-energy power, control and signal circuits of Classes II and III as defined in the electrical code.

12.   Non-vehicle-mounted portable generators.

13.   Replacement of any minor part that does not alter approval of equipment or make such equipment unsafe.

Gas:

1.     Portable heating appliance.

2.     Replacement of any minor part that does not alter approval of equipment or make such equipment unsafe.

3.     Portable cooking or clothes drying appliance.

4.     Portable fuel-cell appliances that are not connected to a fixed piping system and are not interconnected to a power grid.

Mechanical:

1.     Portable heating appliances.

2.     Portable ventilation equipment or appliances.

3.     Portable cooling unit.

4.     Steam, hot or chilled water piping within any heating or cooling equipment regulated by this Code.

5.     Replacement of any part that does not alter its approval or make it unsafe.

6.     Portable evaporative cooler.

7.     Self-contained refrigeration system containing 10 pounds (4.54 kg) or less of refrigerant and actuated by motors of 1 horsepower (746 W) or less.

8.     Portable fuel-cell appliances that are not connected to a fixed piping system and are not interconnected to a power grid.

Plumbing:

1.     The stopping of leaks in drains, water, soil, waste, or vent pipe, provided, however, that if any concealed trap, drain pipe, water, soil, waste or vent pipe becomes defective and it becomes necessary to remove and replace the same with the new material, such work shall be considered as new work and a permit shall be obtained and inspection made as provided in this Code.

2.     The clearing of stoppages or the repairing of leaks in pipes, valves or fixtures and the removal and reinstallation of water closets, provided such repairs do not involve or require the replacement or rearrangement of valves, pipes, or fixtures.

3.     Repair or replacement of any plumbing fixture or appliance of the same type and size and in the same location. Exception: electric and fuel gas water heaters.

4.     Replacement of any part that does not alter its approval or make it unsafe.

(3894-12/10, 4190-12/19)

 

17.07.050 CRC Chapter 1, Division II, Section R105.3.1.1—Deleted
CRC Chapter 1, Division II, Section R105.3.1.1, Determination of substantially improved or substantially damaged existing buildings in flood hazard areas, is hereby deleted. (3894-12/10, 4190-12/19)

 

17.07.060 CRC Chapter 1, Division II, Section R105.3.2 Time Limitation of Application—Amended
CRC Chapter 1, Division II, Section R105.3.2 Time Limitation of Application is amended to read as follows:

R105.3.2 Time limitation of application. Applications for which no permit is issued within 180 days following the date of application shall expire automatically, and plans and other data submitted for review may thereafter be returned to the applicant or destroyed by the building official. The building official may extend the time for action by the applicant in increments of 180 days subject to the following conditions:

1.     The applicant shall submit an application every 180 days, accompanied by a plan review extension fee, established by resolution of the City Council.

2.     Any plans that remain in plan review over 360 days shall meet all construction standards that are adopted at the time the permit is issued.

3.     Plans may not remain in plan review more than 720 days except under extreme situations as approved by the building official.

(3894-12/10, 4190-12/19)

 

17.07.070 CRC Chapter 1, Division II, Section R105.5 Expiration—Amended
CRC Chapter 1, Division II, Section R105.5 Expiration is amended to read as follows:

R105.5 Expiration. Every permit issued shall become invalid unless the work authorized by such permit is commenced within 12 months after its issuance or after commencement of work if more than 180 days pass between inspections. Work shall be considered suspended or abandoned if substantial approval of one of the required progress inspections is not accomplished every 180 days. Before such work can be recommenced, a new permit shall be first obtained, and the fee therefor shall be one-half the amount required for a new permit for such work, provided no changes have been made or will be made in the original plans and specifications for such work; and provided further that such suspension or abandonment has not exceeded one year. In order to renew action on a permit after one year, the permittee shall pay a new full permit fee. The building official is authorized to grant, in writing one or more extensions of time, for periods not more than 180 days each. The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated.

Time limitation for permit expiration as the result of code enforcement shall be as per notice of violation or as otherwise determined by the Building Official.

(3894-12/10, 4190-12/19)

 

17.07.080 CRC Chapter 1, Division II, Section R106 Construction Documents—Added
CRC Chapter 1, Division II, Section R106 Construction Documents a new Subsection R106.1.6 is added to read in its entirely as follows:

R106.1.6 Building security. The construction drawings shall show conformance with the Building Security provisions in Building Code Chapter 36 as amended in Section 17.04.080.

(4190-12/19)

 

17.07.090 CRC Chapter 1, Division II, Section R106 Construction Documents—Added
CRC Chapter 1, Division II, Section R106 Construction Documents a new Subsection R106.1.7 is added to read in its entirely as follows:

R106.1.7 Methane Overlay District. New building construction in the defined methane overlay districts shall comply with the Building Code Chapter 55 as amended in Section 17.04.085 and with the Huntington Beach Fire Code.

(4190-12/19)

 

17.07.100 CRC Chapter 1, Division II, Section R106 Construction Documents—Added
CRC Chapter 1, Division II, Section R106 Construction Documents a new Subsection R106.1.8 is added to read in its entirely as follows:

R106.1.8 Soils report. A Soil report shall be submitted with all permit applications for new construction and additions. Soil reports shall be prepared by a professional engineer licensed by the State to prepare such reports. The Building Official may waive this requirement if he/she finds that the scope of work applied for does not necessitate a soil report.

(4190-12/19)

 

17.07.110 CRC Chapter 1, Division II, Section R108 Fees—Amended
Chapter 1, Division II, Section 108 is hereby amended to read in its entirely as:

R108.1 Payment of fees. A permit shall not be valid until the fees prescribed by law have been paid, nor shall an amendment to a permit be released until the additional fee, if any, has been paid. The building official may allow temporary exceptions.

R108.1.1 Plan review fees. When a plan or other data is required to be submitted, a plan review fee shall be paid. This fee shall be paid at the time of submitting plans and specifications for plan review. Said plan review fees shall be established by resolution of the City Council.

R108.1.2 Permit fees. The fee shall be paid at permit issuance. The standard for determination of value or valuation of the project shall be made by the building official and as established by resolution of the City Council.

R108.1.3 Miscellaneous service fees. Whenever an application is made for all other services, a fee for the service in an amount established by resolution of the City Council shall be paid to the City.

R108.2 Schedule of permit fees. On buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical, and plumbing systems or alterations requiring a permit, a fee for each permit shall be paid as required, in accordance with the schedule as established by resolution of the City Council.

R108.3 Building permit valuations. The applicant for a permit shall provide an estimated permit value at time of application. Permit valuations shall include total value of work, including materials and labor, for which the permit is being issued, such as electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing equipment and permanent systems. If, in the opinion of the building official, the valuation is underestimated on the application, the permit shall be denied, unless the applicant can show detailed estimates to meet the approval of the building official. Final building permit valuation shall be set by the building official and established by resolution of the City Council.

R108.4 Work commencing before permit issuance. Any person who commences any work on a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system before obtaining the necessary permits shall be subject to an investigation fee established by resolution by the City Council that shall be in addition to the required permit fees.

R108.5 Related fees. The payment of the fee for the construction, alteration, removal or demolition for work done in connection to or concurrently with the work authorized by a building permit shall not relieve the applicant or holder of the permit from the payment of other fees that are prescribed by law.

R108.6 Refunds. The building official may authorize the refund of any fee paid hereunder for work that was not performed or for fees that were collected erroneously as established by resolution of the City Council.

(3894-12/10, 4190-12/19)

 

17.07.120 CRC Chapter 1, Section R112.1 Board of Appeals General—Amended
CRC Chapter 1, Section R112.1 is hereby amended to read in its entirely as follows:

R112.1 General. In order to hear and decide appeals of the orders, decisions or determinations made by the building official relative to the application and interpretation of this code, there shall be and hereby created a board of appeals. The board of appeals shall be appointed by the City Council and shall hold office at its pleasure. The board shall adopt rules of procedure for conducting its business, and shall render all decisions and findings in writing to the appellant with a duplicate copy to the building official. Depending on the subject of the appeal, specialized expertise may be solicited for the purpose of providing input to the appeals board.

(4190-12/19)

 

17.07.130 CRC Chapter 3, Section R301.1.3.2 Engineered Design—Amended
CRC Subsection R301.1.3.2 is hereby amended to read in its entirely as follows:

R301.1.3.2. Woodframe structures greater than two-stories. The building official shall require construction documents to be approved and stamped by a California licensed architect or engineer for all dwellings of woodframe construction more than two stories in height or with basement. Notwithstanding other sections of law, the law establishing these provisions is found in Business and professions Code Sections 5537 and 6737.1.

(3894-12/10, 4190-12/19))

 

17.07.140 CRC Chapter 3, Table R301.2(1) Climatic and Geographic Design Criteria—Amended
 

TABLE R301.2(1)

 

GROUND SNOW LOAD

WIND DESIGN

SEISMIC DESIGN CATEGORY f

SUBJECT TO DAMAGE FROM

WINTER DESIGN TEMP e

ICE BARRIER UNDERLAYMENT REQUIRED h

FLOOD HAZARDS g

AIR FREEZING INDEX i

MEAN ANNUAL TEMP j

SPEED d (mph)

TOPOGRAPHIC

EFFECTS k

WEATHERING a

FROST LINE DEPTH b

TERMITE c

Zero

110

No

D2 or E

Negligible

12-24″

Very Heavy

43

No

See Footnote g

0

60

 

MANUAL J DESIGN CRITERIA

 

Elevation

Latitude

Winter Heating

Summer Cooling

Altitude Correction Factor

Indoor Design Temperature

Design Temperature Cooling

Heating Temperature Difference

40

34

41

80

1.00

70

75

 

Cooling Temperature Difference

Wind Velocity Heating

Wind Velocity Cooling

Coincident Wet Bulb

Daily Range

Winter Humidity

Summer Humidity

 

7

 

 

68

14

5

75

 

(3894-12/10, 4190-12/19)

 

17.07.150 Amendment to Table R301.2(1) Footnote g
Table R301.2(1) footnote g is amended to read as follows:

Section Table R301.2(1) Footnote g. For the latest information regarding City’s FIRM Maps for Flood Hazard Locations, City’s entry into the National Flood Insurance Program, dates of the Flood Insurance Study, and Panel Numbers (copies of which are on file in the Office of the City’s Community Development Department) visit Flood Information section in the Community Development Home Page at:

https://www.huntingtonbeachca.gov/government/departments/planning/flood/index.cfm

(4190-12/19)

 

17.07.160 CRC Chapter 3, Section R313.1 Townhouse Automatic Fire Sprinkler Systems—Amended
R313.1 Townhouse automatic fire sprinkler systems. An automatic residential fire sprinkler system shall be installed in townhouses per Huntington Beach Fire Code Chapter 17.56.

Exception: For additions and alterations to existing townhomes, see Huntington Beach Fire Code Chapter 17.56.

(3894-12/10, 4190-12/19)

 

17.07.170 CRC Chapter 3, Section R313.2 One- and Two-Family Dwellings Automatic Fire Sprinkler Systems—Amended
R313.2 One- and two-family dwellings automatic fire sprinkler systems. An automatic residential fire sprinkler system shall be installed in one- and two-family dwellings per Huntington Beach Fire Code Chapter 17.56.

Exception: For additions and alterations to existing one- and two-family dwellings, see Huntington Beach Fire Code Chapter 17.56.

(3894-12/10, 4190-12/19)

 

17.07.180 CRC Section R322.1 Flood-Resistant Construction General—Amended
Section R322.1 General is hereby amended to read as follows:

R322.1 General. Buildings and structures constructed in whole or in part in flood hazard areas, including A or V Zones and Coastal A Zones, as established in Table R301.2(1), and substantial improvement and repair of substantial damage of buildings and structures in flood hazard areas, shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the most restrictive provisions contained in the Floodplain Overlay District in the Zoning and Subdivision Ordinance Chapter 222, Local Coastal Program or this section. Buildings and structures that are located in more than one flood hazard area shall comply with the provisions associated with the most restrictive flood hazard area. Buildings and structures located in whole or in part in identified floodways shall be designed and constructed in accordance with ASCE 24.

(4190-12/19)

 

17.07.190 Section R902 Fire Classification—Deleted
Section R902 is amended in its entirety and replaced by California Building Code Section 1505 as amended in Huntington Beach Municipal Code Sections 17.04.140 through 17.04.150. (4190-12/19)

 

17.07.200 Chapter 45 Building Security—Added
The Residential Code is hereby amended by adding thereto new Chapter 45 entitled, “Building Security,” to read as follows:

Building security shall comply with Building Code Chapter 36 as amended in Section 17.04.160.

(4190-12/19)

 

17.07.210 Methane District Regulations—Added
The Residential Code is hereby amended by adding thereto new Chapter 55 entitled “Methane District Regulations” to read as follows:

Projects in Methane District shall comply with Building Code Chapter 55 as amended in Section 17.04.170 and with the Huntington Beach Fire Code.

(4190-12/19)

 

Chapter 17.08 HOUSING CODE
Note
*       Note: § 17.08.030 repealed by Ord. 3022-12/89; § 17.08.040 repealed by Ord. 3035-3/90.

 

17.08.010 Title
This Uniform Housing Code shall be known as and referred to as the “Huntington Beach Housing Code.” (1935-11/74, 2431-7/80, 2474-2/85, 3022-12/89)

 

17.08.020 Adoption
There is hereby adopted by the City Council by reference that certain code known as the 2016 California Housing Code, and the whole thereof except as hereafter provided. The purpose of such code is to arrest, remedy and prevent the decay and deterioration of places of habitation and to eliminate slums and blighted neighborhoods by providing minimum requirements for places of habitation for the protection of life, health, welfare, safety and property of the general public and of the owners and occupants of places of habitation in the City; and to provide penalties for the violation thereof, and repealing all ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict herewith. Such code is adopted and incorporated as fully as though set out at length herein, as provided by California Government Code Section 50022.2 et seq., and Health and Safety Code Section 18941.5. From the date on which this chapter takes effect, the provisions of said code together with amendments thereto shall be controlling within the corporate limits of the City of Huntington Beach. (1424-7/68, 1627-2/71, 2431-7/80, 2747-2/85, 2976-12/88, 3022-12/89, 3147-7/92, 3423-7/99, 3996-12/13, 4109-12/16)

 

17.08.025 Fire Protection
Chapter 9 is hereby amended to add Section 902 to read as follows:

§ 902 Smoke Detectors. As originally provided by Ord. 3006-6/89, all Group R Division 3 occupancies shall have smoke detectors installed in conformance with the requirements of the Huntington Beach Municipal Code. (3423-7/99)

 

Chapter 17.10 HUNTINGTON BEACH NUISANCE CODE
Note
*       Note: §§ 17.10.100—17.10.190 repealed by Ord. 3398-7/98.

 

17.10.010 Nuisance Defined
As used in this chapter, a nuisance shall mean activities or conditions which affect the social and economic stability of neighborhoods, impair property values and which are injurious or detrimental to the health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of Huntington Beach. (3386-3/98)

 

17.10.020 Additional Enforcement Remedies
The procedures provided for in this chapter shall be cumulative and in addition to any other procedure or legal remedy provided for in this Code or by state law for the abatement of nuisance related activities or conditions. Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prevent the City from commencing a civil or criminal proceeding to abate a nuisance under applicable civil, penal or Municipal Code provisions as an alternative or alternatives to the proceedings set forth in this chapter. (3386-3/98)

 

17.10.030 Definitions
As used in this chapter:

“Abate” and “abatement” shall mean action to terminate, remove, stop, cease, repair, replace or otherwise remedy a nuisance related activity or condition by such means and in such manner as is necessary to the interest of the health, safety or general welfare of the public.

“Administrative abatement officer” shall mean the City Manager and any other person or persons designated by the City Manager as being an administrative abatement officer.

“Person,” “responsible person,” and “responsible party” shall mean any individual, business or entity who is responsible for causing, maintaining or permitting a nuisance activity or condition. The terms “person,” “responsible person” or “responsible party” include, but are not limited to, a property owner, tenant, person with a legal interest in real property or person in possession or occupying real property, the president or other officer of a corporation, a business owner or manager of a business.

 

Any act of negligent or willful conduct of a minor which results in the creation or maintenance of a condition or activity which constitutes a nuisance within the meaning of this chapter shall be imputed to the parent or guardian having custody and control of the minor for all purposes, including the duty to abate the nuisance(s) and the imposition of administrative penalties and costs as provided for herein. The parent or guardian having custody and control of the minor shall be jointly and severally liable with the minor for any and all penalties or costs imposed pursuant to this chapter.

“Premises” shall mean any location, building, structure, residence, garage, room, shed, shop, store, dwelling, lot, parcel, land or portion thereof whether improved or unimproved. (3386-3/98, 3398-7/98)

 

17.10.040 Abatement of Nuisance Related Activities or Condition
Any activity, condition or premise(s) maintained as described herein is declared to be a public nuisance and shall be abated by cessation of the activity, rehabilitation, demolition, removal, repair or other appropriate remedy pursuant to the procedures set forth in this chapter. (3386-3/98, 3398-7/98)

 

17.10.050 Nuisance Designated
It is hereby declared a public nuisance, or an act in the nature of a public nuisance, for any person or party to cause, permit, abet or otherwise allow any premises in this City to be used in such a manner that any one or more of the activities or conditions described in the following subsections are found to occur thereon.

A.    Any condition or activity which is a “nuisance” or a “public nuisance” as defined in Sections 3479 and 3480 of the Civil Code of the State of California or which is specifically declared to constitute a nuisance or public nuisance by any statute of the State of California or by any ordinance of the City of Huntington Beach.

B.     The violation of any provisions of the following California Codes which have been adopted, as amended, by the City of Huntington Beach:

1.     California Building Code;

2.     California Electrical Code;

3.     California Fire Code;

4.     California Residential Code;

5.     California Plumbing Code;

6.     California Mechanical Code;

7.     Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings;

8.     Uniform Swimming Pool, Spa and Hot Tub Code.

C.     The violation of any provision of the Huntington Beach Municipal Code, or the Huntington Beach Zoning and Subdivision Ordinance Code, or any code adopted by reference.

D.    The operation or maintenance of any business, trade or profession in violation of Title 5 of this Code, or lack of a proper certificate of occupancy.

E.     The frequent gathering, or coming and going, of people who have an intent to purchase or use controlled substances on or at any premises in this City.

F.     Participation in a criminal street gang as proscribed by California Penal Code Section 186.22.

G.    The making or continuing, or causing to be made or continued, of any loud, unnecessary or unusual noise which disturbs the peace and quiet of the neighborhood or which causes discomfort or annoyance to any reasonable person of normal sensitiveness residing in the area.

H.    The occurrence of criminal activity at any premises which threatens the life, health, safety or welfare of the residents of the premises, neighbors or the public.

I.      Buildings which are abandoned, boarded up, partially destroyed or left unreasonably in a state of partial construction.

J.      Land, the topography or configuration of which, whether in a man-made state or as a result of grading operations, excavation or fill, causes erosion, subsidence, or surface water drainage problems of such magnitude as to be injurious to the public health, safety and welfare or to adjacent properties.

K.    The failure to secure and maintain from public access all doorways, windows and other openings into vacant structures.

L.     Overgrown vegetation on developed property which:

1.     Harbors rats, vermin, and other disease carriers; or

2.     Causes detriment to neighboring properties or property values; or

3.     Causes a hazardous condition to pedestrian and/or vehicular traffic.

M.    Dead, decayed, diseased or hazardous trees, weeds and other vegetation on developed property which:

1.     Constitutes an unsightly appearance; or

2.     Creates danger to public safety and welfare; or

3.     Is detrimental to nearby property or property values.

N.    Abandoned, broken, neglected machinery or equipment which poses a potential hazard to the general public.

O.    Unprotected or hazardous excavations, swimming pools, and ponds.

P.     Broken or discarded furniture, household equipment and appliances on the premises which causes damage or is a detriment to neighboring properties.

Q.    Packing boxes, lumber, dirt and other trash or debris outside commercial and industrial buildings which is visible from public streets and causes detriment to neighboring properties.

R.     Accumulation of dirt, litter or debris in doorways, adjoining sidewalks, parking lots and landscaped areas.

S.     Deteriorated parking lots which have pot holes, cracks and ridges.

T.     Fences in a state of disrepair or in a dilapidated condition.

U.    Premises including, but not limited to, building exteriors which are maintained in such condition as to become so defective, unsightly or in such condition of deterioration or disrepair that the same causes diminution of the property values of surrounding property or is materially detrimental to proximal properties and improvements. This includes, but is not limited to, the keeping and disposing of or the scattering over the property or premises of any of the following: (1) lumber, junk, trash or debris; (2) abandoned or discarded or unused objects or equipment such as automobiles, furniture, stoves, refrigerators, freezers, cans or containers; (3) stagnant water or excavation(s); (4) any device, decoration, design, fence, structure, clothesline or vegetation which is unsightly by reason of its condition or inappropriate location; or (5) permitting or allowing any graffiti to remain on any building, wall, fence or structure.

V.    The use of any premises for the purpose of illegal gambling, lewdness, assignation, or prostitution as proscribed by State law or this Code.

W.    The maintenance, use, rental or lease of any premises, or subunit thereof, including single-family dwellings, where persons are allowed to congregate, gather or loiter in such a manner as to disturb the peace of other persons lawfully on the property itself or lawfully in the vicinity of the property.

X.    The use of any premises for the purpose of unlawfully selling, serving, storing, keeping, manufacturing or giving away any controlled substance, precursor, or analog as those terms are defined by state law.

Y.    Noise disturbances in violation of Chapter 8.40 of this Code.

Z.     Maintenance of properties or premises in such a manner as to cause substantial diminution of the enjoyment, use, or property values of adjacent properties.

AA.  The maintenance of any sidewalk or driveway located on private property which is debilitated, broken, damaged, or raised to such a degree as to be unsightly if it can be viewed from public property, or to be injurious to property or injurious to persons using said driveway or sidewalk.

BB.  The maintenance of property where buildings or structures have been left boarded up for a period in excess of 10 days without a valid demolition or building permit on file with the Huntington Beach Community Development Department or abate said boarded up condition.

CC.  The maintenance of buildings or structures used or intended to be used for dwelling purposes, storage or similar uses, because of dilapidation, decay, damage, or faulty construction or arrangement, or otherwise, is unsanitary or unfit for human habitation or use is in a condition that is likely to cause injury or be detrimental to the health, safety, or general welfare of those living in the area or within.

DD.  The maintenance of any building or portion thereof, including any dwelling unit, guestroom or suite of rooms, or the premises on which the same is located, in which there exists any of the following listed conditions to an extent that endangers the life, limb, health, property, safety, or welfare of the public or the occupants thereof shall be deemed and hereby is declared to be a substandard building as defined in Section 17920.3 of the Health and Safety Code of the State of California. (3386-3/98, 3398-7/98, 3997-11/13)

 

17.10.051 Graffiti
A.    Upon personal observation or the receipt of a complaint of graffiti or other inscribed material that is located on public or private property within the City so as to be capable of being viewed by a person utilizing any public right-of-way, the Director of Public Works or his or her representative may deliver or cause to be delivered a letter to the private or public property owner advising said owner that he or she is maintaining a public nuisance. The Director of Public Works or his or her representative is authorized to provide for the removal of such graffiti or other inscribed material at the City’s expense upon the following conditions:

1.     Where a structure or personal property is owned by a public entity other than the City, the removal of the graffiti or other inscribed material may be authorized only after securing the written consent of the public entity having jurisdiction over the structure or personal property and such entity executes a release and waiver approved as to form by the City Attorney.

2.     Where a structure or personal property is privately owned, the removal of the graffiti or other inscribed material may be authorized only after securing the written consent of the owner and the owner executes a release and waiver approved as to form by the City Attorney.

3.     In removing the graffiti or other inscribed material, the painting or repair of an area more extensive than where the graffiti or inscribed material is located shall not be authorized, unless the owner agrees to pay for the costs of repainting or repairing a more extensive area.

B.     If the public or private property owner’s consent cannot be obtained, said owner shall have the duty to remove the graffiti or inscribed material at his or her expense, pursuant to the following provisions:

1.     The Director of Public Works or his or her designee shall cause written notice to be served upon the owner of the affected premises requiring that the graffiti or other inscribed material located on the property be painted over, repaired, or removed within 72 hours.

2.     The written notice may be served upon the property owner either by posting such on the affected premises or by certified mail. If written notice is made by certified mail, then service shall be complete at the time of deposit in the U. S. Postal Service. (3739-7/06)

 

17.10.052 Appeal of the Action by the Director of Public Works
A.    If an owner served with written notice by the Director of Public Works or his or her designee requiring removal of graffiti or other inscribed written material from his or her property disagrees with the imposition of such an obligation on the basis that it is being wrongfully applied, compliance would result in undue hardship, or the belief that he or she should not be required to conform with Section 17.10.051(B) due to unique circumstances, he or she may appeal such decision to the City Manager within 10 days after service of the written notice. The appeal shall be in writing to the City Manager and shall set forth the basis of the appeal and be submitted with all supporting documents, if any.

B.     Within 10 days after receipt of the notice of appeal, the City Manager or his or her designee shall render a written decision and mail a copy of such registered or certified mail to the owner. Service of the written notice shall be complete at time of deposit in the U.S. Postal Service. (3739-7/06)

 

17.10.053 Appeal to the City Council
A.    Any owner dissatisfied by the decision of the City Manager may request a hearing before the City Council. Such a request must be filed with the City Clerk’s office within 10 days after service of the written notice of the decision by the City Manager.

B.     Within 15 days of receipt of request for a hearing, the City Manager or his or her designee shall give not less than 10 days written notice by certified or registered mail of the date, time, and place of such a hearing to the applicant. The City Council, on appeal, shall consider all documents put forth by the applicant to the Director of Public Works and the City Manager. The City Council may consider any additional evidence, including points and authorities of law, that it deems necessary in rendering a decision. The decision of the City Council shall be final, and a notification of such shall be mailed to the owner. (3739-7/06)

 

17.10.054 Abatement of Graffiti by City
A.    The City Council, after such public hearing, upon a finding of the existence of the graffiti or inscribed material and that such is designated as a nuisance under this chapter, shall order the Director of Public Works to do said work, at the expense of the owner of the property, and provide for temporary payment of the same with City funds.

B.     At the completion of the work, the Director of Public Works must prepare a statement of the proceedings, reciting the existence of the nuisance, the description of the property, the names of the owners and occupants, if known, the giving of notices, the holding of the public hearing, the making of the work order by the City Council, the doing of the work, and the cost thereof.

C.     Such statement must be signed and verified by the Director of Public Works and filed with the City Council.

D.    All costs incurred by the City shall constitute a charge and special assessment upon such parcel of land. If such costs are not paid within a period specifically set by the City, they shall then be declared a special assessment against that parcel as provided in Section 38773.5 of the Government Code. Such special assessment shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary county taxes are collected, and shall be subject to the same penalties and the same procedures and sale in case of delinquency as provided for ordinary county taxes. The City shall retain the additional and independent right to recover its costs by way of civil action against the owner and person in possession or control, jointly or severally. (3739-7/06)

 

17.10.060 Violations
A.    The owner or other person having charge or control of any such buildings or premises who maintains any public nuisance defined in this chapter, or who violates any notice of abatement served as provided in this chapter, is guilty of a misdemeanor.

B.     Any occupant or lessee in possession of any such building or structure who fails to vacate said building or structure in accordance with a notice given as provided in this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor.

C.     Any person who obstructs, impedes or interferes with any representative of the City Council or with any representative of a City department or with any person who owns or holds any estate or interest in a building which has been ordered to be vacated, repaired, rehabilitated, or demolished or with any person to whom any such building has been lawfully sold pursuant to the provisions of this chapter when any of the aforementioned individuals are lawfully engaged in proceedings involving the abatement of a nuisance is guilty of a misdemeanor. (3386-3/98, 3739-7/06)

 

17.10.070 Alternatives
Nothing in the foregoing sections shall prevent the City Attorney from commencing a civil or criminal proceeding to abate a public nuisance under applicable provisions of the California Civil Code or Penal Code as an alternative to the proceedings set forth herein. (3386-3/98, 3398-7/98)

 

17.10.080 Reward
The City Council may provide a reward, by resolution, for information leading to the identification and apprehension of any person who applies graffiti within the City. In cases where multiple persons are identified and apprehended, based on a single graffiti incident, only one reward is authorized. (3765-4/07, 3777-10/07)

 

Chapter 17.12 DANGEROUS BUILDINGS CODE
Note
*       Note: §§ 17.12.020 and 17.12.030 repealed by Ord. 3307-12/95.

 

17.12.010 Adoption
There is hereby adopted by the City Council by reference that certain code known as the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings, 1997 edition, and the whole thereof, save and except such portions as are hereinafter deleted, modified, or amended, for the purpose of providing a just, equitable and practicable method, or otherwise available at law, whereby buildings or structures which from any cause endanger the life, limb, health, morals, property, safety or welfare of the general public or their occupants, may be required to be repaired, vacated or demolished; providing penalties for the violation of such code, and repealing all ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict therewith, and the same is hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as though set out at length herein, as provided by California Government Code Section 50022 et seq., and Health and Safety Code Section 18941.5. From the date on which this chapter takes effect, the provisions of said code together with amendments thereto shall be controlling within the corporate limits of the City of Huntington Beach. (1332-7/66, 1629-2/71, 1883-1/74, 2431-7/80, 2747-2/85, 2976-12/88, 3022-12/89, 3147-7/92, 3307-12/95, 3424-7/99, 3791-1/08)

 

Chapter 17.14 SAFETY ASSESSMENT PLACARDS
17.14.010 Intent
This chapter establishes standard placards to be used to indicate the condition of a structure for continued occupancy. The chapter further authorizes the building official and his or her authorized representatives to post the appropriate placard at each entry point to a building or structure upon completion of a safety assessment. (3904-1/11)

 

17.14.020 Application of Provisions
The provisions of this chapter are applicable to all buildings and structures of all occupancies regulated by the City of Huntington Beach. (3904-1/11)

 

17.14.030 Definitions
“Safety assessment” is a visual, non-destructive examination of a building or structure for the purpose of determining the condition for continued occupancy. (3904-1/11)

 

17.14.040 Placards
A.    The following are verbal descriptions of the official jurisdiction placards to be used to designate the condition for continued occupancy of buildings or structures. Copies of actual placards are attached.

1.     INSPECTED - Lawful Occupancy Permitted is to be posted on any building or structure wherein no apparent structural hazard has been found. This placard is not intended to mean that there is no damage to the building or structure.

2.     RESTRICTED USE is to be posted on each building or structure that has been damaged wherein the damage has resulted in some form of restriction to the continued occupancy. The individual who posts this placard will note in general terms the type of damage encountered and will clearly and concisely note the restrictions on continued occupancy.

3.     UNSAFE - Do Not Enter or Occupy is to be posted on each building or structure that has been damaged such that continued occupancy poses a threat to life safety. Buildings or structures posted with this placard shall not be entered under any circumstance except as authorized in writing by the building official, or his or her authorized representative. Safety assessment teams shall be authorized to enter these buildings at any time. This placard is not to be used or considered as a demolition order. The individual who posts this placard will note in general terms the type of damage encountered.

B.     This section number, the name of the jurisdiction, its address, and phone number shall be permanently affixed to each placard.

C.     Once it has been attached to a building or structure, a placard is not to be removed, altered or covered until done so by an authorized representative of the building official. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to alter, remove, cover or deface a placard unless authorized pursuant to this section.

 



 



 



 



 



 



 

(3904-1/11)

 

Chapter 17.24 SUN DECKS—WINDSCREENS
Note
*       Note: §§ 17.24.040 and 17.24.050 repealed by Ord. 2216-10/77; §§ 17.24.070 and 17.24.080 repealed by Ord. 2337-1/79.

 

17.24.010 Construction
Decks projecting beyond the bulkhead shall meet the following design requirements:

A.    Decks shall be designed to sustain a minimum live load of 100 pounds per square foot.

B.     There shall be no moment connection between the deck and the bulkhead.

C.     Projecting decks shall be designed to sustain all dead loads plus the required live load within the stresses permitted for the particular materials by the California Building Code. In no case shall the resultant load on the bulkhead, from dead loading, exceed 750 pounds per lineal foot. In addition, a maximum equivalent uniform live load of 50 pounds per square foot is permitted. This live load shall be used to account for all ancillary features incorporated into the deck/patio structure including but not limited to overlayment, windscreens, and planters.

D.    Projecting decks are permitted along the bulkhead provided the total length of the deck along the bulkhead does not exceed 80% of the length of the bulkhead abutting the lot.

E.     The elevation of the top of the deck shall not be higher than the height of the slab of the ground floor of the dwelling unit nor be more than 18 inches above the top of the bulkhead, whichever is less.

F.     All decks shall be in conformance with the Huntington Beach Zoning and Subdivision Ordinance Code. (1114-1/65, 2216-10/77, 2975-12/88, 3022-12/89, 3231-4/94, 3791-1/08)

 

17.24.020 Railing
Railing, not exceeding 42 inches in height and capable of withstanding a horizontal force of 50 pounds per lineal foot applied to the top of the railing may be constructed completely surrounding the deck area. (1114-2/65, 2216-10/77, 3998-12/13)

 

17.24.030 Windscreen
The windscreens may enclose the entire deck perimeter within the following structural limitations:

A.    Windscreens may be supported horizontally by bracing to the main dwelling.

B.     The windscreen shall be designed to withstand a horizontal wind load of 10 pounds per square foot.

C.     Except for necessary framing and overhead windbreaks, all portions of the windscreen above the allowed 42 inch railing height shall be open or of clear glass or other transparent material. (1114-1/65)

 

17.24.060 Applicable to Waterfront Lots
This chapter shall apply only to lots designated as waterfront lots, and decks projecting beyond the bulkhead line shall be limited to wharfage areas assigned to said waterfront lots. (1114-1/65, 2559-7/82)

 

Chapter 17.28 MOVING BUILDINGS
17.28.010 Permit—Application—Conditions
A.    No person, firm or corporation shall move any building, structure, or portion of a building or structure into the City or relocate within the City, or cause the same to be done without first obtaining a separate relocation permit for each building or structure.

B.     Such relocation permit shall be subject to the following conditions:

1.     Payment of a nonrefundable relocation fee, established by resolution of the City Council;

2.     All streets shall be dedicated to their ultimate right-of-way and improved to City standards including street trees, street lights and street signs;

3.     All utilities shall be installed underground;

4.     On-site walkways and driveways shall be installed to City standards;

5.     The building shall be repainted;

6.     Payment of all required fees; and

7.     A cash bond in the amount specified in Section 17.28.110(B). (1208-5/66, 1244-8/66, 2337-1/79, 2431-7/80)

 

17.28.020 Permit—Application
To obtain a permit the applicant shall first file an application therefor. Every such application shall contain or have appended thereto the following information:

A.    Name of street and official house number, the name of the tract and/or block and zone use legend, the lot number and its dimensions, where the building or structure to be moved is to be placed;

B.     The proposed use or occupancy for the building;

C.     The tract, block, lot, zone use and official address of the building or structure’s existing location;

D.    All dimensions and structural type of the building or structure;

E.     The nature of the repairs and any alterations or additions;

F.     The complete valuation of the proposed work;

G.    A plot plan drawn to scale shall be filed with the application. Such plot plan shall indicate with dimensions, all existing and proposed setbacks; and

H.    Two clear photographs of the building. (764-4/60, 2431-7/80)

 

17.28.030 Moving Notice Cards Posted
When such application is filed with all the information required, the building shall be inspected to determine if the structures can be made to conform with applicable State of California and Huntington Beach building regulations. If the structure can be made to conform, the moving notice cards shall be made and posted by the City. If the building cannot be made to conform with the minimum requirements of the Huntington Beach Building Code, the application shall be denied. (1185-2/66, 2431-7/80, 2975-12/88)

 

17.28.040 Moving Notice Card Specifications
The notice of moving and relocation card shall contain the following information:

A.    A brief description of the structure or structures, and the address from which and to which it is proposed to move such structure or structures;

B.     A statement that if a written protest, signed by one or more persons who own real property within 300 feet of the location to which the structure or structures is to be moved, is filed in the Office of the City Clerk within seven days after the notice of moving and relocation has been posted, such protest shall be heard and determined by the City Council at its first regular meeting after the time for filing protests has expired; and

C.     A statement that if a written protest has not been filed with the City Clerk, as provided in subsection B of this section, and provided that all other requirements have been satisfied, a relocation permit will be issued. (1185-2/66, 2431-7/80)

 

17.28.050 Cards Posted in Conspicuous Place
One moving notice card shall be posted in clear view in a conspicuous place approximately 15 feet back of the front property line on the lot to which it is proposed to move the building or structure. If the proposed move of the building or structure is to a corner lot, a second moving notice card shall be posted in like manner, facing the secondary street. A moving notice card shall be posted on the front of any building or structure to be moved within the City. (1185-2/66, 2431-7/80)

 

17.28.060 Card Posting Period
The moving notice cards shall remain posted for a period of seven consecutive days. At the end of such time, moving notice cards shall be removed by an official of the City. (1185-2/66, 2431-7/80)

 

17.28.070 Determination of Effect of Move
If, following initial inspection of the building, it is determined that the structure would have an adverse effect on the characteristics of the neighborhood to which it is proposed that the building be moved, the Planning Director shall refer the matter to the Zoning Administrator. (1244-8/66, 2431-7/80, 2975-12/88, 3022-12/89)

 

17.28.080 Review by Zoning Administrator
The Zoning Administrator shall review the matter as an administrative act to determine whether the movement of the building to its proposed location will adversely affect the neighborhood based on the following criteria:

A.    The age of the building compared with the age of those already in the neighborhood;

B.     Architectural design of the building compared with those in the neighborhood and the effect upon same; and

C.     The size of the structure in comparison to those in the neighborhood. (1244-8/66, 2431-7/80, 2975-12/88)

 

17.28.090 Decision of Zoning Administrator
The Zoning Administrator may approve, conditionally approve or disapprove the application for a permit to relocate. (1244-8/66, 2431-7/80, 2975-12/88)

 

17.28.100 Protest and Hearing
A.    Any protest with respect to a decision of the Zoning Administrator against the moving of a building or structure shall be in writing, signed by one or more persons owning real property within 300 feet of the relocation to which it is proposed such building or structure be moved, and filed in the Office of the City Clerk within the time specified on the moving notice card.

B.     The City Council shall hear such protest at its first regular meeting after the time for filing protests has expired. (764-4/60, 1244-8/66, 2431-7/80, 2975-12/88)

 

17.28.110 Relocation Permit—Bond Required
A.    No relocation permit shall be issued unless the applicant has first posted a cash bond.

B.     The bond shall, in form joint and several, name the City of Huntington Beach as obligee, and shall be in an amount equal to the cost, plus 50% of the work required to be done, in order to comply with all of the conditions of such relocation permit as estimated by the building official.

C.     No bond, however, need be posted in any case where the building official shall determine that the only relocation involved is that of moving a building temporarily to a regularly occupied business premises of a house mover or that of moving a building to adjacent property of the same owner; but the exceptions herein made shall not apply unless the building official finds that no such security is necessary in order to ensure compliance with the requirements of this section. (764-4/60, 1244-8/66, 2431-7/80, 2975-12/88)

 

17.28.120 Bond Conditions
Every bond posted pursuant to this section shall be conditioned:

A.    That each and all of the terms and conditions of the relocation permit shall be complied with to the satisfaction of the building official.

B.     That all of the work required to be done pursuant to the conditions of the relocation permit shall be fully performed and completed within the time specified in the relocation permit; or if no time is specified, within 90 days after the relocation permit is issued. The time specified in any permit may be extended for good and sufficient cause by the building official. No such extension of time shall be valid unless in writing, and no such extension shall release any surety from any bond. (764-4/60, 2431-7/80)

 

17.28.130 Default in Performance of Conditions—Notice Given
A.    Whenever the building official shall find that a default has occurred in the performance of any term or condition of any permit, written notice thereof shall be given to the principal.

B.     Such notices shall specify the work to be done, the estimated cost thereof, and the period of time deemed by the building official to be reasonably necessary for the completion of such work.

C.     After receipt of such notice the owner shall cause the required work to be performed or failing therein, the building official shall then proceed forthwith to cause the required work to be performed and completed. All costs incurred shall be paid out of the aforementioned cash bond. No liability shall be incurred therein other than for the expenditure of the sum in hand therefor. (764-4/60, 1244-8/66, 2431-7/80)

 

17.28.140 Cash Bond—Manner of Enforcement
If a cash bond has been posted, notice of default, as provided above, shall be given to the principal, and if compliance is not obtained within the time specified, the building official, in his or her discretion, shall proceed without delay and without further notice of proceedings whatever to use the cash deposit or any portion of such deposit to cause the required work to be done by contract or otherwise. The balance, if any, of such cash deposit shall, upon completion of the work, be returned to the depositor or his or her successor or assigns, after deducting the cost of the work plus 25% thereof. (764-4/60, 2431-7/80)

 

17.28.150 Option to Demolish Building
When any default has occurred on the part of the principal under the preceding provisions, the building official shall have the option, in lieu of completing the work required, of demolishing the building or structure and clearing, cleaning and restoring the site. (764-4/60, 1244-8/66, 2431-7/80)

 

17.28.160 Bond—Period and Termination
The term of each bond posted, pursuant to this section, shall terminate upon the completion to the satisfaction of the building official of the performance of all the terms and conditions of the relocation permit. Such completion shall be evidenced by a statement thereof, signed by the building official, a copy of which shall be sent to any principal upon request. When a cash bond has been posted, the cash shall be returned to the depositor or to his or her successors or assigns upon the termination of the bond, except any portion thereof that may have been used or deducted as elsewhere in this chapter provided. (764-4/60, 1244-8/66, 2431-7/80)

 

17.28.170 Entry Upon Premises
The building official and his or her duly authorized representatives shall have access to the premises described in the relocation permit for the purpose of inspecting the progress of the work. (1244-8/66, 2431-7/80)

 

17.28.180 Default—Completion of Work by City
In the event of any default in the performance of any term or condition of the relocation permit, the building official or his or her authorized representative shall have the right to go upon the premises to complete the required work or to remove or demolish the building or structure. (1244-8/66, 2431-7/80)

 

17.28.190 Interference with Completion by City
It is unlawful for the owner or his or her representative, successors or assigns, or any other person, to interfere with or obstruct the ingress or egress to or from any such premises of the City of Huntington Beach, engaged in the work of completing, demolishing or removing any building or structure for which a relocation permit has been issued after default has occurred in the performance of the terms or conditions thereof. (764-4/60, 1244-8/66, 2431-7/80)

 

17.28.200 Relocation Permits—Exception
The provisions of this chapter relating to the posting of bonds shall not apply where the building or structure is to be moved to a location outside the City limits. In such cases, if the building official finds that the building or structure is so constructed and in such condition that it can be moved with safety, the permit shall be issued without the requirement of a bond. (764-4/60, 1244-8/66, 2431-7/80)

 

Chapter 17.38 TEMPORARY RENTAL OF MOBILE HOMES IN MOBILE HOME PARKS
17.38.010 Findings and Purpose
The City Council finds that various mobile home parks prohibit the owner of a mobile home from renting it for any period of time, and that such non-rental rules from time to time impose hardships on owners of mobile homes who are unable to reside in their mobile homes, but are held liable for the space rental and upkeep of their mobile home while it is vacant and until the mobile home can be sold or otherwise re-occupied. It is the purpose of this chapter to alleviate hardships on such owners who are unable to reside in their mobile homes by allowing the temporary rental of the mobile home for a reasonable period required for the owner to sell or re-occupy the mobile home. (3277-5/95)

 

17.38.020 Temporary Rental of Mobile Home
It shall be unlawful for any person to prohibit an owner of a mobile home in a mobile home park from renting that mobile home under the following circumstances:

A.    An owner of a mobile home who has resided therein for at least a one-year period prior to the vacancy that necessitates renting the mobile home is unable to continue to occupy the mobile home either temporarily or permanently by reason of (1) illness; (2) death; or (3) other personal hardship.

B.     An owner of a mobile home who has resided therein for at least a one-year period prior to the vacancy that necessitates renting the mobile home can no longer continue to meet the rules of occupancy of a mobile home park by reason of a change of circumstances.

C.     A non-institutional owner or person in a fiduciary capacity who has received ownership of, or the possessory right to, a mobile home through probate, bankruptcy or foreclosure, or the owner’s incapacity, and requires time to arrange for the sale of the mobile home, or to arrange for occupancy of the mobile home by the owner.

D.    Hereafter, “renter” refers to the person or persons who pay rent to the mobile home owner in exchange for the temporary right to reside within the subject mobile home (and the related right to occupy the space upon which the mobile home is located), but not as a co-occupant with the owner. Any renter of a mobile home must meet all the rules of occupancy of the mobile home park in which the mobile home is located with the exception of any rule which directly or indirectly prohibits, in conflict with this section, the temporary rental of a mobile home for up to one year. Prior to the mobile home renter’s taking occupancy, that renter and the mobile home owner shall provide the park owner with:

1.     A copy of the mobile home rental agreement;

2.     The true names of all intended occupants and their residential phone number;

3.     Business phone numbers for all adult occupants who have such numbers; and

4.     An agreement signed by all adult occupants which reads as follows:

I have received copies of the lease between the park owner and the home owner for Space # ______ and current park rules. I have read those documents with care. I believe I understand them. I believe that I qualify for occupancy under those rules and the master lease (except for provisions prohibiting subleasing). I agree to abide by those Park Rules and to meet all obligations of that master lease which are relevant to an occupant. I understand that the park owner may directly enforce the within agreement against me without giving up any rights against the mobile home owner.

E.     Such temporary rentals authorized by this chapter may not exceed 12 months in any two-year period subject to renewal because of continued hardship. (3277-5/95)

 

17.38.030 Severability
If any provision of this chapter or the application thereof to any person or circumstances is held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of the chapter which can be given effect without the invalid provision or application, and to this end the provisions of this chapter are severable. (3277-5/95)

 

Chapter 17.40 MECHANICAL CODE
Note
*       Note: § 17.40.030 repealed by Ord. 3425-7/99; §§ 17.40.045—17.40.060 repealed by Ord. 3790-1/08; § 17.40.040 repealed by Ord. 3999-12/13.

 

17.40.010 Adoption
The 2019 California Mechanical Code, and whole thereof, including Appendices A, B, and C, except as hereinafter provided but excluding Chapters 1 and 14 thereof (codified in Part 4 of Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations), as published by the International Code Council and the California Building Standards Commission, is hereby adopted by reference, subject to the amendments, deletions or additions set forth in this chapter and incorporated in the Huntington Beach Building and Construction Code.

Such code, and amendments thereto, are hereby adopted and incorporated, pursuant to California Government Code Section 50022.2 et seq., and Health and Safety Code Section 18941.5, as fully as though set forth at length herein, for the purpose of protecting public health and safety by prescribing by minimum standards for the use, design and installation of heating, ventilating, comfort-cooling equipment and refrigeration systems; by requiring a permit and inspection for the installation, alteration and replacement of said equipment. From the date on which this chapter takes effect, the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the corporate limits of the City of Huntington Beach. (2747-6/85, 2976-12/88, 3022-12/89, 3147-7/92, 3312-2/96, 3425-7/99, 3574-10/02, 3790-1/08, 3895-12/10, 3999-12/13, 4110-12/16, 4190-12/19)

 

17.40.020 Section 101.1—Amended
CMC Chapter 1, Section 101.1 is hereby amended to read as follows:

101.1 Title. This document shall be known as the “Huntington Beach Mechanical Code,” may be cited as such, and will be referred to herein as “this Code.”

(1938-10/74, 2431-7/80, 2747-6/85, 4190-12/19)

 

17.40.025 Administration
The administrative provisions shall be as provided for in the California Building Code, Chapter 1 Division II, Scope And Administration as adopted pursuant to Chapter 17.04 of the Huntington Beach Municipal Code. (3892-12/10, 4190-12/19)

 

Chapter 17.44 PLUMBING CODE
Note
*       Note: §§ 17.44.030 and 17.44.095 repealed by Ord. 3790-1/08; §§ 17.44.040, 17.44.050 and 17.44.090 repealed by Ord. 3022-12/89; §§ 17.44.060—17.44.080 repealed by Ord. 3147-7/92; § 17.44.100 repealed by 3309-12/95.

 

17.44.010 Adoption
The 2019 California Plumbing Code, and whole thereof, including Appendices A, D, E, and I, except as hereinafter provided, but excluding Chapters 1, entitled “Administration” (codified in Part 5 of Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations), as published by the International Code Council and the California Building Standards Commission, is hereby adopted by reference, subject to the amendments, deletions or additions set forth in this chapter and incorporated in the Huntington Beach Building and Construction Code.

Such code and amendments thereto, are hereby adopted and incorporated, pursuant to California Government Code Section 50022.2 et seq., and Health and Safety Code Section 18941.5 as fully as though set forth at length herein for the purpose of prescribing regulations governing the installation, alteration, repair and maintenance of plumbing and drainage systems. From the date on which this chapter takes effect, the provisions of said code, together with amendments thereto, shall be controlling within the corporate limits of the City of Huntington Beach. (1937-10/74, 2089-8/76, 2431-7/80, 2747-2/85, 2976-12/88, 3022-12/89, 3147-7/92, 3426-7/99, 3790-1/08, 3896-12/10, 4000-12/13, 4111-12/16, 4190-12/19)

 

17.44.020 Section 1.01.1—Amended
CPC Chapter 1, Section 101.1 is hereby amended to read as follows:

101.1 Title. This document shall be known as the “Huntington Beach Plumbing Code,” may be cited as such, and will be referred to herein as “this Code.”

(1409-5/68, 1630-2/71, 1937-10/74, 2431-7/80, 2747-2/85, 2976-12/88, 4190-12/19)

 

17.44.022 Administration
The administrative provisions shall be as provided for in the California Building Code, Chapter 1 Division II, Scope And Administration as adopted pursuant to Chapter 17.04 of the Huntington Beach Municipal Code. (3896-12/10, 4190-12/19)

 

17.44.040 Section 312.1—Amended
Section 312.1 of Section 312 of CPC is hereby amended to read in its entirety as follows:

312.1 General. All underground copper piping and PEX tubing installed in a potable water system throughout the City limits must be completely sleeved with a minimum six millimeter polyvinyl sleeve.

(3147-7/92, 3309-12/95, 3426-7/99, 3575-10/02, 3790-1/08, 3896-12/10, 4000-12/13, 4190-12/19)

 

Chapter 17.46 SWIMMING POOL, SPA AND HOT TUB CODE
17.46.010 Adoption
There is hereby adopted by the City Council by reference that certain code known as the Uniform Swimming Pool, Spa and Hot Tub Code (USPSHTC), compiled by the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials, being particularly the 2018 edition thereof and the whole thereof, except as hereafter provided excluding Chapter 1, “Administration.”

Such code, and amendments thereto, are hereby adopted and incorporated pursuant to California Government Code Section 50022.2 et seq., and Health and Safety Code Section 18941.5 as fully as though set out at length herein for the purpose of protecting public health and safety by prescribing minimum standards for the use, design and installation of swimming pool, spa and hot tub systems; by requiring a permit and inspection for installation, alteration and replacement of said systems. From the date on which this chapter takes effect, the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the corporate limits of the City of Huntington Beach. (3147-7/92, 3310-12/95, 3427-7/99, 3898-12/10, 4001-12/13, 4112-12/16, 4190-12/19)

 

17.46.020 Section 101.1—Amended
Uniform Swimming Pool, Spa and Hot Tub Code Chapter 1, Section 101.1 is hereby amended to read as follows:

101.1 Title. This document shall be known as the Uniform Swimming Pool, Spa, and Hot Tub Code of Huntington Beach, may be cited as such, and will be referred to herein as “this Code.”

(4190-12/19)

 

17.46.030 Administration
Except as amended below, the administrative provisions shall be as provided for in the California Building Code, Chapter 1 Division II, Scope And Administration as adopted pursuant to Chapter 17.04 of the Huntington Beach Municipal Code. (3898-12/10, 4190-12/19)

 

17.46.040 Section 108—Added
New Section 108 Authority to Abate is hereby added to read as follows:

108 Authority to abate.

A.    It shall be unlawful and is hereby declared to be a public nuisance for any person owning, leasing, occupying or having charge of any residential property in the City to maintain such premises in such a manner that any of the following conditions are found to exist thereon:

1.     The failure to secure and maintain from public access all doorways, gate access and other openings, with regards to the barrier requirements of this Code.

2.     Uncleanliness of swimming pool water as determined by the building official. All swimming pool and spa water shall be maintained in a clear condition which is free of algae, insects, debris and in a sanitary condition. The entire floor of the swimming pool shall be clearly visible.

B.     Where a nuisance exists, the building official shall require the nuisance or violation to be abated and where necessary, shall seek such abatement in the manner provided by law.

(3147-7/92, 3898-12/10, 4190-12/19)

 

17.46.050 Chapter 2—Amended
Chapter 2 of the USPSHTC is hereby amended by adding or modifying the following definitions:

 

209 Grade (surface) - The underlying surface such as earth or a walking surface.

218 Portable - A non-permanent structure intended for recreational bathing, in which all controls, water-heating and water-circulating equipment are an integral part of the product and which is cord connected (not permanently electrically wired).

221 Swimming Pool - A swimming pool is any body of water having a depth exceeding 18 inches at any point, constructed, fabricated or installed for swimming, bathing or wading purposes. This includes in-ground, above- ground and on-grade pools, spas and hot tubs.

(3147-7/92, 3310-12/95, 3576-10/02, 3898-12/10, 4190-12/19)

 

17.46.060 Subsection 301.2.4—Amended
Chapter 3, Subsection 301.2.4 is amended to read as follows:

301.2.4 Fuel Gas Piping. Fuel gas piping shall be installed in accordance with the requirements of the Huntington Beach Plumbing and Mechanical Codes.

(3147-7/92, 3310-12/95, 3427-7/99, 4190-12/19)

 

17.46.070 Section 402.3—Amended
Section 402.3 is hereby amended to read as follows:

Swimming pools shall be designed to withstand anticipated stresses under both full and empty conditions, taking into consideration climatic, hydrostatic, seismic, geotechnical, and integration of the pool with other structural conditions. All swimming pool construction shall be in conformance with engineered design for expansive soils, unless a soils report by a registered engineer, approved by the building official, indicates otherwise.

(4190-12/19)

 

17.46.080 Section 512.1—Amended
Section 512.1 General is hereby amended by adding the following exception:

512.1 Exception: Spas and hot tubs under 750 gallons shall not be required to discharge into a sewer.

(4190-12/19)

 

17.46.090 Section 803.0—Amended
Section 803.0 Barrier Requirements is deleted in its entirety and replaced with Section 3109 of the California Building Code as amended by Huntington Beach Municipal Code Chapter 17.04. (4190-12/19)

 

Chapter 17.48 ELECTRICAL CODE
Note
*       Note: § 17.48.030 repealed by Ord. 3428-7/99; §§ 17.48.050 and 17.48.060 repealed by Ord. 3790-1/08; §§ 17.48.080—17.48.100 repealed by Ord. 2976-12/88.

 

17.48.010 Adoption
There is hereby adopted by the City Council by reference that certain code known as the 2019 California Electrical Code, except as hereafter provided.

Such code is hereby adopted and incorporated pursuant to Government Code Section 50022.2 et seq., and Health and Safety Code Section 18941.5 for the purpose of prescribing regulations governing the installation, alteration, repair and maintenance of all electrical installations in the City of Huntington Beach, and repealing all ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict therewith. From the date on which this chapter takes effect, the provisions of said code, together with amendments thereto, shall be controlling within the corporate limits of the City of Huntington Beach. (2787-9/85, 2976-12/88, 3022-12/89, 3115-6/91, 3311-12/95, 3428-7/99, 3577-10/02, 3719-8/05, 3790-1/08, 3897-12/10, 4002-11/13, 4113-12/16, 4190-12/19)

 

17.48.020 Section 101.1—Amended
CEC Chapter 1, Section 101.1 is hereby amended to read as follows:

101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the “Huntington Beach Electrical Code,” may be cited as such, and will be referred to herein as “this Code.”

(2787-9/85, 4190-12/19)

 

17.48.025 Administration
The administrative provisions shall be as provided for in the California Building Code, Chapter 1 Division II, Scope And Administration as adopted pursuant to Chapter 17.04 of the Huntington Beach Municipal Code. (3897-12/10, 4190-12/19)

 

17.48.040 Section 250.52(A)(5)—Amended
Section 250.52(A)(5), Rod and pipe electrodes, is amended to read as follows:

250.52(A)(5) Rod and Pipe Electrodes. Rod electrodes shall not be less than 2.5m (8 ft.) in length, and shall consist of the following materials:

a)     Permanent rod electrodes shall be stainless steel.

b)     Temporary rod electrodes for temporary construction power poles may be copper or copper clad.

c)     Stainless steel rods less than 15.87 mm (5/8 in.) in diameter and nonferrous rods shall be listed and shall not be less than 13mm (1/2 in.) in diameter.

(3719-8/05, 3897-12/10, 4190-12/19)

 

Chapter 17.49 ENERGY CODE
17.49.010 Adoption
The 2019 California Energy Code (codified in Part 6 of Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations), as published by the International Code Council and the California Building Standards Commission, is hereby adopted by reference, subject to the amendments, deletions or additions set forth in this chapter and incorporated in the Huntington Beach Building and Construction Code.

Such code, and amendments thereto, are hereby adopted and incorporated, pursuant to California Government Code Section 50022.2 et seq., and Health and Safety Code Section 18941.5, as fully as though set forth at length herein, for the purpose of regulating and administering the erection, construction, enlargement, alteration, repair, moving, removal, conversion, demolition, occupancy, equipment, use, height, area, and maintenance of buildings or structures in the City of Huntington Beach, and repealing all ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict herewith. From the date on which this chapter takes effect the provisions of such code, together with amendments thereto shall be controlling within the corporate limits of the City of Huntington Beach. (4190-12/19)

 

Chapter 17.50 HISTORICAL BUILDING CODE
17.50.010 Adoption
The 2019 California Historical Building Code (codified in Part 8 of Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations), as published by the International Code Council and the California Building Standards Commission, is hereby adopted by reference, subject to the amendments, deletions or additions set forth in this chapter and incorporated in the Huntington Beach Building and Construction Code.

Such code, and amendments thereto, are hereby adopted and incorporated, pursuant to California Government Code Section 50022.2 et seq., and Health and Safety Code Section 18941.5, as fully as though set forth at length herein, for the purpose of regulating and administering the erection, construction, enlargement, alteration, repair, moving, removal, conversion, demolition, occupancy, equipment, use, height, area, and maintenance of buildings or structures in the City of Huntington Beach, and repealing all ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict herewith. From the date on which this chapter takes effect the provisions of such code, together with amendments thereto shall be controlling within the corporate limits of the City of Huntington Beach. (4190-12/19)

 

Chapter 17.51 EXISTING BUILDING CODE
17.51.010 Adoption
The 2019 California Existing Building Code (codified in Part 10 of Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations), as published by the International Code Council and the California Building Standards Commission, is hereby adopted by reference, subject to the amendments, deletions or additions set forth in this chapter and incorporated in the Huntington Beach Building and Construction Code.

Such code, and amendments thereto, are hereby adopted and incorporated, pursuant to California Government Code Section 50022.2 et seq., and Health and Safety Code Section 18941.5, as fully as though set forth at length herein, for the purpose of regulating and administering the erection, construction, enlargement, alteration, repair, moving, removal, conversion, demolition, occupancy, equipment, use, height, area, and maintenance of buildings or structures in the City of Huntington Beach, and repealing all ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict herewith. From the date on which this chapter takes effect the provisions of such code, together with amendments thereto shall be controlling within the corporate limits of the City of Huntington Beach. (4190-12/19)

 

17.51.020 Section 101.1—Amended
Section [A] 101.1 is hereby amended to read as follows:

101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the “Existing Building Code of Huntington Beach, may be cited as such, and hereinafter referred to as “this Code.”

(4190-12/19)

 

17.51.030 Administration
Chapter 1, Division II, Sections 101 through 115 shall be as provided for in the California Building Code, Chapter 1 Division II, Scope And Administration as adopted pursuant to Chapter 17.04 of the Huntington Beach Municipal Code. (4190-12/19)

 

Chapter 17.52 GREEN BUILDING STANDARDS CODE
17.52.010 Adoption
The 2019 California Green Building Standards Code (codified in Part 11 of Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations), as published by the International Code Council and the California Building Standards Commission, is hereby adopted by reference, subject to the amendments, deletions or additions set forth in this chapter and incorporated in the Huntington Beach Building and Construction Code.

Such code, and amendments thereto, are hereby adopted and incorporated, pursuant to California Government Code Section 50022.2 et seq., and Health and Safety Code Section 18941.5, as fully as though set forth at length herein, for the purpose of regulating and administering the erection, construction, enlargement, alteration, repair, moving, removal, conversion, demolition, occupancy, equipment, use, height, area, and maintenance of buildings or structures in the City of Huntington Beach, and repealing all ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict herewith. From the date on which this chapter takes effect the provisions of such code, together with amendments thereto shall be controlling within the corporate limits of the City of Huntington Beach. (4190-12/19)

 

Chapter 17.53 REFERENCED STANDARDS CODE
17.53.010 Adoption
The 2019 California Referenced Standards Code (codified in Part 12 of Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations), as published by the International Code Council and the California Building Standards Commission, is hereby adopted by reference, subject to the amendments, deletions or additions set forth in this chapter and incorporated in the Huntington Beach Building and Construction Code.

Such code, and amendments thereto, are hereby adopted and incorporated, pursuant to California Government Code Section 50022.2 et seq., and Health and Safety Code Section 18941.5, as fully as though set forth at length herein, for the purpose of regulating and administering the erection, construction, enlargement, alteration, repair, moving, removal, conversion, demolition, occupancy, equipment, use, height, area, and maintenance of buildings or structures in the City of Huntington Beach, and repealing all ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict herewith. From the date on which this chapter takes effect the provisions of such code, together with amendments thereto shall be controlling within the corporate limits of the City of Huntington Beach. (4190-12/19)

 

Chapter 17.56 HUNTINGTON BEACH FIRE CODE
17.56.010 Adoption
An ordinance of the City of Huntington adopting the 2018 Edition of the International Fire Code, regulating and governing the safeguarding of life and property from fire and explosion hazards arising from the storage, handling and use of hazardous substances, materials and devices, and from conditions hazardous to life or property in the occupancy of buildings and premises in the City of Huntington Beach; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; repealing Ordinance No. 4123 of the City of Huntington Beach and all other ordinances or parts of laws in conflict therewith.

Section 1. That the California Fire Code 2019 Edition, three (3) copies of which are on file in the office of the City Clerk of the City of Huntington Beach including all omissions in Chapter 1, Division II, Chapter 3 except Section 301.8.4, Chapter 11, Chapter 25, Chapter 26, and Appendix Chapters E, F, G, and H (see California Fire Code Section 101.2.1, 2019 edition), as published by the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the Fire Code of the City of Huntington Beach, in the State of California regulating and governing the safeguarding of life and property from fire and explosion hazards arising from the storage, handling and use of hazardous substances, materials and devices, and from conditions hazardous to life or property in the occupancy of buildings and premises as herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Fire Code on file in the office of the City of Huntington Beach are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this legislation, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in Section 2 of this Ordinance.

Section 2. That Ordinance No. 4123 of City of Huntington Beach entitled An Ordinance of the City of Huntington Beach Amending Chapter 17.56 of the Huntington Beach Municipal Code Adopting the California Fire Code and all other ordinances or parts of laws in conflict herewith are hereby repealed.

Section 3. That if any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this legislation is, for any reason, held to be unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this Ordinance. The City Council hereby declares that it would have passed this law, and each section, subsection, clause or phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses and phrases be declared unconstitutional.

Section 4. That nothing in this legislation or in the Fire Code hereby adopted shall be construed to affect any suit or proceeding pending in any court, or any rights acquired, or liability incurred, or any cause or causes of action acquired or existing, under any act or ordinance hereby repealed as cited in Section 4 of this law; nor shall any just or legal right or remedy of any character be lost, impaired or affected by this legislation.

Section 5. That the City Clerk is hereby ordered and directed to cause this legislation to be published.

(4189-12/19)

 

17.56.020 Definition
Wherever the word “jurisdiction” is used in the Fire Code as a reference to a location, it shall mean the City of Huntington Beach. (4189-12/19)

 

17.56.030 CFC Section [A] 101.1 Title, Amended
These regulations shall be known as the City of Huntington Beach Fire Code (HBFC), hereinafter referred to as “this code.” (4189-12/19)

 

17.56.040 CFC Section [A] 102.7 Referenced codes and standards, Amended
The codes and standards referenced in this code shall be those that are listed in Chapter 80 as well as City Specifications as signed by the Fire Chief, and such codes and standards shall be considered to be part of the requirements of this code to the prescribed extent of each such reference and as further regulated in Sections 102.7.1 and 102.7.2. (4189-12/19)

 

17.56.050 CFC Section [A] 105.4.2.1 Fire Protection system shop drawings, Amended
Shop drawings for the fire protection system(s) shall be submitted to indicate compliance with this code and the construction documents, and shall be approved prior to the start of installation. Shop drawings shall contain all information as required by the referenced installation standards in Chapter 9. Shop drawings are required for any fire protection system that is to be installed or modified, regardless of the number of sprinkler heads, alarm devices or nozzles involved, or the dollar value of the work. (4189-12/19)

 

17.56.060 CFC Section 105.6.30 Mobile food preparation vehicles, Amended
A permit is required for mobile food preparation vehicles that are part of a Huntington Beach permitted special or specific event equipped with appliances that produce smoke or grease-laden vapors. (4189-12/19)

 

17.56.070 CFC Section [A] 108.1 Board of appeals established, Amended
In order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the fire code official relative to the application and interpretation of this code, there may be created a board of appeals. The board of appeals shall be appointed by the City Council and shall hold office at its pleasure. The fire code official shall be an ex officio member of said board but shall have no vote on any matter before the board. The board shall adopt rules of procedure for conducting its business, and shall render all decisions and findings in writing to the appellant with a duplicate copy to the fire code official. (4189-12/19)

 

17.56.080 CFC Section [A] 110.4 Violation Penalties Amended
Persons who shall violate a provision of this code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who shall erect, install, alter, repair or do work in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the fire code official, or of a permit or certificate used under provisions of this code shall be guilty of a misdemeanor as prescribed in Chapter 1.16 of the Huntington Beach Municipal Code, or may be subject to administrative citations as prescribed in Chapter 1.18 of the Huntington Beach Municipal Code. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense. (4189-12/19)

 

17.56.090 CFC Section 202, Definitions, CONTAINMENT VESSEL, Amended
A gas-tight Department of Transportation-transportable recovery vessel designed so that a leaking compressed gas container can be placed within its confines thereby encapsulating the leaking container. (4189-12/19)

 

17.56.100 CFC Section 321, Development on or near land containing or emitting toxic combustible or flammable liquids, gases or vapors, Added
 

SECTION 321

DEVELOPMENT ON OR NEAR LAND CONTAINING OR EMITTING TOXIC, COMBUSTIBLE OR FLAMMABLE LIQUIDS, GASES OR VAPORS, Added

 

321.1 Geological studies, evaluations, reports. The fire code official may require the submittal for approval of geological studies, evaluations, reports remedial recommendations and/or similar documentation from a state licensed and department-approved individual or firm on any parcel of land to be developed which has, or is adjacent to, or within 1000 feet of a parcel of land that has an active or abandoned oil or gas well operation, petroleum or chemical refining facility, petroleum or chemical storage, or may contain or give off toxic, combustible or flammable liquids, gases or vapors. The submitted documentation will show that the site is compliant with current signed City Specifications 429, Methane District Building Permit Requirements and 431-92, Soil Quality Standards.

(4189-12/19)

 

17.56.110 CFC Section 322, Parade floats, Added
CFC SECTION 322

PARADE FLOATS, Added

 

322.1 Decorative materials, Added. Decorative materials on parade floats shall be non-combustible or flame retardant.

322.2 Fire protection, Added. Motorized parade floats and towing apparatus shall be provided with a minimum 2A10BC rated portable fire extinguisher readily accessible to the operator.

322.3 Engine exhaust, Added. Motorized parade floats shall be provided with an engine exhaust system that is capable of carrying the exhaust product away from any enclosed spaces to the open air.

(4189-12/19)

 

17.56.120 CFC Section 503.1.1 Buildings and facilities, Amended
Approved fire apparatus access roads shall be provided for every building, facility or portion of a building hereafter constructed or moved into or within the jurisdiction. The fire apparatus access road shall comply with the requirements of this section and current signed City Specification 401, Minimum Standards for Fire Apparatus Access, and shall extend to within 150 feet (45,720 mm) of all portions of the facility and all portions of the exterior walls of the first story of the building as measured by an approved route around the exterior of the building or facility.

Exceptions:

1.     The fire code official is authorized to increase the dimension of 150 feet (45,720 mm) where:

1.2.  Fire apparatus access roads cannot be installed because of location on property, topography, waterways, nonnegotiable grades or other similar conditions, and an approved alternative means of fire protection is provided.

1.3.  There are not more than two Group R-3 or Group U occupancies.

(4189-12/19)

 

17.56.130 CFC Section 503.2 Specifications
Fire apparatus access roads shall be installed and arranged in accordance with Sections 503.2.1 through 503.2.8 and current City Specification 401, Minimum Standards for Fire Apparatus Access. (4189-12/19)

 

17.56.140 CFC Section 503.2.1 Dimensions, Amended
The fire access roads shall comply with the requirements stated in current City Specification 401, Minimum Standards for Fire Apparatus Access. (4189-12/19)

 

17.56.150 CFC Section 503.2.3 Surface, Amended
Fire apparatus access roads shall comply with the requirements stated in current City Specification 401, Minimum Standards for Fire Apparatus Access. (4189-12/19)

 

17.56.160 CFC Section 503.2.4 Turning radius, Amended
The required turning radius of a fire apparatus access road shall comply with the requirements stated in current City Specification 401, Minimum Standards for Fire Apparatus Access. (4189-12/19)

 

17.56.170 CFC Section 503.2.5 Dead ends, Amended
Dead-end fire apparatus access roads in excess of 150 feet (45,720 mm) in length shall comply with the requirements stated in current City Specification 401, Minimum Standards for Fire Apparatus Access. (4189-12/19)

 

17.56.180 CFC Section 503.6 Security gates, Amended
The installation of security gates across a fire apparatus access road shall be installed and operated in accordance with current City Specification 403, Fire Access for Pedestrian or Vehicular Security Gates & Buildings. (4189-12/19)

 

17.56.190 CFC Section 505.1 Address identification, Amended
New and existing buildings shall be provided with address identification in accordance with City Specification 428, Premises Identification. (4189-12/19)

 

17.56.200 CFC Section 506.1 Where required, Amended
Where access to or within a structure or an area is restricted because of secured openings or where immediate access is necessary for life-saving or fire-fighting purposes, the fire code official is authorized to require a key box to be installed in an approved location in accordance with current City Specification 403, Fire Access for Pedestrian or Vehicular Security Gates & Buildings. (4189-12/19)

 

17.56.210 CFC Section 507.1 Required water supply, Amended
An approved water supply capable of supplying the required fire flow for fire protection shall be provided to premises upon which facilities, buildings or portions of buildings are hereafter constructed or moved into or within the jurisdiction.

 

Exception: Title 25 California Code of Regulations, Chapter 2, Subchapter 1, Article 6 – Fire Protection Standards for Parks – is hereby adopted by reference, and applies to all existing mobile home parks licensed by the State of California Department of Housing and Community Development (HCD), notwithstanding any contrary provisions as set forth in Title 25, Section 1304(a).

(4189-12/19)

 

17.56.220 CFC Section 507.5 Fire hydrant systems, Amended
Fire hydrant systems shall comply with Sections 507.5.1 through 507.5.7 and Appendix C, or by an approved method. Minimum fire hydrant spacing for multi-family residential (triplexes or greater, apartment houses, hotels, convents or monasteries) and all commercial or industrial properties shall be spaced not more than 300 feet along streets or fire apparatus access roadways, so that all fire apparatus-accessible portions of the building are within 150 feet of a hydrant. Minimum fire hydrant spacing for single-family detached and duplex residential dwellings shall be not more than 500 feet along the street or fire apparatus access roadways, so that each dwelling is within 300 feet of a hydrant. (4189-12/19)

 

17.56.230 CFC Section 507.5.7 Fire hydrant supply connections, Added
It shall be prohibited for underground water supply lines with a single connection from a municipal main to supply both fire hydrants and fire suppression systems. Looped supply lines that are supplied from two points of connection shall be allowed for hydrants and fire suppression system supplies. (4189-12/19)

 

17.56.240 CFC Section 901.6.3 Records, Amended
Records of all system inspections, tests and maintenance required by the referenced standards shall be maintained. All reports of the test and maintenance results shall be submitted to the Huntington Beach Fire Department electronically in a method and format selected by the fire code official. (4189-12/19)

 

17.56.250 CFC Section 903.2 Where Required, Amended
Approved automatic sprinkler systems in new buildings and structures as well as existing buildings and structures, as required by Section 1103.5.5, shall be provided in the locations described in Sections 903.2.1 through 903.2.12. In no case, where the provisions of Section 903 of this code are applicable, and notwithstanding any less restrictive provisions or exceptions, shall a building or structure be constructed or modified to exceed 10,000 square feet in total gross floor area, or 5,000 square feet in gross floor area per fire area, without approved automatic sprinkler systems being provided throughout the building or fire area, respectively. (4189-12/19)

 

17.56.260 CFC Section 903.2.4 Group F, Amended
An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout all buildings containing a Group F occupancy where one of the following conditions exists:

1.     A Group F fire area exceeds 5,000 square feet.

2.     A Group F fire area is located more than three stories above grade plane.

3.     Reserved.

4.     A Group F occupancy used for the manufacture of upholstered furniture or mattresses exceeds 2,500 square feet (232 m²).

(4189-12/19)

 

17.56.270 CFC Section 903.3.1.1.1 Exempt location, Amended
In other than Group I-2, I-2.1 and I-3 occupancies, automatic sprinklers shall not be required in the following rooms or areas where such rooms or areas are protected with an approved automatic fire detection system in accordance with Section 907.2 that will respond to visible or invisible particles of combustion. Sprinklers shall not be omitted from any room merely because it is damp, of fire-resistance rated construction or contains electrical equipment.

1.     Any room where the application of water, or flame and water, constitutes a serious life or fire hazard.

2.     Any room or space where sprinklers are considered undesirable because of the nature of the contents, when approved by the fire code official.

3.     Fire service access elevator machine rooms and machinery spaces.

4.     Machine rooms, machinery spaces, control rooms, and control spaces with occupant evacuation elevators designed in accordance with Section 3008 of the California Building Code.

5.     When approved by the fire code official, spaces or areas in telecommunications buildings used exclusively for telecommunications equipment, and associated electrical power distribution equipment, provided those spaces or areas are equipped throughout with an automatic smoke detection system in accordance with Section 907.2 and are separated from the remainder of the building by not less than 1-hour fire barriers constructed in accordance with Section 707 of the California Building Code or not less than 2-hour horizontal assemblies constructed in accordance with Section 712 of the California Building Code, or both.

6.     Solar photovoltaic panel structures with no use underneath. Signs may be provided, as determined by the enforcing agency prohibiting any use underneath including storage.

7.     Solar photovoltaic (PV) panels supported by framing that have sufficient uniformly distributed and unobstructed openings throughout the top of the array (horizontal plane) to allow heat and gases to escape, as determined by the enforcing agency.

(4189-12/19)

 

17.56.280 CFC Section 903.3.5.3 Hydraulic calculations margin, Added
Fire protection system hydraulic calculations shall include a 10 percent safety margin between the available water supply and the required system supply. (4189-12/19)

 

17.56.290 CFC Section 903.4 Sprinkler system supervision and alarms, Amended
All valves controlling the water supply for automatic sprinkler systems, pumps, tanks, water levels and temperatures, critical air pressures and water-flow switches on all sprinkler systems shall be electrically supervised by a listed fire alarm control unit.

Exceptions:

1.     Automatic sprinkler systems protecting one- and two-family dwellings.

2.     Limited area systems in accordance with Section 903.3.8.

3.     Reserved.

4.     Jockey pump control valves that are sealed or locked in the open position.

5.     Reserved.

6.     Valves controlling the fuel supply to fire pump engines that are sealed or locked in the open position.

7.     Trim valves to pressure switches in dry, pre-action and deluge sprinkler systems that are sealed or locked in the open position.

(4189-12/19)

 

17.56.300 CFC Section 907.1 General, Amended
This section covers the application, installation, performance and maintenance of fire alarm systems and their components in new and existing buildings and structures. The requirements of Section 907.2 are applicable to new buildings and structures. The requirements of Section 907.2 are also applicable to existing buildings and structures as required by Section 907.9. (4189-12/19)

 

17.56.310 CFC Section 914.2.1 Automatic sprinkler system, Amended
Covered and open mall buildings and buildings connected shall be equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1, which shall comply with the following:

1.     The automatic sprinkler system shall be complete and operative throughout occupied space in the covered mall building prior to occupancy of any of the tenant spaces. Unoccupied tenant spaces shall be similarly protected unless provided with approved alternate protection.

2.     Sprinkler protection for the mall of a covered mall building shall be independent from that provided for tenant spaces or anchor buildings.

3.     Sprinkler protection for the tenant spaces of an open mall building shall be independent from that provided for anchor buildings.

4.     Sprinkler protection shall be provided beneath exterior circulation balconies located adjacent to an open mall.

5.     Where tenant spaces are supplied by the same system, they shall be independently controlled.

Exception: Reserved.

(4189-12/19)

 

17.56.320 CFC Section 914.3.1 Automatic sprinkler system, Amended
Buildings and structures shall be equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 and a secondary water supply where required by Section 914.3.2. A sprinkler water-flow alarm-initiating device and a control valve with a supervisory signal-initiating device shall be provided at the lateral connection to the riser on each floor. (4189-12/19)

 

17.56.330 CFC Section 914.6.1 Automatic sprinkler system, Amended
Stages shall be equipped with an automatic fire-extinguishing system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1. Sprinklers shall be installed under the roof and gridiron and under all catwalks and galleries over the stage. Sprinklers shall be installed in dressing rooms, performer lounges, shops and storerooms accessory to such stages. (4189-12/19)

 

17.56.340 CFC Section 916.12 Notification Devices, Added
Gas detection systems shall be equipped with emergency notification devices. Notification devices shall be located in all areas of the building protected by the gas detection system. Notification devices shall comply with the installation and spacing requirements stated in NFPA 72 and the manufacturer’s specifications. (4189-12/19)

 

17.56.350 CFC Section 1103.5 Sprinkler systems, Amended
An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided in existing buildings in accordance with Sections 1103.5.1 through 1103.5.5. (4189-12/19)

 

17.56.360 CFC Section 1103.5.5 Tenant improvements, Added
Section 903 shall apply to existing occupancies/tenant space undergoing tenant improvement as follows:

1.     Occupancy/tenant space undergoing tenant improvement where the square footage of the space is being increased.

2.     Occupancy/tenant space where there is a change in occupancy classification to an assembly, educational, institutional, hazardous, or residential use.

3.     Occupancy/tenant space where the entire roof structure is to be removed during the improvement.

4.     Assembly occupancy with an occupant load that exceeds 299 persons.

Exceptions:

1.     Existing Group R-3 occupancies that will remain below a gross floor area of 5,000 square feet.

2.     Existing Group R-2 occupancies where the tenant improvement is in only one unit.

(4189-12/19)

 

17.56.370 CFC Section 1103.7 Fire alarm systems, Amended
An approved fire alarm system shall be installed in existing buildings and structures in accordance with Sections 1103.7.1 through 1103.7.10 and provide occupant notification in accordance with Section 907.5 unless other requirements are provided by other sections of this code. Existing high-rise buildings shall comply with Sections 1103.7.8 and 1103.7.9.

Exception: Occupancies with an existing previously approved fire alarm system.

(4189-12/19)

 

17.56.380 CFC Section 1103.7.10 Tenant improvements, Added
Section 907 shall apply to existing occupancies/tenant space undergoing tenant improvement as follows:

1.     Occupancy/tenant space undergoing tenant improvement where the square footage of the space is being increased.

2.     Occupancy/tenant space where there is a change in occupancy classification to an assembly, educational, institutional, hazardous, or residential use.

3.     Occupancy/tenant space where the entire roof structure is to be removed during the improvement.

4.     Assembly occupancy that increases the maximum occupant load to exceed 299 persons.

Exception: The fire code official may waive this requirement based on the scope of the project.

(4189-12/19)

 

17.56.390 CFC Section 2306.2.3 Above-ground tanks located outside, above grade, Amended
Above-ground tanks shall not be used for the storage of Class I, II, or III liquid motor fuels, except as provided by this section.

1.     Above-ground tanks used for outside, above-grade storage of Class I liquids shall be listed and labeled as protected above ground tanks in accordance with UL 2085 and shall be in accordance with Chapter 57. Such tanks shall be located in accordance with Table 2306.2.3.

2.     Above-ground tanks used for outside, above-grade storage of Class II or IIIA liquids shall be listed and labeled as protected above-ground tanks in accordance with UL 2085 and shall be installed in accordance with Chapter 57. Tank locations shall be in accordance with Table 2306.2.3.

        Exception: Other above-ground tanks that comply with Chapter 57 where approved by the fire code official.

3.     Tanks containing fuels shall not exceed 2,200 gallons (8,327 L). Aggregate quantities greater than 2,200 gallons at a single site requires approval by the fire code official.

4.     Tanks located at farms, construction projects, or rural areas shall comply with section 5706.2

5.     Above-ground tanks used for outside above-grade storage of Class IIIB liquid motor fuel shall be listed and labeled in accordance with UL 142 or listed and labeled as protected above-ground tanks in accordance with UL 2085 and shall be installed in accordance with Chapter 57. Tank locations shall be in accordance with Table 2306.2.3.

(4189-12/19)

 

17.56.400 CFC Section 2306.2.4.1 Tank capacity limits, Amended
Tanks storing Class I and Class II liquids at an individual site shall be limited to a maximum individual capacity of 2,200 gallons (8,327 L). Aggregate quantities greater than 2,200 gallons (8,327 L) at a single site requires approval by the fire code official. (4189-12/19)

 

17.56.410 CFC Section 2306.2.4.2
Fleet vehicle motor fuel-dispensing facilities, Amended. Tanks storing Class II and Class IIIA liquids at a fleet vehicle motor fuel-dispensing facility shall be limited to a maximum individual capacity of 2,200 gallons (8,327 L). Aggregate quantities greater than 2,200 gallons (8,327 L) at a single site requires approval by the fire code official. (4189-12/19)

 

17.56.420 CFC Section 2306.2.6 Special enclosures, Amended
Where installation of tanks in accordance with Section 5704.2.11 is impractical, or because of property or building limitations, tanks for liquid motor fuels are allowed to be installed in buildings in special enclosures in accordance with all of the following:

1.     The special enclosures shall be liquid tight and vapor tight.

2.     The special enclosure shall not contain backfill.

3.     Side, top and bottom of the special enclosure shall be reinforced concrete at least 6 inches (152 mm) thick, with openings for inspection through the top only.

4.     Tank connections shall be piped or closed such that neither vapors nor liquid can escape into the enclosed space between the special enclosure and any tanks inside the special enclosure.

5.     Means shall be provided whereby portable equipment can be employed to discharge to the outside any vapors which might accumulate inside the special enclosure should a leakage occur.

6.     Tanks containing Class I, II, or IIIA liquids inside a special enclosure shall not exceed 2,200 gallons (8,327 L) in individual capacity. Aggregate quantities greater than 2,200 gallons (8,327 L) at a single site requires approval by the fire code official.

7.     Each tank within special enclosures shall be surrounded by a clear space of not less than 3 feet (910 mm) to allow for maintenance and inspection.

(4189-12/19)

 

17.56.430 Section 3310.1 Required access, Amended
Approved vehicle access for firefighting shall be provided to all construction or demolition sites. Vehicle access shall be provided to within 100 feet (30,480 mm) of temporary or permanent fire department connections. Vehicle access shall be provided by either temporary or permanent roads, capable of supporting vehicle loading under all weather conditions. Vehicle access shall be maintained until permanent fire apparatus access roads are available. Construction sites shall have a minimum of 6-foot perimeter security fencing with gates installed for fire apparatus access. Gate widths shall be a minimum of 24 feet for fire apparatus roadways and 6 feet for walk-in entry. Secured vehicle gates or entries shall utilize approved Knox padlock or entries shall utilize an approved padlock or chain (maximum link or lock shackle size of ¼″) when required by a fire code official. Temporary fire lane signs shall be provided and maintained to allow emergency access during construction. Hydrants, fire department connections, and fire lanes shall be posted “Fire Lane – No Parking” when required by the fire code official. (4189-12/19)

 

17.56.440 CFC Section 3312.1 When required, Amended
An approved water supply for fire protection, either temporary or permanent, as approved by both the Fire and Public Works Departments, shall be made available as soon as combustible material arrives on the site. (4189-12/19)

 

17.56.450 CFC Section 3313.1 Where required, Amended
In buildings required to have standpipes by Section 905.3.1, not less than one standpipe shall be provided for use during construction. Such standpipe shall be provided with fire department hose connections at accessible locations adjacent to usable stairs. Such standpipes shall be extended as construction progresses to within one floor of the highest point of construction having secured decking or flooring. (4189-12/19)

 

17.56.460 CFC Section 3314.1.1 Function During Construction, Added
For buildings higher than a single story above grade, and under construction, an approved automatic sprinkler system shall be installed and shall be fully functional up to one floor below the highest point of construction having secured decking or flooring.

Exception: Buildings entirely of Type 1 or Type 2 construction.

(4189-12/19)

 

17.56.470 CFC Section 3318 Owner’s responsibility, Added
Necessary precautions and engineering controls shall be utilized to minimize the potential for false alarm activations caused by construction activity. False alarms caused by construction activity shall be treated as a system malfunction and may result in charges in accordance with the approved fee schedule. (4189-12/19)

 

17.56.480 CFC Section 5003.3.1.4 Responsibility for cleanup, Amended
The person, firm or corporation responsible for an unauthorized discharge shall institute and complete all actions necessary to remedy the effects of such unauthorized discharge, whether sudden or gradual, at no cost to the jurisdiction. When deemed necessary by the fire code official, cleanup may be initiated by the fire department or by an authorized individual or firm. Costs associated with such cleanup shall be borne by the owner, operator or other person responsible for the unauthorized discharge. Clean up shall comply with current signed City Specification 431-92, Soil Quality Standard. (4189-12/19)

 

17.56.490 CFC Section 5704.2.9.6.1 Locations where above-ground tanks are prohibited, Amended
The limits referred to herein prohibiting the storage of Class I and Class II liquids in outside, above-ground tanks are hereby established for all commercial land use districts as defined in the Huntington Beach Zoning and Subdivision Ordinance.

Exceptions:

1.     Bulk plants may exist in I-G (General Industrial) zoned districts only.

2.     Class III liquids classified as a crude oil may only be stored on properties with an O (oil operations, no drilling) or O1 (drilling allowed, subject to conditional use) suffix.

3.     Class II liquids may be stored temporarily on construction sites with the approval of the fire code official.

4.     Storage of Class I or Class II liquids in aboveground tanks is prohibited within the City of Huntington Beach except at the locations classified as Zone I-G (General Industrial) where permitted by a site plan use permit on property designated as potentially suitable for the uses permitted under these zone’s classifications by the Huntington Beach Zoning and subdivision Ordinance as the same may be amended from time to time.

(4189-12/19)

 

17.56.500 CFC Section 5704.2.11.1 Location, Amended
Flammable and combustible liquid storage tanks located underground, either outside or under buildings, shall be in accordance with all of the following:

1.     Tanks shall be located with respect to existing foundations and supports such that the loads carried by the latter cannot be transmitted to the tank.

2.     The distance from any part of a tank storing liquids to the nearest wall of a basement, pit, cellar, or lot line shall not be less than 3 feet (914 mm).

3.     A minimum distance of 1 foot (305 mm), shell to shell, shall be maintained between underground tanks.

4.     The installation of underground combustible/flammable liquid tanks is hereby prohibited in all residential districts. The fire code official may authorize installation of underground combustible/flammable liquid tanks in agricultural and manufacturing districts.

(4189-12/19)

 

17.56.510 CFC Section 5704.2.13.1.4 Tanks abandoned in place, Amended
Tanks shall not be abandoned in place. (4189-12/19)

 

17.56.520 CFC Section 5706.2.4.4 Locations where above-ground tanks are prohibited, Amended
The limits referred to herein prohibiting the storage of Class I and II liquids in outside, aboveground tanks are hereby established for all commercial land use districts as defined in the Huntington Beach Zoning and Subdivision Ordinance.

Exceptions:

1.     Bulk plants may exist in I-G (general industrial) zoned districts only.

2.     Class III liquids classified as crude oil may only be stored on properties with an O (oil operations, no drilling) or O1 (drilling allowed, subject to conditional use) suffix.

3.     Class II liquids may be stored temporarily on construction sites with the approval of the fire code official.

4.     The storage of Class I and Class II liquids in aboveground tanks is prohibited within the City of Huntington Beach except at locations classified as Zone I-G (general industrial) where permitted by a site plan use permit on property designated as Huntington Beach Zoning and Subdivision Ordinance as the same may be amended from time to time.

(4189-12/19)

 

17.56.530 CFC Section 5706.3 Well drilling, operating, and abandonment. Amended
Wells for oil production or injection, and wells for natural gas shall be drilled, operated or abandoned in accordance the Huntington Beach Oil Code (Huntington Beach Municipal Code Title 15). Where there is a conflict between the California Fire Code and the Huntington Beach Oil Code, the most restrictive shall govern. (4189-12/19)

 

17.56.540 CFC Section 5801.1.1 Methane Soil Gas, Added
All sources of methane soil gas, including petrogenic and biogenic, are subject to methane soil gas testing, passive or active mitigation, and methane detection and alarm systems as prescribed in City Specification 429, Methane District Building Permit Requirements. (4189-12/19)

 

17.56.550 CFC Section 5806.2 Limitations, Amended
The limits referred to herein prohibiting the storage of flammable cryogenic fluids in stationary containers outside buildings are hereby established for all commercial land use districts as defined in the Huntington Beach Zoning and Subdivision Ordinance. (4189-12/19)

 

17.56.560 CFC Section 6104.2 Limitations, Amended
The limits referred to herein prohibiting the storage of liquefied petroleum gases for the protection of heavily populated or congested areas are hereby established for all commercial land use districts as defined in the Huntington Beach Zoning and Subdivision Ordinance. (4189-12/19)

 

17.56.570 CFC Chapter 80, Reference Standards, Amendments to NFPA 13-16
6.7.2, Amended. Fire department connections (FDC) shall be of an approved type. The location shall be approved and be no more than 150 feet from a public or private hydrant. If the FDC serves a standpipe system, it shall be no more than 100 feet from a hydrant. The size of piping and the number of inlets shall be approved by the Fire code official. If approved by the H.B. Public Works Dept., it may be installed on the backflow assembly. Fire department inlet connections shall be painted OSHA safety red. When the fire sprinkler density design requires 500 gpm (including inside hose stream demand) or greater, or a standpipe system is included, four 2 ½″ inlets shall be provided.

8.17.1.1.1 Residential Water-flow Alarms, Added. Local water-flow alarms shall be provided on all sprinkler systems and shall be connected to the building fire alarm or water-flow monitoring system where provided. Group R occupancies not requiring a fire alarm system by the California Fire Code shall be provided with at least one approved interior alarm device in each unit, or interconnection to the unit smoke alarm system. Sound levels in all sleeping areas shall be a minimum of 15 DBA above the average ambient sound or a minimum of 75 DBA with all intervening doors closed. Alarms shall be audible within all other living areas within each dwelling unit. When not connected to a fire alarm or water-flow monitoring system, audible devices shall be powered from an uninterruptible circuit (except for over-current protection (GFI), serving normally operated appliances in the residence.

23.1.3(43), Amended. Size and location of hydrants, showing size and number of outlets and if outlets are to be equipped with independent gate valves. Whether hose houses and equipment are to be provided, and by whom, shall be indicated. Static and residual hydrants that were used in the flow tests shall be shown. Water supply certification shall be not more than six months prior to the plan submittal to the authority having jurisdiction.

(4189-12/19)

 

17.56.580 CFC Chapter 80, Reference Standards, Amendments to NFPA 13D-16
4.1.5, Added. Stock of Spare Sprinklers.

4.1.5.1, Added. A supply of at least two sprinklers for each type shall be maintained on the premises so that any sprinklers that have operated or been damaged in any way can be promptly replaced.

4.1.5.2, Added. The sprinklers shall correspond to the types and temperature ratings of the sprinklers in the property.

4.1.5.3, Added. The sprinklers shall be kept in a cabinet located where the temperature to which they are subjected will at no time exceed 100°F (38°C).

4.1.5.4, Added. A special sprinkler wrench shall be provided and kept in the cabinet to be used in the removal and installation of sprinklers. One sprinkler wrench shall be provided for each type of sprinkler installed.

7.1.2, Amended. The sprinkler system piping shall not have a separate control valve installed unless supervised by one of the following methods:

(1)    Central station, proprietary or remote station alarm service.

7.3 Pressure Gauges, Amended. At least one water pressure gauge shall be installed on the riser assembly.

7.6 Alarms, Amended. Exterior water flow alarm indicating devices shall be listed for outside service and audible from the street from which the house is addressed. Exterior audible devices shall be placed on the front or side of the structure and the location subject to final approval by the fire code official. Additional interior alarm devices shall be required to provide audibility throughout the structure. Sound levels in all sleeping areas with all intervening doors closed shall be a minimum of 15 dBA above the average ambient sound level but not less than 75 dBA. Audible devices shall be powered from an uninterruptible circuit (except for over-current protection) serving normally operated appliances in the residence.

Exceptions:

1.     When an approved water flow monitoring system is installed, interior audible devices may be powered through the fire alarm control panel.

2.     When smoke detectors specified by the CBC or CRC are used to sound an interior alarm upon water flow switch activation.

(4189-12/19)

 

17.56.590 CFC Chapter 80, Reference Standards, Amendments to NFPA 13R-16
6.16.1, Amended. A local waterflow alarm shall be provided on all sprinkler systems and shall be connected to the building fire alarm or water-flow monitoring system where provided. Group R occupancies containing less than the number of stories, dwelling units or occupant load specified in Chapter 9 of the California Fire Code as requiring a fire alarm system shall be provided with a minimum of one approved interior alarm device in each unit. Sound levels in all sleeping areas shall be a minimum of 15 dBA above the average ambient sound or a minimum of 75 dBA with all intervening doors closed. Alarms shall be audible within all other living areas within each dwelling unit. When not connected to a fire alarm, residential smoke detection or water-flow monitoring system, audible devices shall be powered from an uninterruptible circuit (except for over-current protection) serving normally operated appliances in the residence.

There shall also be a minimum of one exterior alarm indicating device, listed for outside service and audible from the access roadway that serves that building.

(4189-12/19)

 

17.56.600 CFC Chapter 80, Reference Standards, Amendments to NFPA 14-13
6.4.5.4.1, Amended. The fire department connection shall have four 2 ½ inch, internal threaded (NHS) inlets. The inlets shall be provided with approved caps to protect the system from entry of debris. The location of the FDC shall be approved and be no more than 100 feet from a public hydrant. If acceptable to the water authority, it may be installed on the backflow assembly. Fire department inlet connections shall be painted OSHA safety red.

(4189-12/19)

 

17.56.610 CFC Chapter 80, Reference Standards, Amendments to NFPA 24-16
5.9.1.2, Amended. Fire department connections shall be of an approved type and contain a minimum of two 2 ½ inch inlets. The location shall be approved and be no more than 150 feet from a public or private fire hydrant when serving a fire sprinkler system. When serving a standpipe system, it can be no more than 100 feet from a hydrant. If acceptable to the water authority, it may be installed on the backflow assembly. The supply pipe shall be painted OSHA safety red.

5.9.1.2.1, Added. When the sprinkler density design is 500 gpm (including the interior hose stream demand) or greater, or a standpipe system is included, four 2 ½″ inlets shall be provided.

6.2.1.1, Added. The closest upstream indicating control valve to the riser shall be painted OSHA red.

6.3.3, Added. All post indicator valves controlling fire suppression water supplies shall be painted OSHA red.

10.1.1.3.2, Added. All ferrous pipe shall be coated and wrapped. Joints shall be coated and wrapped after assembly. All fittings shall be protected with a loose 8-mil polyethylene tube. The ends of the tube shall extend past the joint by a minimum of 12 inches and be sealed with 2 inch wide tape approved for underground use. Galvanizing does not meet the requirements of this section.

Exception: 316 Stainless Steel pipe and fittings.

10.4.1.1, Amended. All bolted joint accessories shall be cleaned and thoroughly coated with asphalt or other corrosion-retarding material, prior to poly-tube, and after installation.

10.4.1.4, Added. All bolts used in pipe-joint assembly shall be 316 stainless steel.

10.4.3.1, Amended. Private fire service mains supplying fire protection systems within the building shall be permitted to extend no more than 18 inches, as measured from the outside of the building to the center of the vertical pipe, under the building to the riser location. The pipe under the building or building foundation shall be 316 stainless steel and shall not contain mechanical joints.

10.4.3.1.1, Amended. Pipe Joints shall not be located under foundation footings. The pipe under the building or building foundation shall be 316 stainless steel and shall not contain mechanical joints.

10.4.3.2, Amended. Where approved, private fire service mains supplying systems within the building shall be permitted to extend more than 18 inches under the building when all the requirements of Sections 10.4.3.2.1 through 10.4.3.2.4 are met.

(4189-12/19)

 

17.56.620 CFC Chapter 80, Reference Standards, Amendments to NFPA 72-16
14.2.2.2.3, Amended. If a deficiency is not corrected at the conclusion of system inspection, testing, or maintenance, the system owner or the owner’s designated representative and fire code official shall be informed of the impairment in writing within 24 hours.

(4189-12/19)

 

17.56.630 CFC Appendix B, Fire Flow Requirements for Buildings, B105 One- and two-family dwellings, Amended
The minimum fire-flow and flow duration requirements for one- and two-family dwellings, Group R-3 and R-4 buildings and townhouses shall be as specified in Tables B105.1(1) and B105.1(2).

Exception: When the building is equipped with an approved automatic sprinkler system, the fire flow requirements of Table B105.1 and B105.1(2) shall not be less than 1,000 gallons per minute (3785.4 L/min) for 1 hour.

(4189-12/19)

 

Chapter 17.60 SOLAR, HYDRONICS AND GEOTHERMAL CODE
17.60.010 Adoption
There is hereby adopted by the City Council by reference that certain code known as the Uniform Solar, Hydronics and Geothermal Code, compiled by the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials, being particularly the 2018 Edition thereof and the whole thereof, except as hereafter provided, excluding Chapter 1, “Administration.”

Such code, and amendments thereto, are hereby adopted and incorporated pursuant to California Government Code Section 50022.2 et seq., and Health and Safety Code Section 18941.5 as though fully set out at length herein for the purpose of protecting public health and safety by prescribing minimum standards for the use, design and installation of solar energy systems; by requiring a permit and inspection for installation, alteration and replacement of said equipment. From the date on which this chapter takes effect, the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the corporate limits of the City of Huntington Beach. (2178-4/77, 2431-7/80, 2787-9/85, 2976-12/88, 3022-12/89, 3147-7/92, 3308-12/95, 3429-7/99, 3899-12/10, 4003-12/13, 4114-12/16, 4190-12/19)

 

17.60.020 Title—Amended
This chapter shall be known as the “Huntington Beach Solar, Hydronics and Geothermal Code,” may be cited as such and will be referred to herein as “this Code.” (2178-4/77, 2431-7/80, 3022-12/89, 4114-12/16, 4190-12/19)

 

17.60.030 Administration—Amended
The administrative provisions shall be as provided for in the California Building Code, Chapter 1 Division II, Scope and Administration as adopted pursuant to Chapter 17.04 of the Huntington Beach Municipal Code. (3899-12/10, 4190-12/19)

 

17.60.040 Electrical—Amended
Chapter 10 is amended to read as follows:

Chapter 10. Electrical installations shall be in accordance with the requirements of the Huntington Beach Electrical Code.

(3899-12/10, 4190-12/19)

 

Chapter 17.61 SMALL RESIDENTIAL ROOFTOP SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS
17.61.010 Intent and Purpose
The intent and purpose of this Chapter is to adopt an expedited permitting process for small residential rooftop solar energy systems that complies with California Government Code Section 65850(g). This Chapter is designed to encourage the use of solar systems by removing unreasonable barriers, minimizing costs to property owners and the City, and expanding the ability of property owners to install solar energy systems. This Chapter allows the City to achieve these goals while protecting the public health and safety. (4067-9/15)

 

17.61.020 Definitions
A.    “Small residential rooftop solar energy system” means all of the following:

1.     A solar energy system that is no larger than 10 kilowatts alternating current nameplate rating or 30 kilowatts thermal.

2.     A solar energy system that conforms to all applicable State fire, structural, electrical, and other building codes as adopted or amended by the City and California Civil Code Section 714(c)(3), as such section or subdivision may be amended, renumbered, or redesignated from time to time.

3.     A solar energy system that is installed on a single or duplex family dwelling.

4.     A solar panel or module array that does not exceed the maximum legal building height as set by Section 210.06 of the City Zoning Code.

B.     “Solar energy system” means either of the following:

1.     Any solar collector or other solar energy device whose primary purpose is to provide for the collection, storage, and distribution of solar energy for space heating, space cooling, electric generation, or water heating.

2.     Any structural design feature of a building whose primary purpose is to provide for the collection, storage, and distribution of solar energy for electricity generation, space heating, space cooling or water heating. (4067-9/15)

 

17.61.030 Applicability
This Chapter applies to the permitting of all small residential rooftop solar energy systems in the City. Small residential rooftop solar energy systems legally established or permitted prior to the effective date of this Chapter are not subject to the requirements of this Chapter unless physical modifications or alterations are undertaken that materially change the size, type, or components of a small rooftop energy system in such a way as to require new permitting. Routine operation and maintenance or like-kind replacements with no structural alterations shall not require a permit. (4067-9/15)

 

17.61.040 Solar Energy System Requirements
A.    All solar energy systems shall meet applicable health and safety standards and requirements imposed by the City and the State of California.

B.     Solar energy systems for heating water in single-family residences and for heating water in commercial or swimming pool applications shall be certified by an accredited listing agency as defined by the California Plumbing and Mechanical Code.

C.     Solar energy systems for producing electricity shall meet all applicable safety and performance standards established by the California Electrical Code, the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, and accredited testing laboratories such as Underwriters Laboratories and, where applicable, rules of the Public Utilities Commission regarding safety and reliability. (4067-9/15)

 

17.61.050 Duties of Department of Planning and Building and Building Official
A.    The Building Official shall implement an administrative, nondiscretionary review process to expedite the approval of small residential rooftop solar energy system applications. The process shall incorporate the use of standard plans and a checklist of all requirements with which small residential rooftop solar energy systems shall comply to be eligible for expedited review. The small residential rooftop solar system permit process, standard plans, and checklist shall substantially conform to the recommendations for expedited permitting, including the checklists and standards contained in the most current version of the California Solar Permitting Guidebook as adopted by the Governor’s Office of Planning and Research, and as specified by Government Code Section 65850.5(g)(2).

B.     All documents required for the submission of an expedited small residential rooftop solar energy system application shall be made available on the City website. (4067-9/15)

 

17.61.060 Expedited Permit Review and Inspection Requirements
A.    The Building Official shall review an application for a small residential rooftop solar energy system to determine whether it complies with the standard plans and checklist that the Building Official adopted pursuant to Section 17.61.050. If the Building Official deems any application incomplete, he or she shall issue a written correction notice detailing the deficiencies in the application and any additional information required to be eligible for expedited permit issuance.

B.     If the Building Official determines a small residential rooftop solar energy system application is complete and meets the requirements of the standard plans and checklist, he or she shall administratively approve it and issue all required permits for its installation.

C.     The Building Official shall perform only one inspection for a small residential rooftop solar energy system eligible for expedited review. The inspection shall be done in a timely manner and may include consolidated inspections.

D.    If a small residential rooftop solar energy system fails inspection, a subsequent inspection is authorized but need not conform to the requirements of this chapter.

E.     The Building Official shall review each application for a small residential rooftop solar energy system to determine whether it will have a specific, adverse impact upon the public health or safety. The Building Official may impose mitigation conditions on an application to mitigate any specific, adverse impacts upon the public health or safety. When imposing mitigation conditions, the Building Official shall consider any cost-effective method, condition, or mitigation measure the City previously imposed on another similarly situated successful prior application. The Building Official shall use his or her best efforts to ensure that the selected method, condition, or mitigation meets the conditions of Civil Code Section 714(d) (1) (A) and (B). The Building Official may deny the application if he or she determines that the specific, adverse impacts cannot be mitigated.

F.     The Building Official shall support his or her determination of specific, adverse impacts upon the public health or safety through written findings based upon objective, identified and written public health or safety standards, policies or conditions in existence on the date the application was deemed complete.

G.    The decision of the Building Official to condition or deny the application based upon specific, adverse impacts upon the public health or safety may be appealed to the Director of Planning and Building.

H.    The City building permit does not authorize an applicant to connect the small residential rooftop energy system to the local utility provider’s electricity grid. The applicant is responsible for obtaining such approval from the local utility provider. (4067-9/15)

 

Chapter 17.62 EXPEDITED ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING STATION PERMITTING
17.62.010 Intent and Purpose
The intent and purpose of this chapter is to adopt an expedited permitting process for the installation of electric vehicle charging stations. Implementation of this chapter is designed to encourage the use of electric vehicle charging stations while protecting the public health and safety. (4166-3/19)

 

17.62.020 Definitions
“A Feasible Method to Satisfactorily Mitigate or Avoid the Specific, Adverse Impact” includes, but is not limited to, any cost-effective method, condition, or mitigation imposed by a city, county, or city and county on another similarly situated application in a prior successful application for a permit.

“Electronic Submittal” means the utilization of one or more of the following:

1.     Email.

2.     The Internet.

3.     Facsimile.

“Electric Vehicle Charging Station” or “Charging Station” means any level of electric vehicle supply equipment station that is designed and built in compliance with Article 625 of the California Electrical Code or any successor statutes, as it reads on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, and delivers electricity from a source outside an electric vehicle into a plug-in electric vehicle.

“Specific, Adverse Impact” means a significant, quantifiable, direct, and unavoidable impact, based on objective, identified, and written public health or safety standards, policies, or conditions as they existed on the date the application was deemed complete. (4166-3/19)

 

17.62.030 Applicability
This chapter applies to the process for installation of electric vehicle charging stations in the City. (4166-3/19)

 

17.62.040 Electric Vehicle Charging Station Requirements
A.    All electric vehicle charging stations shall meet applicable health and safety standards and requirements imposed by the City and State of California.

B.     Electric vehicle charging stations shall comply with all City, State, and Federal laws and regulations including, but not limited to, all applicable safety and performance standards established by the California Electrical Code, the Society of Automotive Engineers, the National Electrical Manufacturers Association, and accredited testing laboratories such as Underwriters Laboratories and, where applicable, rules of the Public Utilities Commission regarding safety and reliability. (4166-3/19)

 

17.62.050 Duties of Department of Community Development and Building Official
A.    The Building Official shall implement an administrative, nondiscretionary review process to expedite the review of electric vehicle charging station applications. The process shall include a checklist of all requirements that electric vehicle charging station applications shall have to be eligible for expedited review.

B.     The Building Official may establish a process to prioritize competing applications for expedited permits.

C.     The checklist and required permitting documentation shall be published on the City’s website. (4166-3/19)

 

17.62.060 Expedited Permit Review Requirements
A.    The Building Official shall review an application for an electric vehicle charging station to determine whether it satisfies the information requirements prior to deeming the application complete.

B.     If the Building Official deems an application incomplete, the Building Official shall issue a written correction notice detailing all deficiencies in the application and any additional information required to be eligible for expedited permit issuance.

C.     Upon confirmation of the application and supporting documents being complete and meeting the requirements of the checklist, the Building Official shall approve the application and issue all required permits or authorizations.

D.    The Building Official shall review each application for an electric vehicle charging station to determine whether it will have a specific, adverse impact upon the public health or safety. If the Building Official makes a finding, based on substantial evidence, that the electric vehicle charging stations could have a specific, adverse impact upon the public health or safety, the City may require the applicant to apply for a conditional use permit. Any conditions imposed on an application to install an electric vehicle charging station shall be designed to mitigate the specific, adverse impact upon the public health or safety at the lowest cost possible.

E.     The Building Official may not deny an application for a permit to install an electric vehicle charging station unless he or she makes written findings based upon substantial evidence in the record that the proposed installation would have a specific, adverse impact upon the public health or safety, and there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific, adverse impact. The findings shall include the basis for the rejection of potential feasible alternatives of preventing the adverse impact.

F.     The decision of the Building Official pursuant to subsections D and E may be appealed to the City’s Planning Commission. (4166-3/19)

 

Chapter 17.64 UNDERGROUNDING OF UTILITIES
17.64.010 Definitions
The following terms or phrases as used in this chapter shall, unless the context indicates otherwise, have the respective meanings herein set forth:

“Commission” shall mean the Public Utilities Commission of the State of California.

“Poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures” shall mean poles, towers, supports, wires, conductors, guys, stubs, platforms, crossarms, braces, transformers, insulators, cutouts, switches, communication circuits, appliances, attachments and appurtenances located aboveground within a district and used, or useful, in supplying electric, communication or similar or associated service.

“Underground utility district” or “district” shall mean that area in the City within which poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures are prohibited as such area is described in a resolution adopted pursuant to the provision of Section 17.64.110 of this chapter.

“Utility” shall include all persons or entities supplying electric, communication or similar or associated service by means of electrical materials or devices. (2222-12/77)

 

17.64.020 Underground Utilities Coordinating Committee—Established
There is hereby established an underground utilities coordinating committee, appointed by the City Council, which said committee shall consist of five members as follows:

A.    Director of Public Works;

B.     Director of Planning;

C.     One City employee appointed by the City Manager;

D.    District representative, Southern California Edison Company; and

E.     Senior engineer, Public Improvements, Verizon. (2222-12/77, 2382-7/79, 2975-12/88, 3783-10/07)

 

17.64.030 Duties
It shall be the duty of the committee to advise the City Council with respect to all technical aspects of the undergrounding of public utilities within the City of Huntington Beach and in that regard the committee shall:

A.    Determine the location and priority of conversion work within the City;

B.     Recommend specific projects and methods of financing;

C.     Recommend time limitation for completion of projects and extensions of time;

D.    Develop a long-range plan for establishing underground utilities districts;

E.     Perform such other duties as may be assigned to it by the City Council.

The Director of Public Works shall be chairperson of said committee. A majority of the members of the committee, or their authorized representatives, present at any meeting shall constitute a quorum. Said committee shall meet upon call of the chairperson. Members of the committee shall serve at the pleasure of the City Council and without compensation. (2222-12/77, 3783-10/07)

 

17.64.040 Planning Commission Review
Prior to submitting reports to the City Council, the committee shall submit all undergrounding plans to the Planning Commission in order to ascertain its recommendations with respect to comprehensive planning for the City, and the effect of such proposed undergrounding plans thereon. (2222-12/77)

 

17.64.050 Underground Public Utilities Facilities
All new public and private utility lines and distribution facilities, including but not limited to electric, communications, street lighting, and cable television lines, shall be installed underground, except that surface-mounted transformers, pedestal-mounted terminal boxes, meter cabinets, concealed ducts in an underground system and other equipment appurtenant to underground facilities located on private property or installed pursuant to a franchise or other agreement need not be installed underground, and provided further that cable television lines may be installed on existing utility poles within subdivisions developed with overhead utility lines.

This section shall not apply to main feeder lines or transmission lines located within the public right-of-way of an arterial highway as shown in the circulation element of the General Plan. (2222-12/77, 3783-10/07)

 

17.64.060 Overhead Installation
Installation of overhead utility lines is permitted for the following:

A.    Relocation and/or the increase of the size of service on a lot when it does not necessitate any increase in the number of existing overhead lines and/or utility poles;

B.     Any new service when utility poles exist along abutting property lines prior to February 15, 1967, and which are not separated by any alley or public right-of-way and no additional utility poles are required;

C.     Temporary uses, including directional signs, temporary stands, construction poles, water pumps, and similar uses;

D.    Oil well services. (2222-12/77)

 

17.64.070 Conversion of Overhead Utilities
Any new overhead service which is permitted by these provisions shall have installed a service panel to facilitate conversion to underground utilities at a future date. (2222-12/77)

 

17.64.080 Underground Trenches
All underground utility lines in residential developments which are installed on private property shall be located along lot lines. However, the trench for service lines may curve from the lot line to the building at the nearest, most practical location.

This provision is intended to reduce conflicts which may occur in future construction because of existing underground utility lines. (2222-12/77)

 

17.64.090 Public Hearing by Council
The Council may from time to time call public hearings to ascertain whether the public necessity, health, safety or welfare requires the removal of poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures within designated areas of the City and the underground installation of wires and facilities for supplying electric, communication, or similar or associated service. Prior to holding such public hearing, the City Engineer shall consult with all affected utilities and shall prepare a report for submission at such hearing, containing, among other information, the extent of such utilities’ participation and estimates of the total costs to the City and affected property owners. Such report shall also contain an estimate of the time required to complete such underground installation and removal of overhead facilities. The City Clerk shall notify all affected property owners as shown on the last equalized assessment roll and utilities concerned by mail of the time and place of such hearings at least 10 days prior to the date thereof. Each such hearing shall be open to the public and may be continued from time to time. At each such hearing all persons affected shall be given an opportunity to be heard. The decision of the Council shall be final and conclusive. (2222-12/77)

 

17.64.100 Council May Designate Underground Utility Districts by Resolution
If, after any such public hearing the Council finds that the public necessity, health, safety or welfare requires such removal and such underground installation within a designated area, the Council shall, by resolution adopted by affirmative vote of at least five members of the City Council, declare such designated area an underground utility district and order such removal and underground installation. Such resolution shall include a description of the area comprising such district, the reason for placing public utilities underground (see Public Utilities Commission Rule 20), and shall fix the time within which such affected property owners must be ready to receive underground service. A reasonable time shall be allowed for such removal and underground installation, having due regard for the availability of labor, materials and equipment necessary for such removal and for the installation of such underground facilities as may be occasioned thereby. (2222-12/77)

 

17.64.110 Unlawful to Erect or Maintain Overhead Utilities Within District
Whenever the Council creates an underground utility district and orders the removal of poles, overhead wires and associated structures therein, as provided in Section 17.64.100 of this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person or utility to erect, construct, place, keep, maintain, continue, employ or operate poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures in the district after the date when said overhead facilities are required to be removed by such resolution, except as said overhead facilities may be required to furnish service to an owner or occupant of property prior to the performance by such owner or occupant of the underground work necessary for such owner or occupant to continue to receive utility service as provided in Section 17.64.200 of this chapter, and for such reasonable time as may be required to remove said facilities after said work has been performed, and except as otherwise provided in this chapter. (2222-12/77)

 

17.64.120 Exceptions—Emergency or Unusual Circumstance Declared Exception
Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, overhead facilities may be installed and maintained for a period not to exceed 10 days without authority of the Council in order to provide emergency service. In such case, the Director of Public Works shall be notified in writing prior to the installation of the facilities. The Council may grant special permission on such terms as the Council may deem appropriate in cases of unusual circumstances, without discrimination as to any person or utility, to erect, construct, install, maintain, use or operate poles’ overhead wires and associated overhead structures. (2222-12/77)

 

17.64.130 Exceptions to This Chapter
The following shall be excluded from the provisions of this chapter unless otherwise provided in the resolution designating the underground utilities district:

A.    Poles or electroliers used exclusively for street lighting.

B.     Overhead wires (exclusive of supporting structures) crossing any portion of a district within which overhead wires have been prohibited, or connecting to buildings on the perimeter of a district, when such wires originate in an area from which poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures are not prohibited.

C.     Poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures used for the transmission of electric energy at nominal voltages in excess of 34,500 volts.

D.    Any municipal facilities or equipment installed under the supervision and to the satisfaction of the City engineer.

E.     Overhead wires attached to the exterior surface of a building by means of a bracket or other fixture and extending from one location on the building to another location on the same building or to an adjacent building without crossing any public street.

F.     Antennas used by a utility for furnishing communication services.

G.    Equipment appurtenant to underground facilities, such as surface-mounted transformers, pedestal-mounted terminal boxes and water cabinets and concealed ducts.

H.    Temporary poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures used or to be used in conjunction with construction projects.

I.      Utilities with existing on-pole services as of the date of this chapter, where the utility is not the sole user of the poles, and where the utility is replacing one single wire, cable, or line with another or adding an additional smaller wire, cable or line, provided that utility will be placed underground at the time the other utility utilizing the poles places its service underground. (2222-12/77, 3635-5/04, 3783-10/07)

 

17.64.135 Lines Not in Use—Notice to City
At any time a line, cable or wire is taken out of service, or abandoned or is otherwise no longer used, the utility shall give notice of non-use to the City. Within six months of the time upon which the line, cable or wire ceases to be used (the notice date) the utility shall remove the line, cable or wire from the poles. (3635-5/04)

 

17.64.140 Community Antenna Television Service
Distribution lines and individual service lines for community antenna television (CATV) service shall be installed underground in all new developments within the City. All new CATV installations in said new developments shall be made in accordance with specifications adopted by City Council resolution. Said improvements within the public right-of-way, upon completion, shall be dedicated to the City of Huntington Beach. (2222-12/77)

 

17.64.150 Authority of Director of Public Works
The Director of Public Works shall have the authority to waive the requirements of Section 17.64.140 with respect to improvements within the public right-of-way when, in his or her judgment, it is determined to be in the best interest of the City so to do, based upon the following criteria:

A.    Whenever engineering plans and specifications are not required.

B.     Where existing improvements such as curbs and gutters, sidewalks, streets, etc., would have to be removed and replaced.

C.     The location of existing overhead facilities.

D.    The location of existing structures.

E.     The condition of existing street improvements.

F.     The amount of lineal footage of CATV facilities involved. (2222-12/77, 3783-10/07)

 

17.64.160 Authority of Director of Planning
The Director of Planning shall have the authority to waive the on-site requirements, as set out in Section 17.64.140, when, in his or her judgment, it is determined to be in the best interest of the City so to do, based upon the following criteria:

A.    Where existing improvements would have to be removed and replaced.

B.     The location of existing overhead facilities.

C.     The location of existing structures.

D.    The condition of existing improvements.

E.     The amount of lineal footage of CATV facilities involved.

F.     The interface of the new development to the existing development on the site.

G.    The interface to similar facilities required off site. (2222-12/77, 2975-12/88, 3783-10/07)

 

17.64.170 Appeal to City Council
Any landowner or developer affected may appeal the determination of the Director of Public Works or the Director of Planning to the City Council. (2222-12/77, 3783-10/07)

 

17.64.180 Notice to Property Owners and Utility Companies
Within 10 days after the effective date of a resolution adopted pursuant to Section 17.64.110 of this chapter, the City Clerk shall notify all affected utilities and all persons owning real property within the district created by said resolution, of the adoption thereof. Said City Clerk shall further notify such affected property owners of the necessity that if they or any person occupying such property desire to continue to receive electric, communication or similar or associated service, they or such occupant shall provide all necessary facility changes on their premises so as to receive such service from the lines of the supplying utility or utilities at a new location. (2222-12/77)

 

17.64.190 Responsibility of Utility Companies
If underground construction is necessary to provide utility service within a district created by any resolution adopted pursuant to Section 17.64.110 hereof, the supplying utility shall furnish that portion of the conduits, conductors and associated equipment required to be furnished by it under its applicable rules, regulations and tariffs on file with the commission. (2222-12/77)

 

17.64.200 Responsibility of Property Owners
A.    Every person owning, operating, leasing, occupying or renting a building or structure within a district shall construct and provide that portion of the service connection on his or her property between the facilities referred to in Section 17.64.190, and the termination facility on or within said building or structure being served. If the above is not accomplished by any person within the time provided for in the resolution enacted pursuant to Section 17.64.110 of this chapter, the City engineer shall give notice in writing to the owner thereof as shown on the last equalized assessment roll, to provide the required underground facilities within 30 days after receipt of such notice.

B.     The notice to provide the required underground facilities may be given either by personal service or by mail. In case of service by mail on either of such persons, the notice must be deposited in the United States mail in a sealed envelope with postage prepaid, addressed to the person in possession of such premises, and the notice must be addressed to such owner’s last known address as the same appears on the last equalized assessment roll, and when no address appears, to General Delivery, City of Huntington Beach. If notice is given by mail, such notice shall be deemed to have been received by the person to whom it has been sent within 48 hours after the mailing thereof. If notice is given by mail to either the owner or occupant of such premises, the City engineer shall, within 48 hours after the mailing thereof, cause a copy thereof, printed on a card not less than eight by 10 inches in size, to be posted in a conspicuous place on said premises.

C.     The notice given by the City engineer to provide the required underground facilities shall particularly specify what work is required to be done, and shall state that if said work is not completed within 30 days after receipt of such notice, the City engineer will provide such required underground facilities, in which case the cost and expense thereof will be assessed against the property benefited and become a lien upon such property.

D.    If upon the expiration of the 30 days, the said required underground facilities have not been provided, the City engineer shall forthwith proceed to do the work, provided, however, if such premises are unoccupied and no electric or communications services are being furnished thereto, the City engineer shall in lieu of providing the required undergrounding facilities, have the authority to order the disconnection and removal of any and all overhead service wires and associated facilities supplying utility service to said property. Upon completion of the work by the City engineer, he or she shall file a written report with the City Council setting forth the fact that the required underground facilities have been provided and the cost thereof, together with a legal description of the property against which such cost is to be assessed. The Council shall thereupon fix a time and place for hearing protests against the assessment of the cost of such work upon such premises, which said time shall not be less than 10 days thereafter.

E.     The City Clerk shall forthwith, upon the time for hearing such protests having been fixed, give a notice in writing to the person in possession of such premises, and a notice in writing thereof to the owner thereof, in the manner hereinabove provided for the giving of the notice to provide the required underground facilities, of the time and place that the Council will pass upon such report and will hear protests against such assessment. Such notice shall also set forth the amount of the proposed assessment.

F.     Upon the date and hour set for the hearing of protests, the Council shall hear and consider the report and all protests, if there be any, and then proceed to affirm, modify or reject the assessment.

G.    If any assessment is not paid within 15 days after its confirmation by the Council, the amount of the assessment shall become a lien upon the property against which the assessment is made by the City engineer, and the City engineer is directed to turn over to the assessor and tax collector a notice of lien on each of said properties on which the assessment has not been paid, and said assessor and tax collector shall add the amount of said assessment to the next regular bill for taxes levied against the premises upon which said assessment was not paid. Said assessment shall be due and payable at the same time as said property taxes are due and payable, and if not paid when due and payable, shall bear interest at the rate of six percent per annum. (2222-12/77)

 

17.64.210 Responsibility of City
The City shall remove at its own expense all City-owned equipment from all poles required to be removed hereunder in ample time to enable the owner or user of such poles to remove the same within the time specified in the resolution enacted pursuant to Section 17.64.110 of this chapter. (2222-12/77)

 

17.64.220 Extension of Time
In the event that any act required by this chapter or by a resolution adopted pursuant to Section 17.64.110 cannot be performed within the time provided because of shortage of materials, war, restraint by public authorities, strikes, labor disturbances, civil disobedience, or any other circumstances beyond the control of the actor, then the time within which such act will be accomplished shall be extended for a period equivalent to the time of such limitation. (2222-12/77)

 

Chapter 17.65 FAIR SHARE TRAFFIC IMPACT FEE
17.65.010 Short Title
This chapter of the Municipal Code may be cited as the “Fair Share Traffic Impact Fee Ordinance.” (3048-9/90)

 

17.65.015 Legislative Findings
A.    The State of California, through the enactment of Government Code Sections 66001 through 66009 has authorized the City to enact development impact fees.

B.     The imposition of development impact fees is a method of ensuring that new development bears a proportionate share of the cost of capital facilities and other costs necessary to accommodate such development. These fees are established to promote and protect the public health, safety and welfare.

C.     Increase in residential and nonresidential development in the City creates a need for increased funds to pay for the cost of street, traffic signal and bridge improvements which are needed to serve the increasing development in the City.

D.    Pursuant to the “Development Impact Fee Calculation and Nexus Report for the City of Huntington Beach” (“Nexus Report”) dated October 2011, as amended April 27, 2012, which is incorporated herein by reference in these findings as though set forth in full, the fees established pursuant to this chapter are derived from, based upon, and do not exceed the costs of providing additional street, traffic signal and bridge improvements attributable to applicable new residential or nonresidential development. This study is based in part upon master planning to more specifically identify existing circulation system elements.

E.     The fees collected pursuant to this chapter shall be used to finance the possible acquisition and expansion of circulation systems identified herein in furtherance of the City’s General Plan, as well as the Master Facilities Plan which is part of the Nexus Plan and the City of Huntington Beach Capital Improvement Plan.

F.     Detailed study of the impacts of future residential and nonresidential construction in the City, along with an analysis of the need for the potential acquisition and expansion of circulation systems has been prepared. This study is included in the Nexus Report.

G.    As set forth in the Nexus Report, there is a reasonable relationship between the need for the potential acquisition and expansion of existing circulation system elements and the increase in the number of vehicles set forth in this chapter and the impacts of the types of development for which the corresponding fee is charged. In addition, there is a reasonable relationship between the fee’s use and the type of development to which the fee is charged and a reasonable relationship between the amount of the fee and the cost of the system or portion thereof attributable to the development on which the fee is imposed. (3944-8/12)

 

17.65.020 Intent and Purposes
A.    This chapter is intended to implement the goals, objectives and policies of the City of Huntington Beach General Plan, by ensuring that the City’s adopted level of service standards for arterial roadways and signalized intersections are maintained when new development is constructed within the City limits. By imposing a fee that is reasonably related to the burdens created by new development on the City’s surface transportation system, together with funding available from other City revenue sources, the City will be able to construct the required capital improvements, accommodate projected growth and fulfill the goals, objectives and policies of the City’s General Plan.

B.     It is the intent of the City Council that the fee required by this chapter shall be supplementary to any conditions imposed upon a development project pursuant to other provisions of this Code, the Subdivision Map Act, the California Environmental Quality Act, other state and local laws, ordinances or Charter provisions which may authorize the imposition of conditions on development. (3048-9/90)

 

17.65.030 Definitions
See Chapter 17.73 of this Code. (3944-8/12)

 

17.65.050 Establishment of a Fair Share Traffic Impact Mitigation Fee
A.    A Fair Share Traffic Impact Mitigation Fee is hereby established. Any person who, 60 days after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, seeks to develop land, or modify the use of land within the City, by applying for a building permit or other entitlement for use, or an extension of a building permit or other entitlement for use previously granted, for a development project that will generate net additional vehicle trips on City streets, is hereby required to pay a Fair Share Traffic Impact Mitigation Fee in the manner and amount specified in the current City of Huntington Beach Fee Resolution separately adopted.

B.     The City Council shall, by resolution, set the specific amount of the fee, applicability of the fee, a formula for adjusting the fee to account for annual inflation in transportation improvement construction costs, describe the benefit and impact area on which the development impact fee is imposed, list the specific public improvements to be constructed, and describe the estimated cost of these facilities.

C.     This fee shall be adjusted as provided in the resolution setting the specific amount of the fee. (3944-8/12)

 

17.65.060 Exemptions
A.    Exemption Categories. The following development projects shall be exempt from the requirements of this chapter:

1.     Government and public facilities.

2.     Alteration or expansion of an existing building in which no additional dwelling units are created, the use is not changed, and where no additional vehicle trips will be produced over and above those produced by the existing building.

3.     The construction of accessory buildings, structures or uses which will not produce additional vehicular trips over and above those produced by the principal building or use of the land.

4.     The replacement of a destroyed or partially destroyed building or structure with a new building or structure of the same size and use, provided that no additional vehicle trips will be produced over and above those produced by the original use of the land.

B.     Claim for Exemption Required. Any claim of exemption must be filed in the same manner and will be considered pursuant to the same procedure as for a fee adjustment as provided in Chapter 17.73. (3048-9/90)

 

17.65.070 Calculation and Payment of the Traffic Impact Fee
A.    Fee Calculation. The Public Works Director shall be responsible for calculating the Fair Share Traffic Impact Mitigation Fee required by this chapter, in accordance with the Fair Share Traffic Impact Mitigation Fee Schedule adopted by resolution of the City Council. The applicable amount of the fee shall be estimated at least 60 days prior to the first public hearing for any discretionary planning approvals required by City Zoning and Subdivision Ordinance. The estimated fee shall identify the use category, the vehicle trip-miles for the use and the total estimated for fee based upon the proposed size of the developments. The fee estimated shall be recalculated as needed at the time a building permit is issued, based on the vehicle trip generation characteristics of the final development plan for which the building permit is issued.

B.     Payment Procedure for Commercial or Industrial Development Projects. Fees required by this chapter from a new commercial or industrial development project shall be paid at the time that the City issues a building permit for the project.

C.     Payment Procedure for Residential Development Projects. The fee required by this chapter from a new residential development project shall be paid before final inspection of the dwelling unit on which the fee was imposed. However, the Planning Director may adopt procedures to advance the time the fee is due on residential development projects consistent with Government Code Section 66007, as amended.

D.    Fee Payments for Phased Development Projects. If a development project will be constructed in phases, and separate building permits and certificates of occupancy will be issued for each phase, fees imposed pursuant to this chapter shall be calculated on the basis of the vehicle trip characteristics of the entire development project. Payment of the fees may be made separately for each phase, provided the amount paid for each phase shall be equal to the percentage that the vehicle trips for that phase represent of the total development project’s vehicle trips. The fee per vehicle trip shall be the fee in effect at the time payment is due.

E.     Deposit of Fees. All Traffic Impact Fees collected shall be transferred for deposit into a separate reserve account, as specified in this chapter, and used solely for the purposes specified in this chapter. (3827-4/09, 3879-6/10, 3944-8/12)

 

17.65.080 Fee Adjustments
See Chapter 17.73. (3944-8/12)

 

17.65.090 Fee Refunds
Upon application, fees collected by the City pursuant to this chapter shall be refunded only under the following circumstances:

A.    Erroneous or Illegal Collection. Fees will be refunded if the applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Public Works Director that they were erroneously or illegally collected, or if the City is compelled to do so pursuant to a final judgment by a court of competent jurisdiction. An application for a refund pursuant to this section shall be filed within 90 days after the payment of the fees pursuant to Section 17.65.070.

B.     City Failure to Commit Funds. Pursuant to Government Code Section 66001(e), fees will be refunded if the City fails to commit them to a surface transportation improvement project of the nature or type identified in the Master Facilities Plan, which is a part of the Nexus Report, within five years from the date that the fees were collected from the applicant. For purposes of this subsection, fees are deemed to have been “committed” if they have been budgeted or otherwise encumbered by the City for an eligible improvement, studies, design drawings or any necessary applications for approval by other governmental agencies have been initiated, construction bidding has been initiated, or improvements are under construction. Eligible refunds, plus interest at the City’s average annual cost of funds, will be made only upon an application filed within 180 days of the expiration of the fifth anniversary of the fee payment. (3944-8/12)

 

17.65.100 Fee Credits for Construction of Citywide Surface Transportation Improvements
A.    An applicant for a new development project shall be entitled to a credit against the amount of the Fair Share Traffic Impact Mitigation Fee otherwise required by this chapter, if the applicant agrees to dedicate right-of-way needed for, or construct a traffic improvement listed in, the Master Facilities Plan. No credit shall be given for site-related improvements or site-related right-of-way dedications.

B.     Application. A separate application shall be filed for each adjustment request made pursuant to this section. Such application shall be filed with the Public Works Director on a form provided by the director, not later than:

1.     Thirty days prior to the first public hearing on an applicable discretionary permit application for the development project, pursuant to the City Zoning and Subdivision Ordinance; or

2.     If no such discretionary permit is required, at the time of application for a building permit for the development project. Each application shall provide the documentation and assurances specified below.

Any credit application shall be considered pursuant to Section 17.65.070 in the same manner as the fee calculation adjustment.

C.     Credit for the Dedication of Non-Site-Related Right-of-Way. Credit for the dedication of non-site-related right-of-way for streets or street segments listed in the Master Facilities Plan shall be valued at 115% of the most recent assessed value as determined by the Orange County Assessor, or at the fair market value established by a private appraiser acceptable to the City. In no event shall the credit exceed the right-of-way costs for the street segment specified in the Master Facilities Plan or other applicable basis for the fee, nor shall the credit exceed the amount of the Fair Share Traffic Impact Mitigation Fee that would otherwise apply. Credit for the dedication shall be provided when the property has been conveyed at no cost to, and accepted by, the City in a manner specified by the City.

D.    Credit for Construction of Non-Site-Related Improvements.

1.     Applications for credit for construction of non-site-related improvements shall submit acceptable engineering drawings, specifications and construction cost estimates to the Public Works Director. The director shall recommend to the Planning Commission the amount of the credit for improvement construction based on either these cost estimates or alternative estimates if the director determines reasonably that the estimates submitted by the applicant are either unreliable or inaccurate. In no event shall the amount of the credit exceed the improvement cost specified in the Master Facilities Plan, or other applicable basis for the fee, nor shall the credit exceed the amount of the Fair Share Traffic Impact Mitigation Fee that would otherwise apply.

2.     No final inspection or certificate of occupancy for the development project may be issued until: (a) the construction is completed and accepted by the City; (b) a suitable maintenance and warranty bond is received and accepted by the City; and (c) all design, construction, inspection, testing, bonding and acceptance procedures are in strict compliance with City paving, drainage and other applicable requirements. (3944-8/12)

 

17.65.110 Establishment of Reserve Account for Fees
Pursuant to Government Code Section 66006, fees paid to the City pursuant to this chapter shall be deposited into a separate reserve account in the City’s general fund and used solely for the purposes of providing surface transportation improvements. All monies deposited into the reserve account established by this chapter shall be held separate and apart from other City funds. All interest or other earnings on the unexpended balance in the reserve account shall be credited to the reserve account. (3048-9/90)

 

17.65.120 Eligible Expenditures From Fee Reserve Account
All monies and interest earnings in the reserve account established by this chapter shall be expended on the construction of surface transportation projects of the nature or type identified in the Master Facilities Plan, or such other report as may be prepared from time to time to document the reasonable fair share of the costs to mitigate the traffic impacts of new development. Such expenditures may include, but are not necessarily limited to the following:

A.    Reimbursement for all direct and indirect costs incurred by the City to construct surface transportation improvements pursuant to this chapter, including the cost of land and right-of-way acquisition, planning, legal advice, engineering, design, construction and equipment.

B.     Reimburse the City for the construction of surface transportation projects of the nature or type identified in the Master Facilities Plan, or such other report as may be prepared from time to time to document the reasonable fair share of the costs to mitigate the traffic impacts of new development constructed by the City with local funds from other sources.

C.     Costs of issuance or debt service associated with bonds, notes or other security instruments issued to fund surface transportation improvements identified in the Master Facilities Plan.

D.    Reimbursement for administrative costs incurred by the City in establishing or maintaining the reserve account required by this chapter, including the cost of studies to establish the requisite nexus between the fee amount and the use of fee proceeds. City administrative costs shall not exceed 10% of the reserve account balance in any fiscal year.

E.     No reserve account funds shall be used to pay for capital improvements that are associated with existing arterial street segment or signalized intersection level of service deficiencies, except to the extent that new development contributes to the further degradation of operations, nor shall reserve account funds be used for periodic surface transportation system maintenance. (3944-8/12)

 

17.65.130 Annual Program Review and Periodic Adjustment of the Fee
Within 180 days after the last day of each fiscal year, the City Council shall review the status of compliance with this chapter, including the amount of fees collected, expenditures from the reserve account, and the degree to which the fees collected pursuant to this chapter are assisting the City to mitigate the surface transportation impacts of new development. At least every five years after the effective date of the ordinance enacting this chapter, the Public Works Director shall prepare, and the City Council shall consider, the fee formula established to implement this chapter, whether any adjustment in the fee formula or use of fee proceeds is warranted, or any other changes are needed to the procedures established by this chapter, to fulfill the goals, objectives or policies of the City’s General Plan. Each year between periodic reviews of the fee formula, the fee shall be increased by a factor to account for inflation in surface transportation construction costs, as provided in the City Council resolution setting the fee amount. (3617-10/03)

 

17.65.140 Preparation of Implementation Guidelines
Within 60 days after the effective date of the ordinance enacting this chapter, the Director of Public Works shall prepare administrative guidelines to implement the provisions of this chapter. The guidelines shall include administrative procedures, example fee calculations, application forms and such other information that will assist City staff, decision makers, developers and the public to understand how the provisions of this chapter are to be implemented. (3048-9/90)

 

17.65.150 Severability
If any section, phrase, sentence, or portion of this chapter is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portions shall be deemed a separate, distinct, and independent provision; and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions thereof. (3944-8/12)

 

Chapter 17.67 LIBRARY DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES
17.67.010 Intent and Purpose
A.    The purpose of this chapter is to establish a Library Development Impact Fee upon future development projects, an equitable share of the cost of mitigating future library facility needs created by such projects.

B.     A Library Development Impact Fee is being created for the purpose of assuring that the impacts created by new developments in the City of Huntington Beach pay a fair share of the proportional costs required for expansion of library facilities and collections.

C.     This chapter is intended to implement the goals, objectives and policies of the City of Huntington Beach General Plan, as well as following recommendations in the Master Facilities Plan, a part of the Nexus Report (as described below), and the City of Huntington Beach Capital Improvement Plan by ensuring that the City’s expansion of library facilities and collections are maintained when new development is constructed within the City limits. By imposing a fee that is reasonably related to the burdens created by new development on the City’s library services, together with funding available from other City revenue sources, the City will be able to construct the required capital improvements, accommodate projected growth and fulfill the goals, objectives and policies of the City’s General Plan and Master Facilities Plan a part of the Nexus Report.

D.    It is the intent of the City Council that the fee required by this chapter shall be supplementary to any conditions imposed upon a development project pursuant to other provisions of the Municipal Code, the Subdivision Map Act, the California Environmental Quality Act, other state and local laws, ordinances or chapter provisions which may authorize the imposition of conditions on development. (Res. No. 2012-23, 3945-8/12)

 

17.67.015 Legislative Findings
A.    The State of California, through the enactment of Government Code Sections 66001 through 66009 has authorized the City to enact development impact fees.

B.     The imposition of development impact fees is a method of ensuring that new development bears a proportionate share of the cost of capital facilities and other costs necessary to accommodate such development. These fees are established to promote and protect the public health, safety and welfare.

C.     Increase in residential development in the City increases the demand on the amount of library space and collection items.

D.    Pursuant to the “Development Impact Fee Calculation and Nexus Report for the City of Huntington Beach” (“Nexus Report”) dated October, 2011, as amended April 27, 2012, which is incorporated herein by reference in these findings as though set forth in full, the fees established pursuant to this chapter are derived from, based upon, and do not exceed the costs of providing additional library services attributable to applicable new residential development. This study is based in part upon master planning to more specifically identify capital facilities to serve new development; the expansion of the amount of library facilities space and the number of collection items in the systems.

E.     The fees collected pursuant to this chapter shall be used to finance the expansion of library facilities and collections identified herein in furtherance of the City’s General Plan, as well as the Master Facilities Plan which is a part of the Nexus Report and the City of Huntington Beach Capital Improvement Plan.

F.     A detailed study of the impacts of future residential construction in the City, along with an analysis of the need for the expansion of library facilities and collections has been prepared. This study is included in the Nexus Report.

G.    As set forth in the Nexus Report, there is a reasonable relationship between the need for the expansion of library facilities and collections set forth in this chapter and the impacts of the types of development for which the corresponding fee is charged. In addition, there is a reasonable relationship between the fee’s use and the type of development to which the fee is charged and a reasonable relationship between the amount of the fee and the cost of the facilities and collections or portion thereof attributable to the development on which the fee is imposed. (Res. No. 2012-23, 3945-8/12)

 

17.67.020 Definitions
Shall be as set forth in Chapter 17.73 of this Code. (Res. No. 2012-23, 3945-8/12)

 

17.67.030 Establishment of a Library Development Impact Fee
There is imposed a Library Development Impact Fee on all new nonsubdivided residential and nonresidential development in the City. (Res. No. 2012-23, 3945-8/12)

 

17.67.035 Fund Established
A Library Development Impact Fee fund is established. The Library Development Impact Fee fund is a fund to be utilized for payment of the actual or estimated costs of library services and collections as set forth in the Nexus Report which includes the Master Facilities Plan, as well as the City of Huntington Beach Capital Improvement Plan related to new residential construction. (Res. No. 2012-23, 3945-8/12)

 

17.67.036 Fee Imposed
A.    Any person who, 60 days after the effective date of this Development Impact Fee Ordinance, seeks to engage in nonsubdivided residential or nonresidential development including mobile home development by obtaining a building permit or other discretionary approval is required to pay a Library Development Impact Fee in the manner and amount as set forth in the current City of Huntington Beach Fee Resolution separately adopted.

B.     No certificate of occupancy, temporary certificate of occupancy, final building permit approval or construction approval for a mobile home pad or pads, as applicable, for the activities listed in this chapter, shall be issued unless and until the Library Development Impact Fee required by this chapter has been paid to the City. (Res. No. 2012-23, 3945-8/12)

 

17.67.040 Exemptions and Credits
A.    Exemptions. Any claim of exemption must be made no later than the time of application for a building permit or mobile home construction approval. Any claim of exemption must be filed in the same manner and will be considered pursuant to the same procedure as for a fee adjustment as provided in Chapter 17.73. The following shall be exempted from payment of the Library Development Impact Fee:

1.     Residential Development.

a.     Alteration or expansion of an existing residential building in which no additional dwelling units are created, the use is not changed and where no additional library services will be provided over and above those provided by the existing building.

b.     The replacement of a destroyed or partially destroyed building or structure with a new building or structure of the same size and use, provided that no additional library services will be required over and above those provided by the original use of the land.

c.     The construction of residential accessory buildings, structures or uses which will not require additional library services over and above those provided by the principal building or use of the land.

d.     The installation of a replacement mobile home on a lot or other such site when a Library Development Impact Fee for such mobile home site has previously been paid pursuant to this chapter, or where a mobile home legally existed on such site on or prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter.

e.     Construction, replacement or rebuilding of a single-family dwelling (one unit per lot) on an existing lot of record, or the replacement of one mobile home with another on the same pad, or the moving and relocation of a single-family home from one lot within the City to another lot within the City. This exemption shall not apply to tract development, to the development of more than one unit per lot, nor to the replacement of a single-family dwelling with more than one dwelling unit.

2.     Affordable Housing for Lower Income Households. Property rented, leased, sold, conveyed or otherwise transferred, at a rental price or purchase price which does not exceed the “affordable housing cost,” as defined in Section 50052.5 of the California Health and Safety Code when provided to a “lower income household” as defined in Section 50079.5 of the California Health and Safety Code or “very low-income household” as defined in Section 50105 of the California Health and Safety Code. This exemption shall require the applicant to execute an agreement to guarantee that the units shall be maintained for lower and very low-income households whether as units for rent or for sale or transfer. The agreement shall be in the form of a deed restriction or other legally binding and enforceable document acceptable to the City Attorney and shall bind the owner and any successor-in-interest to the real property being developed. The agreement shall subordinate, if required, to any state or federal program providing affordable housing to lower and very low-income households. The agreement shall be recorded with the Orange County Recorder prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. Applicant or any successor-in-interest shall be required to provide annually, or as requested, the names of all tenants or purchasers, current rents and income certification to ensure compliance. Voluntary removal of the housing restriction or violation of the restriction shall require the applicant or any successor-in-interest to pay the then applicable Library Development Impact Fee at the time of voluntary conversion or as imposed at the time of violation on the unit in violation, plus any attorneys’ fees and costs of enforcement, if applicable.

B.     Credits. Any applicant whose development is located within a community facilities district (CFD) and/or is subject to the assessments thereof, shall receive an offset credit towards the fees established by this chapter to the extent that the assessments fund improvements within the CFD which would otherwise be funded by the Development Impact Fees established by this chapter. (Res. No. 2012-23, 3945-8/12)

 

17.67.045 Calculation of Required Fees
A.    At the time of the issuance of the building permit, the Director of Planning and Building or his/her designee (“director”) shall calculate the amount of the applicable Library Development Impact Fee due as specified in the current fee resolution setting the amount of the fee.

B.     The director shall calculate the amount of the applicable Library Development Impact Fee due by:

1.     Determining the number and type of dwelling units in a residential development or mobile home pads in a mobile home park or site, and multiplying the same by the Library Development Impact Fee amount per dwelling unit or pad as established by the current fee resolution setting the amount of the fee.

2.     Determining the gross square feet of floor area, or number of lodging units, type of use and location in a nonresidential development, and multiplying the same by the Library Development Impact Fee amount as established by the current fee resolution setting the amount of the fee.

3.     Determining the number and type of dwelling units and the nonresidential number of lodging units or gross square feet of floor area, type of use and location in a structure containing mixed uses which include a residential use, and multiplying the same by the Library Development Impact Fee amount for each use as established by the current fee resolution setting the amount of the fee.

4.     Determining the gross square feet of floor area, or number of lodging units, type of use and location in a structure containing mixed uses which include two or more nonresidential principal uses, and multiplying the same by the Library Development Impact Fee amount as established by the current fee resolution. The gross square feet of floor area of any accessory use will be charged at the same rate as the predominant principal use unless the Department of Planning and Building finds that the accessory use is related to another principal use. (Res. No. 2012-23, 3945-8/12)

 

17.67.050 Payment of Fees
A.    The City shall collect from the applicant the Library Development Impact Fee prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, temporary certificate of occupancy, final building permit approval or construction approval for mobile home pad or pads, whichever occurs first.

B.     Except for any adjustment charge allocated to the City all funds collected shall be properly identified and promptly transferred for deposit in the Library Facilities Impact Fee fund and used solely for the purposes specified in this chapter. (Res. No. 2012-23, 3945-8/12)

 

17.67.055 Fee Payments for Phased Development Projects
If a development project will be constructed in phases, and separate building permits and certificates of occupancy will be issued for each phase, fees imposed pursuant to this chapter shall be calculated on the basis of the development characteristics of the entire development project. Payment of the fees may be made separately for each phase, provided the amount paid for each phase shall be equal to the percentage that that phase represents of the total development project’s development characteristics. The fee shall be the fee in effect at the time payment is due. (Res. No. 2012-23, 3945-8/12)

 

17.67.060 Refund
A.    Any applicant who has paid a Library Development Impact Fee pursuant to this chapter may apply to the director for a full or partial refund of same, if, within one year after collection of the Library Development Impact Fee the fee has been modified as follows: reduction in the number of dwelling units, a change in the type of dwelling units, a reduction in square footage, or the applicability of an exemption pursuant to this chapter. In the event a refund is issued, the City may retain a sum up to 20% of the Development Impact Fee paid by the applicant to offset the administrative costs of refund. In no event shall a refund exceed the amount of the Library Development Impact Fee actually paid.

B.     Erroneous or Illegal Collection. Fees will be refunded if the applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction of the director that they were erroneously or illegally collected. If the director determines the fees were not erroneously or illegally collected, then the applicant may appeal the decision pursuant to Section 17.73.030, Appeals. An application for a refund pursuant to this section MUST be filed within 90 days after the payment of the fees.

C.     City Failure to Commit Funds. Pursuant to the Mitigated Fee Act, upon application of the then current landowner, fees will be refunded if the City fails to commit them to a project of the nature or type identified in the Nexus Report within five years from the date that the fees were collected from the applicant. For purposes of this subsection, fees are deemed to have been “committed” if they have been budgeted or otherwise encumbered by the City for an eligible improvement, studies, design drawings or any necessary applications for approval by other governmental agencies have been initiated, construction bidding has been initiated, or improvements are under construction. Eligible refunds, plus interest at the City’s average annual cost of funds will be made only upon an application filed within 180 days of the expiration of the fifth anniversary of the fee payment. (Res. No. 2012-23, 3945-8/12)

 

17.67.065 Use of Funds
A.    Funds collected from the Library Development Impact Fee shall be used to fund the costs of expansion of the amount of library space and the number of collection items in the library’s collection attributable to new residential construction and shall include:

1.     The acquisition of additional property for library expansion.

2.     The construction of new facilities for library services.

3.     The furnishing of new buildings or facilities for library services.

4.     The purchase of library collections to expand the collections.

5.     The funding of a master plan to identify capital facilities to serve new users and patrons.

6.     The cost of financing (e.g., interest payments).

7.     Projects identified in the City of Huntington Beach General Plan, the Master Facilities Plan included in the Nexus Report, City of Huntington Beach Capital Improvement Plan, adopted annual City of Huntington Beach budget, or City Council approved development projects.

B.     Funds shall not be used for periodic or routine maintenance or to maintain or repair existing buildings.

C.     Revenue raised would be limited to capitalized cost related to growth.

D.    In the event that bonds or similar debt instruments are issued for advanced provision of capital facilities for which Library Development Impact Fees may be expended, impact fees may be used to pay debt service on such bonds or similar debt instruments to the extent that the facilities provided are of the type described in this chapter.

E.     Funds may be used to provide refunds as described in this chapter. (Res. No. 2012-23, 3945-8/12)

 

17.67.070 Fee Adjustments
Shall be as set forth in Chapter 17.73 of this Code. (Res. No. 2012-23, 3945-8/12)

 

17.67.072 Appeals
Shall be as set forth in Chapter 17.73 of this Code. (Res. No. 2012-23, 3945-8/12)

 

17.67.075 Credit for Construction of Non-Site-Related Improvements
A.    Applications for credit for construction of non-site-related improvements shall include acceptable engineering drawings, specifications and construction cost estimates submitted to the director. The director shall determine the amount of the credit for improvement construction based on either these cost estimates or alternative estimates if the director determines reasonably that the estimates submitted by the applicant are either unreliable or inaccurate. In no event shall the amount of the credit exceed the improvement cost specified in the Nexus Report, or other applicable basis for the fee, nor shall the credit exceed the amount that would otherwise apply.

B.     No final inspection or certificate of occupancy for the development project may be issued until: (1) the construction is completed and accepted by the City; (2) a suitable maintenance and warranty bond is received and accepted by the City; and (3) all design, construction, inspection, testing, bonding and acceptance procedures are in strict compliance with City paving, drainage and other applicable requirements. (Res. No. 2012-23, 3945-8/12)

 

17.67.080 Eligible Expenditures From Fee Reserve Account
All monies and interest earnings in any reserve account shall be expended on the projects of the nature or type identified in the Nexus Report, or such other report as may be prepared from time to time to document the reasonable fair share of the costs to mitigate the impact of new development on the expansion of library services and collections. (Res. No. 2012-23, 3945-8/12)

 

17.67.090 Annual Report and Amendment Procedures
A.    Within 180 days after the last day of each fiscal year, the Director of Library Services of the City of Huntington Beach shall evaluate progress in implementation of the Library Development Impact Fee and shall prepare a report thereon to the City Council in accordance with Government Code Section 66006, incorporating among other things:

1.     The expansion of library services and collections commenced, purchased or completed utilizing monies from the Library Development Impact Fee fund;

2.     The amount of the fees collected and the interest earned;

3.     The amount of Library Development Impact Fees in the fund; and

4.     Recommended changes to the Library Development Impact Fee, including, but not necessarily limited to, changes in this Library Development Impact Fee chapter or fee resolution.

B.     Based upon the report and such other factors as the City Council deems relevant and applicable, the City Council may amend the ordinance codified in this chapter or the fee resolution implementing this chapter. Changes to the Library Development Impact Fee rates or schedules may be made by amending the fee resolution. Any change which increases the amount of the Library Development Impact Fee shall be adopted by the City Council only after a noticed public hearing. Nothing herein precludes the City Council or limits its discretion to amend the ordinance codified in this chapter or the fee resolution establishing Library Development Impact Fee rates or schedules at such other times as may be deemed necessary. (Res. No. 2012-23, 3945-8/12)

 

17.67.100 Effect of Library Development Impact Fee on Zoning and Subdivision Regulations
This chapter shall not affect, in any manner, the permissible use of property, density/intensity of development, design and improvement standards and public improvement requirements or any other aspect of the development of land or construction of buildings, which may be imposed by the City pursuant to the City’s zoning regulations, subdivision regulations or other ordinances or regulations of the City, which shall be operative and remain in full force and effect without limitation with respect to all residential and nonresidential development. (Res. No. 2012-23, 3945-8/12)

 

17.67.110 Violation—Penalty
A violation of this chapter shall be prosecuted in the same manner as misdemeanors are prosecuted; and upon conviction, the violator shall be punishable according to law. However, in addition to or in lieu of any criminal prosecution, the City shall have the power to sue in civil court to enforce the provisions of this chapter. (Res. No. 2012-23, 3945-8/12)

 

17.67.120 Severability
If any section, phrase, sentence, or portion of this chapter is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portions shall be deemed a separate, distinct, and independent provision; and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions thereof. (Res. No. 2012-23, 3945-8/12)

 

Chapter 17.68 AREA OF BENEFIT DISTRICTS
17.68.010 Requirement for Installation of Improvements
As a condition of approval for a development, a developer may be required to install and dedicate public improvements which may contain supplemental size, capacity, number, or length for the benefit of property not within the development. When such supplemental size, capacity, number, or length benefits property not within the development, the City may enter into an agreement setting forth the procedures to reimburse the developer for the supplemental improvements through an area of benefit district. In order to reimburse the developer, the City may:

A.    Collect from other persons, including public agencies, a reasonable charge for the use of supplemental improvements benefiting real property not within the development area.

B.     Contribute to the developer that part of the cost of the public improvements that benefit real property outside the development area and levy a charge upon the real property benefited to reimburse the developer for such cost, together with interest thereon, if any.

C.     Establish and maintain area of benefit districts for the levy and collection of such charge from the property benefited. The charge collected shall be paid to the City or developer constructing the public improvement. (3151-8/92, 3564-7/02)

 

17.68.020 Definitions
“Actual or estimated costs of public improvements” means the actual or estimated costs for construction, design engineering, district formation, right-of-way appraisal and acquisition costs, condemnation proceedings, environmental impact mitigation, plan check and permit fees, construction inspections, maintenance of improvements, or any other expenses attributable to the construction of public improvements. If the scope of the development is altered during construction in order to respond to events or circumstances which are revealed during construction, the City Council may increase the estimated cost by not more than 10% without notice to the affected property owners.

“Administrative costs” shall be defined as costs for direct labor and employee benefits, outside consultants, direct materials, indirect costs, overhead costs, and fixed assets or depreciation charges.

“Area of benefit” means the entire area which receives a benefit from the supplemental improvements. The area of benefit shall be that area which, in the opinion of the City Council, upon the recommendation of the City engineer, and after a noticed public hearing, is determined to be the area benefited by the construction of the supplemental improvements.

“Benefited property” is the parcel(s) that is benefited by the supplemental improvements and is included within the area of benefit.

“Charge” means the excess costs attributable to an individual parcel of real property.

“Developer” means the person who is responsible for constructing the public improvements.

“Development” means any residential, commercial or industrial project or subdivision.

“Development area” means any residential subdivision or commercial or industrial projects to be constructed by the developer.

“Excess costs” means the costs attributable to that portion of public improvements which benefit areas outside the development area. Benefit may be determined by any commonly accepted method which fairly apportions the cost of the improvements to the benefiting properties.

“Public improvements” means those improvements as set forth herein including, but not limited to, streets, bridges, traffic signals, street lights, drainage, flood control, water or sanitary sewer facilities, reclaimed water facilities, landscaping, grading, soil remediation, abandonment of oil facilities, relocation of utilities, other public facilities such as parks, libraries, fire stations, police stations, and any accessory improvements necessary for the functioning of the public improvements. The term “public improvements” includes not only improvements that benefit the development, but also those that benefit parcels outside the development. “Public improvements” shall also include any property or property interests reasonably necessary for the construction of the improvement.

“Substantial completion of an improvement” means completion of construction of a public improvement to the extent necessary to allow it to be used for the purpose for which it was intended.

“Supplemental improvements” means those public improvements which are:

1.     Required as a condition of approval of the development which has a size, capacity, number, or length greater than necessary solely to benefit or mitigate the impacts of the development; or

2.     Improvements which have been agreed upon between the City and developer. (3151-8/92, 3564-7/02)

 

17.68.030 Application for Area of Benefit District
A.    Whenever a developer elects, or is required by the City, to install or replace supplemental improvements, or whenever the City participates in the costs of supplemental improvements in advance of development, and provided that the costs of such supplemental improvements are not financed by an assessment district or similar proceeding, the developer may submit an application for formation of an area of benefit district, or the City Council, on its own motion, may initiate the formation of the area of benefit district.

B.     The application of the developer shall be in writing and shall be submitted to the office of the City engineer with a non-refundable application fee. The City engineer shall expeditiously process the request to City Council. (3151-8/92, 3564-7/02)

 

17.68.040 Application Fee for Formation of the Area of Benefit District
Where the developer has applied for formation of an area of benefit district, prior to the City Council authorizing the initiation of the formation of the area of benefit district, the developer shall deposit with the City the following fees to cover various administration costs:

A.    A non-refundable application fee will be required from the developer prior to commencing any work on the area of benefit district. The amount of the application fee will be determined by the City engineer. The application fee will be deposited in a general area of benefit district administration fund established by the City Treasurer.

B.     District formation fees shall be deposited into a specific project fund for each individual project to cover such expenses as the calculation of the excess costs of the supplemental improvements, determination of the area of benefit and determination of the apportionment of the excess costs to the benefiting parcels. District formation fees will also include publishing of all notices, mailing, and City administrative costs. Once the fees have been deposited to the City by the developer, the City engineer will process the developer’s request to City Council. The City engineer may retain a qualified consultant to prepare the documents and estimates. This consultant shall have no business relationship with the developer. The costs of any such engineering services shall be paid by the developer. The City Council may treat such costs as an incidental cost of the supplemental improvements that may be recouped pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. (3151-8/92, 3564-7/02)

 

17.68.050 Recovering Costs for Formation and Monitoring the Area of Benefit District
The City Council may levy a supplemental fee on all benefited properties paying area of benefit charges intended to reimburse the City and developer for the cost of formation and monitoring the district. (3151-8/92, 3564-7/02)

 

17.68.060 Report of the City Engineer
Pursuant to the direction of the City Council, the City engineer shall prepare and file with the City Clerk a report containing the following information:

A.    A map indicating the boundaries of the area of benefit district which identifies all parcels within the district.

B.     The actual or total estimated cost of the supplemental improvements.

C.     The proposed spread of the excess costs to the area of benefit. (3151-8/92, 3564-7/02)

 

17.68.070 Notice and Hearing on Establishment of Area of Benefit District
A.    Upon receiving the request from the City engineer, the City Clerk shall set a noticed public hearing before the City Council. The City Clerk shall cause a notice of the hearing, in substantially the following form, to be published once in a newspaper of general circulation in the City of Huntington Beach at least 10 days prior to such hearing:

 

NOTICE OF HEARING

 

The City Council of the City of Huntington Beach will hold a public hearing at _____ on ____________at the City Council Chambers, 2000 Main Street, Huntington Beach, California 92648 to consider the establishment of an Area of Benefit District for the financing of certain public facilities and related improvements within the City.

 

Your property is located within the proposed boundaries of the Area of Benefit District and may be subject to a charge to pay a portion of the cost of providing public facilities which benefit your parcel of land. If, after the date of forming this District, you either file a final map (subdivision, parcel, consolidation, etc.) or apply for a building permit, the charge and inflation adjustment would become due and payable.

 

The proposed boundaries of the District are more particularly described by Diagram No______ which is on file in the Office of the City Clerk. All persons desiring to testify with respect to: the necessity of said Public Improvements, the cost of said Public Improvements, the benefited area and the amount of the costs eligible to be recovered, may appear and be heard at said hearing.

 

B.     The City engineer shall, at least 14 days prior to the hearing, cause a copy of the above notice to be mailed to each owner of real property within the benefited area as shown on the last equalized tax roll. Such notice shall be accompanied by a diagram of the proposed benefited area and a statement by the City engineer describing the following:

1.     A description of the public improvements and that portion considered to be in excess of the developer’s requirements.

2.     The estimated or actual costs necessary to pay for the public improvements.

3.     The actual or estimated costs of the supplemental improvements which are proposed to be charged against the benefiting property when such property is developed or redeveloped.

4.     A diagram identifying the properties to be included within the district. (3151-8/92, 3564-7/02)

 

17.68.080 Action by City Council
A.    After the public hearing the City Council may, in its sole discretion, approve a resolution establishing the area of benefit district and may enter into a reimbursement agreement with the developer to provide for the disbursements of the proceeds of the area of benefit district.

B.     The resolution establishing the area of benefit district shall incorporate an exhibit containing the following:

1.     A list of the benefited properties identified by assessor’s parcel numbers.

2.     A diagram identifying the parcels included within the district.

3.     An apportionment of the excess costs which represent the actual or estimated amount to be charged against each benefited property within the district. If the costs are estimated, the resolution will indicate that the charges are subject to re-computation by the City engineer when the construction and final audit have been completed.

4.     The time when such charges are due and payable.

5.     A statement indicating that the charges are subject to an interest or inflation charge, the terms of which shall be defined.

C.     Once the area of benefit district has been approved by a resolution of the City Council, it shall establish a statement of charges due from the benefiting properties and their successors, heirs and assigns.

D.    Unless directed otherwise by the City Council at the time of the district formation, the City Clerk shall record a certified copy of the resolution establishing the district with the County Recorder. (3151-8/92, 3564-7/02)

 

17.68.090 Re-Computation of Charge
If the district is formed based on estimated costs, then the City engineer shall reapportion the charge amounts after final costs have been calculated and verified by the City engineer or his or her designee. All affected property owners shall be notified in writing of their charge amount. (3151-8/92, 3564-7/02)

 

17.68.100 Administrative Audit
The finance officer shall prepare a report indicating the administrative costs incurred for each district on an annual basis. The report shall be prepared each calendar year following the formation of an area of benefit district and shall be completed by February 15th. (3151-8/92, 3564-7/02)

 

17.68.110 Establishment of Area of Benefit Charge
A.    Payment of charges shall be placed by the City in the appropriate fund account established by the Council for each district. These funds will be established to reimburse the developer for costs incurred for the construction of the supplemental improvements. All accrued interest in this fund will be transferred to the project monitoring fund. The term of any reimbursement agreement shall be established by the City Council based upon the reasonable expectations of the development of benefited properties or the utilization of the public improvement by such benefited properties provided.

B.     Following the formation of the district, if any person records a final map (subdivision, parcel, consolidation, etc.) or applies for a building permit on a parcel within a district in accordance with this chapter, and such person or their predecessor in interest has not paid such charge to the City, the established charge shall be paid prior to the recording of the final tract map, final parcel map or the issuance of the building permit.

C.     All charges shall include a principal charge plus an interest or inflation charge calculated from the date of establishment of the district. The date of establishment shall be the date of acceptance of the public improvements by the City, or City Council approval of the district, whichever occurs later.

D.    Once a charge has been paid, the City engineer shall cause a notice to be recorded with the County Recorder removing the parcel from the area of benefit district. (3151-8/92, 3564-7/02)

 

17.68.115 Exemption From Charge
A.    No charge shall be required in connection with building permits described below:

1.     Building alterations for non-residential uses which do not exceed a one-third of the value of a building, as defined in the Uniform Building Code, and which effect no change in occupancy, and where no additional vehicle trips will be produced over and above those produced by the existing building.

2.     Building alterations or additions for residential use which add no residential units.

3.     Fences and walls.

4.     Repair of construction defects or damage due to fire, civil unrest, flood or any other destructive act of nature which does not increase the building area by more than one-third the original area, provided that no additional vehicle trips will be produced over and above those produced by the original use of the land.

5.     Temporary uses as specified in the City of Huntington Beach Ordinance Code, Article 973.

B.     Any claim of exemption must be filed with the City engineer. Such application shall be filed with the City engineer at the time of application for a building permit or final map. Each application shall state in detail the factual basis for the requested charge exemption. (3564-7/02)

 

17.68.117 Adjustment of Charge
The City Council may create, pursuant to the resolution establishing an area of benefit district, a procedure for adjusting the charge to benefited parcels. The procedure shall address the circumstance that the supplemental improvements will not benefit individual properties within the area of benefit due to the nature of development proposed on the property. (3564-7/02)

 

17.68.120 Obligation of Developer to Claim Monies
All monies collected under the provisions of this chapter shall be deposited by the City Treasurer into the appropriate fund established for the collection of funds and the monitoring of the district. The City Treasurer shall pay annually all monies so collected to the developer who paid for the supplemental improvements for which the charges were collected, or to their assignees. The City shall notify the developer of the existence of monies deposited in said fund. No funds will be reimbursed to the developer until all costs included in the district have been verified by the City engineer. The notice shall be mailed to the address contained in the reimbursement agreement and no further inquiries shall be required by the City. If any such money remains on deposit with the City without being claimed by the party rightfully entitled to it within three years after notice has been made as provided herein, such money shall be forfeited to the City and then it shall be transferred to the general fund of the City. (3151-8/92, 3564-7/02)

 

17.68.130 Delegation of Duties
Whenever a duty is delegated to or reposed in a City official or employee, except the City Council, that official or employee may delegate all or a portion of these duties to an assistant, deputy, or other employee of the City. (3151-8/92, 3564-7/02)

 

17.68.140 Challenges to District
Any action or proceeding to challenge, attack, set aside, avoid, or review the decision of the City Council to establish an area of benefit district or a reimbursement charge, fee, or requirement, or to decline to establish a district shall be brought by an interested person within 90 days of formation of the district. (3151-8/92, 3564-7/02)

 

Chapter 17.72 COVENANTS OF EASEMENT
17.72.010 Purpose
The purpose of this chapter is to implement California Government Code Sections 65870 through 65875, inclusive, regarding the creation of easements through the execution and recordation of covenants. (3203-10/93)

 

17.72.020 Creation—Types of Easements
In addition to any other method for the creation of an easement, an easement may be created by a recorded covenant of easement made by an owner of real property to the City. An easement created pursuant to this chapter may be for parking, ingress, egress, emergency access, light and air access, landscaping, or open-space purposes. (3203-10/93)

 

17.72.030 Effect
At the time of recording of the covenant of easement, all the real property benefited or burdened by the covenant shall be in common ownership. The covenant shall be effective when recorded and shall act as an easement pursuant to Division 2, Part 2, Title 2, Chapter 3, Section 801 et seq. of the California Civil Code, except that it shall not merge into any other interest in the real property. Section 1104 of the California Civil Code shall be applicable to conveyance of the affected real property. (3203-10/93)

 

17.72.040 Enforcement
A covenant executed pursuant to this chapter shall be enforceable by the successors in interest to the real property benefited by the covenant. (3203-10/93)

 

17.72.050 Recording—Contents
A covenant of easement recorded pursuant to this chapter shall describe the real property to be subject to the easement and the real property to be benefited thereby. The covenant of easement shall also identify the approval, permit, or designation granted which relied upon or required the covenant. The covenant of easement shall be recorded in the county where all or a portion of the restricted property is located and shall contain a legal description of the real property and be executed by the owner of the real property. From and after the time of its recordation, the covenant shall impart notice thereof to all persons to the extent afforded by the recording laws of this state. Upon recordation, the burdens of the covenant shall be binding upon, and the benefits of the covenant shall inure to, all successors in interest to the real property. (3203-10/93)

 

17.72.060 Public Hearing on Release of Covenant
Upon written request from any person, whether or not that person has title to the real property, the City Council shall hold a public hearing regarding the release of a covenant of easement recorded pursuant to this chapter. The covenant of easement may be released upon a determination by the City Council that the restriction of the property is no longer necessary to achieve the land use goals of the City. Said determination shall be made based upon a preponderance of the evidence presented at the public hearing. If the City Council so determines, a release shall be recorded by the City in the official records of the County of Orange within 30 days following the public hearing. (3203-10/93)

 

17.72.070 Fees
The City Council may adopt by resolution a fee to recover the reasonable cost of processing the release of the covenant from those persons requesting the release pursuant to Section 17.72.050. (3203-10/93)

 

17.72.080 Standing to Enforce or Challenge
Nothing in this chapter shall create in any person other than the City and the owner of the real property burdened or benefited by the covenant standing to enforce or to challenge the covenant or any amendment thereto or release therefrom. (3203-10/93)

 

Chapter 17.73 DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEE(S)—GENERAL
17.73.010 Definitions
As used in this chapter:

“Applicant” means the property owner, landowner or duly designated agent thereof, that applies for a permit or other entitlement for a new development permit.

“Attached dwelling unit” (term is used in Thorpe report) shall mean shared living quarters with two or more dwelling units on a site, without separate kitchen or bathroom facilities for each room or unit. This classification includes boarding houses.

“Building permit” means the City permit required for new building construction and/or additions which add square footage pursuant to Title 17 of this Code. Neither a grading permit, nor a foundation permit shall be considered a building permit for purposes of this chapter.

“Calculation” means the point in time at which the City calculates the development impact fee(s) to be paid by the applicant. Calculation will generally occur at the time of issuance of the applicable building permit or construction approval for a residential or commercial/industrial development or mobile home pad but may occur earlier in the development approval process.

“Chief” may mean the Police Chief or Fire Chief.

“City” shall mean the City of Huntington Beach.

“City Manager” means the City Manager or his/her designee of the City of Huntington Beach.

“Collect” or “collection” means the point in time at which the development impact fee(s) are paid by the applicant. Collection will occur on the date of final inspection or the date a certificate of occupancy or temporary certificate of occupancy, whichever occurs first, or in the case of a mobile home pad or pads, collection will occur at or on the date of construction approval is issued.

“Collections” shall mean books, magazines, DVDs, compact disks, computer programs, digital resources and other reference and circulation materials.

“Commercial or industrial development project” shall mean the construction of new floor area on a lot in any of the nonresidential zoning districts of the City.

“Community use facilities” shall mean facilities dedicated for community use for social, community and educational groups.

“Detached dwelling unit” shall mean a detached building or buildings designed primarily for use as a dwelling, with one or more habitable rooms with only one kitchen, and designed for occupancy as a unit by one or more persons living as a household unit with common access to all living, kitchen and bathroom areas, no portion of which is rented as a separate unit.

“Development” means the addition of new dwelling units and/or new nonresidential square footage to an undeveloped, partially developed or redeveloped site and involving the issuance of a building permit and certificate of occupancy for such construction, reconstruction or use. Development may also include expanded uses that create additional impacts on City facilities, infrastructure or parkland. Development also includes the approval and construction of new mobile home pads in existing or new mobile home parks or sites, but not including the following so long as no additional dwelling units or gross floor area is added:

1.     A permit to operate;

2.     A permit for the internal alteration, remodeling, rehabilitation, or other improvements or modifications to an existing structure;

3.     The rebuilding of a structure destroyed by an act of God or the rehabilitation or replacement of a building in order to comply with the City’s seismic safety requirements;

4.     Parking facilities; or

5.     The rehabilitation or replacement of a building destroyed by imminent public hazard, acts of terrorism, sabotage, vandalism, warfare or civil disturbance except where said destruction was caused or in any manner accomplished, instigated, motivated, prompted, incited, induced, influenced, or participated in by any persons or their agents having any interest in the real or personal property at the location.

“Development project” means any residential, commercial or industrial development project, and shall mean any construction, addition, alteration or other change of use of a building or land that requires the City to issue a grading, building, plumbing, mechanical, or electrical permit, or any other form of entitlement.

“Director” may mean the Director of Community Services, Director of Library Services, Director of Planning and Building, or Director of Public Works.

“Dwelling unit” or “DU” is as defined in Section 203.06 of the Huntington Beach Zoning and Subdivision Ordinance (“ZSO”).

“Fee resolution” means and refers to the City resolution specifying the development impact fee(s) per dwelling unit or mobile home pad for residential development and per gross square foot of floor area for nonresidential development, by type and by location.

“Fees Calculation Report” shall mean the report prepared for the City entitled “Development Impact Fee(s) Calculation and Nexus Report for the City of Huntington Beach” dated October 2011.

“Floor area” shall mean the area of all floors and levels as defined in the ZSO.

“Government or public facilities” shall mean publicly owned buildings and structures used for the purposes of conducting City, county, state or federal government business. Such facilities shall include, but not be limited to, City halls, police and fire stations, offices, equipment yards, sanitation facilities, schools, recreation centers, and similar facilities. Private commercial development projects leasing publicly owned land shall not be considered government or public facilities.

“Gross square feet” or “gsf” means the area of a nonresidential development measured from the exterior building lines of each floor with respect to enclosed spaces but excluding parking spaces whether or not enclosed. For purposes of this chapter, the term “enclosed spaces” specifically includes, but is not limited to, an area available to and customarily used by the general public and all areas of business establishments generally accessible to the public such as fenced, or partially fenced in areas of garden centers attached to and serving the primary structure.

“Land use category” shall mean any of the specific land uses that have been listed in the fair share implementation resolution authorized pursuant to Section 17.65.050, and used to provide the basis for future development impact projections.

“Library facilities” shall mean library building space and library materials, which are owned and operated by the City of Huntington Beach.

“Library materials” shall mean books, magazines, DVDs, compact disks, computer programs, digital resources and other reference and circulation materials.

“Master Facilities Plan” shall mean the report prepared for the City entitled Development Impact Fee Master Facilities Plan, prepared by Revenue & Costs Specialists, LLC, dated October 2011.

“Mobile home” shall mean a structure transportable in sections which is a minimum of eight feet in width and 40 feet in length, built on a permanent chassis, and designed to be a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation.

“Nonresidential development” means a development undertaken for the purpose of creating gross floor area, excluding dwelling units, but which includes, and is not limited to commercial, industrial, retail, office, hotel/motel, and warehouse uses involving the issuance of a building permit for such construction, reconstruction or use.

“Planning and Building Director” shall mean the Planning and Building Director of the City of Huntington Beach or his/her designee.

“Planning Department” shall mean the Planning Department of the City of Huntington Beach.

“Police Department” means the Police Department of the City of Huntington Beach.

“Residential development” means a development undertaken for the purpose of creating a new dwelling unit or units and involving the issuance of a building permit and certificate of occupancy for such construction, reconstruction or use, or the construction approval for a mobile home pad or pads.

“Residential development project” shall mean the construction of a dwelling unit on a lot in any of the residential zoning districts of the City. For purposes of this chapter, the addition of floor area shall be considered construction of a residential development project if the additional floor area exceeds 50% of the existing floor area, as determined by the Director of Planning and Building.

“Site-related right-of-way or improvement construction” shall mean right-of-way or traffic improvements that must be constructed on the site of a new development project in order to comply with applicable City development regulations and standards.

“Surface transportation system” shall mean the City’s system of streets, roads and intersections traversed by automobiles and other vehicles.

“Trip-miles” shall mean the number of vehicle trips multiplied by the average trip length for a specified use as identified in the Fee Calculation Report.

“Vehicle trips” shall mean the number of average, daily trips generated by uses of land, as specified in the most recent edition of the Institute of Transportation Engineers, Trip Generation, and at the discretion of the Public Works Director when the reference document does not provide a reasonable representation of vehicle trips for a specific use, special studies or alternative reference documents may be used. (Res. No. 2012-23, 3947-8/12)

 

17.73.020 Fee Adjustments
A.    An applicant for a new development project subject to a fee required by this title may apply to the City for a refund, reduction, adjustment or waiver of the fee.

B.     Circumstances That May Justify a Fee Adjustment. Examples of circumstances that may justify a fee adjustment include, but are not necessarily limited to the following:

1.     The development project includes an existing building that is proposed to be demolished, provided the building proposed to be demolished was capable of being used at the time of the development project application, and sufficient information about its prior use is available. Any such adjustment is limited to the amount of the fee that would otherwise be due for the new development project.

2.     The physical or operating characteristics (e.g., hours of operation) of the new development project are substantially different from the land use on which the fee calculation is based.

3.     The new development project includes multiple land uses that are complementary.

4.     Property values are worth less than the City’s estimated value in the methodology. Likewise, the City may present evidence in the form of an appraisal and the value is in excess of that used in the methodology.

C.     An application for a fee adjustment shall be made and decided as follows: A separate application shall be filed for each adjustment request made pursuant to this section. Such application shall be made on a form provided by the Director of Planning and Building or his/her designee and shall be filed with the Director of Planning and Building not later than:

1.     Thirty days prior to the first public hearing on an applicable discretionary permit application for the development project, pursuant to the City Zoning and Subdivision Ordinance; or

2.     If no such discretionary permit is required, at the time of application for a building permit for the development project.

D.    Each application shall state in detail the factual basis for the requested fee reduction, adjustment or waiver. The Director of Planning and Building shall determine if the application is complete, and if not, may cause the public hearing to be continued until the application is determined to be complete. The director shall act within 10 days after receipt of the completed application to approve or deny the application. (Res. No. 2012-23, 3947-8/12)

 

17.73.030 Appeals
A.    An applicant may appeal, by protest, any imposition of the development impact fee(s) by filing a notice of appeal with the City Manager or his/her designee within 90 days after the applicant pays the required development impact fee(s).

B.     A valid appeal by protest of the imposition of the development impact fee(s) shall meet all of the following requirements:

1.     Tendering in advance of the appeal any required payment in full or providing assurance of payment satisfactory to the City Manager or his/her designee;

2.     Serving written notice on the City Manager or his/her designee including:

a.     A statement that the required payment has been tendered under protest or that required conditions have been satisfied;

b.     A statement informing the City Manager or his/her designee of the factual elements of the dispute and the legal theory forming the basis of the protest;

c.     The name and address of the applicant;

d.     The name and address of the property owner;

e.     A description and location of the property;

f.      The number of residential units or nonresidential gross square footage proposed, by land use or dwelling unit type, as appropriate; and

g.     The date of issuance of the building permit.

C.     The City Manager or his/her designee shall schedule a hearing and render a final decision on the applicant’s appeal within 60 days after the date the applicant files a valid appeal.

D.    The hearing shall be administrative. Evidence shall be submitted by the City Manager or his/her designee and by the applicant and testimony shall be taken under oath.

E.     The burden of proof shall be on the applicant to establish that the applicant is not subject to the imposition of the development impact fee(s) pursuant to the applicable development impact fee ordinance and applicable state law.

F.     If the development impact fee(s) has been paid in full or if the notice of appeal is accompanied by a cash deposit, letter of credit, bond or other surety acceptable to the City Manager or his/her designee in an amount equal to the development impact fee(s) calculated to be due, the application for the building permit or mobile home construction approval shall be processed. The filing of a notice of appeal shall not stay the imposition or the collection of the development impact fee(s) calculated by the City to be due unless sufficient and acceptable surety has been provided.

G.    Any petition for judicial review of the City Manager’s final decision shall be made in accordance with applicable state law and after the administrative remedies proscribed herein have been exhausted.

1.     Hearing. The City Manager or his/her designee shall consider the fee(s) adjustment application prior to the public hearing as the application for a discretionary development permit for the development project, or, if no such permit is required, the City Manager or his/her designee shall consider the application at a separate hearing within 60 days after the fee(s) adjustment application is deemed complete by the City Manager or his/her designee.

2.     Appeal. Any person may appeal the decision of the City Manager or his/her designee to the City Council, by filing a written appeal with the City Clerk within 10 days of the City Manager’s or his/her designee’s decision. (Res. No. 2012-23, 3947-8/12)

 

17.73.040 Judicial Review
A.    Any judicial action or proceeding to attack, review, set aside, void or annul the development impact fee ordinance, or any provision thereof, or resolution, or amendment thereto, shall be commenced within 90 days of the effective date of the ordinance, resolution, or any amendment thereto.

B.     Any judicial action or proceeding to attack, review, set aside or annul the imposition or collection of a development impact fee(s) on a development shall be preceded by a valid appeal by protest pursuant to Section 17.73.030 hereof and a final decision of the City Manager or his/her designee pursuant thereto and shall be filed and service of process effected within 90 days after the hearing on appeal regarding the imposition of development impact fee(s) upon the development. (Res. No. 2012-23, 3947-8/12)

 

Chapter 17.74 FIRE FACILITIES DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEE
17.74.010 Legislative Findings
A.    The State of California, through the enactment of Government Code Sections 66001 through 66009 has authorized the City to enact development impact fees.

B.     The imposition of development impact fees is a method of ensuring that new development bears a proportionate share of the cost of capital facilities and other costs necessary to accommodate such development. These fees are established to promote and protect the public health, safety and welfare.

C.     Increase in residential and nonresidential development in the City creates a need for increased funds to pay for the cost of increased fire suppression/medic facilities, vehicles and specialty equipment which are needed to serve the increasing development in the City.

D.    Pursuant to the “Development Impact Fee Calculation and Nexus Report for the City of Huntington Beach” (“Nexus Report”) dated October 2011, as amended April 27, 2012, which is incorporated herein by reference in these findings as though set forth in full, the fees established pursuant to this chapter are derived from, based upon, and do not exceed the costs of providing additional fire suppression/medic facilities, vehicles and specialty equipment attributable to applicable new residential or nonresidential development. This study is based in part upon master planning to more specifically identify capital facilities to serve new development; the acquisition, relocation and expansion of fire stations; the construction or acquisition of fire suppression/medic facilities, vehicles and specialty equipment, and increase the number of emergency response vehicles.

E.     The fees collected pursuant to this chapter shall be used to finance the acquisition, relocation and expansion of fire stations; the construction or acquisition of fire suppression/medic facilities, vehicles and specialty equipment, and increase the number of emergency response vehicles identified herein in furtherance of the City General Plan, the Nexus Report and its attached Master Facilities Plan, and the City of Huntington Beach Master Improvement Plan.

F.     A detailed study of the impacts of future residential and nonresidential construction in the City, along with an analysis of the need for the acquisition, relocation and expansion of fire stations; the construction or acquisition of fire suppression/medic facilities, vehicles and specialty equipment, and increase the number of emergency response vehicles has been prepared. This study is included in the Nexus Report.

G.    As set forth in the Nexus Report, there is a reasonable relationship between the need for the acquisition, relocation and expansion of fire stations; the construction or acquisition of fire suppression/medic facilities, vehicles and specialty equipment, and increase the number of emergency response vehicles set forth in this chapter and the impacts of the types of development for which the corresponding fee is charged. In addition, there is a reasonable relationship between the fee’s use and the type of development to which the fee is charged and a reasonable relationship between the amount of the fee and the cost of the facilities and equipment or portion thereof attributable to the development on which the fee is imposed. (Res. No. 2012-23, 3943-8/12)

 

17.74.020 Intent and Purpose
A.    A Fire Facilities Development Impact Fee is being created for the purpose of assuring that the impacts created by new development in the City of Huntington Beach pay a fair share of the proportional facility and equipment and vehicle costs required to support needed acquisition, relocation and expansion of fire stations; the construction or acquisition of fire suppression/medic facilities, vehicles and specialty equipment, and increase the number of emergency response vehicles and related costs necessary to accommodate such development.

B.     This chapter is intended to implement goals, objectives and policies of the City of Huntington Beach General Plan, as well as following the recommendations in the Nexus Report including the Master Facilities Plan, which is a part of the Nexus Report, and the City of Huntington Beach Capital Improvement Plan by ensuring that the City’s acquisition, relocation and expansion of fire stations; the construction or acquisition of fire suppression/medic facilities, vehicles and specialty equipment, and the increase in the number of emergency response vehicles are maintained when new development is constructed within the City limits. By imposing a fee that is reasonably related to the burdens created by new development on the City’s Fire Department, together with funding available from other City revenue sources, the City will be able to construct the required capital improvements, accommodate projected growth and fulfill the goals, objectives and policies of the City’s General Plan, the Nexus Report and its attached Master Facilities Plan.

C.     It is the intent of the City Council that the fee required by this chapter shall be supplementary to any conditions imposed upon a development project pursuant to other provisions of the Municipal Code, the Subdivision Map Act, the California Environmental Quality Act, other state and local laws, ordinances or chapter provisions which may authorize the imposition of conditions on development. (Res. No. 2012-23, 3943-8/12)

 

17.74.030 Definitions
Shall be as set forth in Chapter 17.73 of this Code. (Res. No. 2012-23, 3943-8/12)

 

17.74.040 Fire Facilities Development Impact Fee
There is imposed a Fire Facilities Development Impact Fee on all nonsubdivided, new residential and nonresidential development. (Res. No. 2012-23, 3943-8/12)

 

17.74.050 Fund Established
A Fire Facilities Development Impact Fee fund is established. The Fire Facilities Development Impact Fee fund is a fund to be utilized for payment of the actual or estimated costs of fire facilities and equipment as set forth the Nexus Report which includes the Master Facilities Plan, as well as the City of Huntington Beach Capital Improvement Plan related to new residential and nonresidential construction. (Res. No. 2012-23, 3943-8/12)

 

17.74.060 Fee Imposed
A.    Any person who, 60 days after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, seeks to engage in nonsubdivided residential or nonresidential development including mobile home development by obtaining a building permit or other discretionary approval is required to pay a Fire Facilities Development Impact Fee in the manner and amount as set forth in the current City of Huntington Beach Fee Resolution separately adopted.

B.     No certificate of occupancy, temporary certificate of occupancy, or final building permit approval or construction approval for a mobile home pad or pads, as applicable, for the activities listed in this chapter, shall be issued unless and until the Fire Facilities Development Impact Fee required by this chapter has been paid to the City. (Res. No. 2012-23, 3943-8/12)

 

17.74.070 Calculation of Fire Facilities Development Impact Fee
A.    At the time of the issuance of the building permit, the Director of Planning and Building or his/her designee (“director”) shall calculate the amount of the applicable Fire Facilities Development Impact Fee due as specified in the current fee resolution setting the amount of the fee.

B.     The director shall calculate the amount of the applicable Fire Facilities Development Impact Fee due by:

1.     Determining the number and type of dwelling units in a residential development or mobile home pads in a mobile home park or site, and multiplying the same by the Fire Facilities Development Impact Fee amount per dwelling unit or pad as established by the current fee resolution setting the amount of the fee;

2.     Determining the gross square feet of floor area, or number of lodging units, type of use and location in a nonresidential development, and multiplying the same by the Fire Facilities Development Impact Fee amount as established by the current fee resolution setting the amount of the fee;

3.     Determining the number and type of dwelling units and the nonresidential number of lodging units or gross square feet of floor area, type of use and location, in a structure containing mixed uses which include a residential use, and multiplying the same by the Fire Facilities Development Impact Fee amount for each use as established by the current fee resolution setting the amount of the fee;

4.     Determining the gross square feet of floor area, or number of lodging units, type of use and location in a structure containing mixed uses which include two or more nonresidential principal uses, and multiplying the same by the Fire Facilities Development Impact Fee amount as established by the current fee resolution. The gross square feet of floor area of any accessory use will be charged at the same rate as the predominant principal use unless the director finds that the accessory use is related to another principal use. (Res. No. 2012-23, 3943-8/12)

 

17.74.075 Fee Payments for Phased Development Projects
If a development project will be constructed in phases, and separate building permits and certificates of occupancy will be issued for each phase, fees imposed pursuant to this chapter shall be calculated on the basis of the development characteristics of the entire development project. Payment of the fees may be made separately for each phase, provided the amount paid for each phase shall be equal to the percentage that that phase represents of the total development project’s development characteristics. The fee shall be the fee in effect at the time payment is due. (Res. No. 2012-23, 3943-8/12)

 

17.74.076 Fee Adjustments
Shall be as set forth in Chapter 17.73 of this Code. (Res. No. 2012-23, 3943-8/12)

 

17.74.080 Payment of Fee
A.    The City shall collect from the applicant the Fire Facilities Development Impact Fee prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, temporary certificate of occupancy, or final building permit approval or construction approval for mobile home pad or pads, whichever occurs first.

B.     Except for any administrative costs allocated to the City, all funds collected shall be properly identified and promptly transferred for deposit in the Fire Facilities Development Impact Fee fund and used solely for the purposes specified in this chapter. (Res. No. 2012-23, 3943-8/12)

 

17.74.090 Use of Funds
A.    Funds collected from the Fire Facilities Development Impact Fee shall be used to fund the costs of providing additional fire suppression/medic facilities, vehicles and specialty equipment attributable to new residential and nonresidential construction and shall include:

1.     The acquisition of additional property for fire department facilities.

2.     The construction of new facilities for fire department services.

3.     The furnishing of new buildings or facilities for fire department services.

4.     The purchase of new specialty equipment and vehicles for fire department services.

5.     The funding of a master plan to identify capital facilities to serve new fire department development.

6.     The cost of financing (e.g., interest payments).

7.     Projects identified in the City of Huntington Beach General Plan, the Master Facilities Plan included in the Nexus Report, the City of Huntington Beach Capital Improvement Plan, adopted annual City of Huntington Beach budget, or City Council approved development projects.

B.     Funds shall not be used for periodic or routine maintenance or to maintain or repair existing buildings, and/or existing vehicles or equipment.

C.     Revenue raised would be limited to capitalized cost related to growth.

D.    In the event that bonds or similar debt instruments are issued for advanced provision of capital facilities for which Fire Facilities Development Impact Fees may be expended, development impact fees may be used to pay debt service on such bonds or similar debt instruments to the extent that the facilities provided are of the type described in this chapter.

E.     Funds may be used to provide refunds as described in this chapter. (Res. No. 2012-23, 3943-8/12)

 

17.74.100 Refund
A.    Any applicant who has paid a Fire Facilities Development Impact Fee pursuant to this chapter may apply to the director for a full or partial refund of same, if, within one year after collection of the Fire Facilities Development Impact Fee the fee has been modified as follows: reduction in the number of dwelling units, a change in the type of dwelling units, a reduction in square footage, or the applicability of an exemption pursuant to this chapter. In the event a refund is issued, the City may retain a sum up to 20% of the Development Impact Fee paid by the applicant to offset the administrative costs of refund. In no event shall a refund exceed the amount of the Fire Facilities Development Impact Fee actually paid.

B.     Erroneous or Illegal Collection. Fees will be refunded if the applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction of the director that they were erroneously or illegally collected. If the director determines the fees were not erroneously or illegally collected, then the applicant may appeal the decision pursuant to Section 17.73.030, Appeals. An application for a refund pursuant to this section must be filed within 90 days after the payment of the fees.

C.     City Failure to Commit Funds. Pursuant to the Mitigated Fee Act, upon application of the then current landowner, fees will be refunded if the City fails to commit them to a project of the nature or type identified in the Nexus Report within five years from the date that the fees were collected from the applicant. For purposes of this subsection, fees are deemed to have been “committed” if they have been budgeted or otherwise encumbered by the City for an eligible improvement, studies, design drawings or any necessary applications for approval by other governmental agencies have been initiated, construction bidding has been initiated, or improvements are under construction. Eligible refunds, plus interest at the City’s average annual cost of funds, will be made only upon an application filed within 180 days of the expiration of the fifth anniversary of the fee payment. (Res. No. 2012-23, 3943-8/12)

 

17.74.110 Exemptions and Credits
A.    Exemptions. Any claim of exemption must be made no later than the time of application for a building permit or mobile home construction approval. Any claim of exemption must be filed in the same manner and will be considered pursuant to the same procedure as for a fee adjustment as provided in this chapter. The following shall be exempted from payment of the Fire Facilities Development Impact Fee:

1.     Residential Development.

a.     Alteration or expansion of an existing residential building in which no additional dwelling units are created, the use is not changed and where no additional fire suppression/medic facilities, vehicles and specialty equipment will be provided over and above those provided by the existing building.

b.     The replacement of a destroyed or partially destroyed building or structure with a new building or structure of the same size and use, provided that no additional fire suppression/medic facilities, vehicles and specialty equipment will be required over and above those provided by the original use of the land.

c.     The construction of residential accessory buildings, structures or uses which will not require additional fire suppression/medic facilities, vehicles and specialty equipment over and above those provided by the principal building or use of the land.

d.     The installation of a replacement mobile home on a lot or other such site when a Fire Facilities Development Impact Fee for such mobile home site has previously been paid pursuant to this chapter, or where a mobile home legally existed on such site on or prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter.

e.     Construction, replacement or rebuilding of a single-family dwelling (one unit per lot) on an existing lot of record, or the replacement of one mobile home with another on the same pad, or the moving and relocation of a single-family home from one lot within the City to another lot within the City. This exemption shall not apply to tract development, to the development of more than one unit per lot, nor to the replacement of a single-family dwelling with more than one dwelling unit.

2.     Affordable Housing for Lower Income Households. Property rented, leased, sold, conveyed or otherwise transferred, at a rental price or purchase price which does not exceed the “affordable housing cost,” as defined in Section 50052.5 of the California Health and Safety Code, when provided to a “lower income household,” as defined in Section 50079.5 of the California Health and Safety Code, or “very low-income household,” as defined in Section 50105 of the California Health and Safety Code. This exemption shall require the applicant to execute an agreement to guarantee that the units shall be maintained for lower and very low-income households whether as units for rent or for sale or transfer. The agreement shall be in the form of a deed restriction or other legally binding and enforceable document acceptable to the City Attorney and shall bind the owner and any successor-in-interest to the real property being developed. The agreement shall subordinate, if required, to any state or federal program providing affordable housing to lower and very low-income households. The agreement shall be recorded with the Orange County Recorder prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. Applicant or any successor-in-interest shall be required to provide annually, or as requested, the names of all tenants or purchasers, current rents and income certification to ensure compliance. Voluntary removal of the housing restriction or violation of the restriction shall require the applicant or any successor-in-interest to pay the then applicable Fire Facilities Development Impact Fee at the time of voluntary conversion or as imposed at the time of violation on the unit in violation, plus any attorneys’ fees and costs of enforcement, if applicable.

B.     Credits. Any applicant whose development is located within a community facilities district (CFD) and/or is subject to the assessments thereof, shall receive an offset credit towards the fees established by this chapter to the extent that the assessments fund improvements within the CFD which would otherwise be funded by the Development Impact Fees established by this chapter. (Res. No. 2012-23, 3943-8/12)

 

17.74.120 Appeals
Shall be as set forth in Chapter 17.73 of this Code. (Res. No. 2012-23, 3943-8/12)

 

17.74.130 Credit for Construction of Non-Site-Related Improvements
A.    Applications for credit for construction of non-fire-related improvements shall submit applicable engineering drawings, specifications and construction cost estimates or the like to the director. The director shall determine any credit for improvement based on either these cost estimates or alternative estimates if the director determines reasonably that the estimates submitted by the applicant are either unreliable or inaccurate. In no event shall the amount of the credit exceed the improvement cost specified in the Nexus Report, or other applicable basis for the fee, nor shall the credit exceed the amount that would otherwise apply.

B.     No final inspection or certificate of occupancy for the development project may be issued until: (1) the construction is completed and accepted by the City; (2) a suitable maintenance and warranty bond is received and accepted by the City; and (3) all design, construction, inspection, testing, bonding and acceptance procedures are in strict compliance with City paving, drainage and other applicable requirements. (Res. No. 2012-23, 3943-8/12)

 

17.74.140 Eligible Expenditures From Fee Reserve Account
All monies and interest earnings in any reserve account shall be expended on projects of the nature or type identified in the Nexus Report, or such other report as may be prepared from time to time to document the reasonable fair share of the costs to mitigate the fire suppression/medic facilities, vehicles and specialty equipment impacts of new development. (Res. No. 2012-23, 3943-8/12)

 

17.74.150 Annual Report and Amendment Procedures
A.    Within 180 days after the last day of each fiscal year, the Fire Chief of the City of Huntington Beach shall evaluate progress in implementation of the Fire Facilities Development Impact Fee and shall prepare a report thereon to the City Council in accordance with Government Code Section 66006, incorporating among other things:

1.     The fire facilities and equipment commenced, purchased or completed utilizing monies from the Fire Facilities Development Impact Fee fund;

2.     The amount of the fees collected and the interest earned;

3.     The amount of Fire Facilities Development Impact Fees in the fund; and

4.     Recommended changes to the Fire Facilities Development Impact Fee, including, but not necessarily limited to changes in this Fire Facilities Development Impact Fee chapter or the fee resolution.

B.     Based upon the report and such other factors as the City Council deems relevant and applicable, the City Council may amend the ordinance codified in this chapter or the fee resolution implementing this chapter. Changes to the Fire Facilities Development Impact Fee rates or schedules may be made by amending the fee resolution. Any change which increases the amount of the Fire Facilities Development Impact Fee shall be adopted by the City Council only after a noticed public hearing. Nothing herein precludes the City Council or limits its discretion to amend the ordinance codified in this chapter or the fee resolution establishing Fire Facilities Development Impact Fee rates or schedules at such other times as may be deemed necessary. (Res. No. 2012-23, 3943-8/12)

 

17.74.160 Effect of Fire Facilities Development Impact Fee on Zoning and Subdivision Regulations
This chapter shall not affect, in any manner, the permissible use of property, density/intensity of development, design and improvement standards and public improvement requirements or any other aspect of the development of land or construction of buildings, which may be imposed by the City pursuant to the City’s zoning regulations, subdivision regulations or other ordinances or regulations of the City, which shall be operative and remain in full force and effect without limitation with respect to all residential and nonresidential development. (Res. No. 2012-23, 3943-8/12)

 

17.74.170 Violation—Penalty
A violation of this chapter shall be prosecuted in the same manner as misdemeanors are prosecuted; and upon conviction, the violator shall be punishable according to law. However, in addition to or in lieu of any criminal prosecution, the City shall have the power to sue in civil court to enforce the provisions of this chapter. (Res. No. 2012-23, 3943-8/12)

 

17.74.180 Severability
If any section, phrase, sentence, or portion of this chapter is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portions shall be deemed a separate, distinct, and independent provision; and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions thereof. (Res. No. 2012-23, 3943-8/12)

 

Chapter 17.75 POLICE FACILITIES DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES
17.75.010 Legislative Findings
A.    The State of California, through the enactment of Government Code Sections 66001 through 66009 has authorized the City to enact development impact fees.

B.     The imposition of development impact fees is a method of ensuring that new development bears a proportionate share of the cost of capital facilities and other costs necessary to accommodate such development. These fees are established to promote and protect the public health, safety and welfare.

C.     Increase in residential and nonresidential development in the City creates a need for increased funds to pay for the cost of increased police services and facilities which are needed to serve the increasing development in the City.

D.    Pursuant to the “Development Impact Fee Calculation and Nexus Report for the City of Huntington Beach” (“Nexus Report”) dated October 2011, as amended April 27, 2012, which incorporated herein by reference in these findings as though set forth in full, the fees established pursuant to this chapter are derived from, based upon, and do not exceed the costs of providing additional police services attributable to applicable new residential or nonresidential development. This study is based in part upon master planning to more specifically identify capital facilities to serve new development; the acquisition of additional property for police facilities; the construction of buildings for police services; the furnishing of buildings or facilities for police services; and the purchasing of equipment and vehicles for police services.

E.     The fees collected pursuant to this chapter shall be used to finance the police facilities and equipment identified herein in furtherance of the City’s General Plan, as well as the Nexus Report and its attached Master Facilities Plan and the City of Huntington Beach Capital Improvement Plan.

F.     Detailed study of the impacts of future residential and nonresidential construction in the City, along with an analysis of the need for new police facilities and equipment has been prepared. This study is included in the Nexus Report.

G.    As set forth in the Nexus Report, there is a reasonable relationship between the need for the police facilities and equipment set forth in this chapter and the impacts of the types of development for which the corresponding fee is charged. In addition, there is a reasonable relationship between the fee’s use and the type of development to which the fee is charged and a reasonable relationship between the amount of the fee and the cost of the facilities and equipment or portion thereof attributable to the development on which the fee is imposed. (Res. No. 2012-23, 3942-8/12)

 

17.75.020 Intent and Purpose
A.    A Police Facilities Development Impact Fee is being created for the purpose of assuring that the impacts created by new development in the City of Huntington Beach pay a fair share of the proportional facility and equipment and vehicle costs required to support needed police facilities and related costs necessary to accommodate such development.

B.     This chapter is intended to implement the goals, objectives and policies of the City of Huntington Beach General Plan, as well as following the recommendations in the Nexus Report including the Master Facilities Plan, and the City of Huntington Beach Capital Improvement Plan by ensuring that the City’s police services are maintained when new development is constructed within the City limits. By imposing a fee that is reasonably related to the burdens created by new development on the City’s Police Department, together with funding available from other City revenue sources, the City will be able to construct the required capital improvements, accommodate projected growth and fulfill the goals, objectives and policies of the City’s General Plan and Master Facilities Plan, a part of the Nexus Report.

C.     It is the intent of the City Council that the fee required by this chapter shall be supplementary to any conditions imposed upon a development project pursuant to other provisions of the Municipal Code, the Subdivision Map Act, the California Environmental Quality Act, other state and local laws, ordinances or chapter provisions which may authorize the imposition of conditions on development. (Res. No. 2012-23, 3942-8/12)

 

17.75.030 Definitions
Shall be as set forth in Chapter 17.73 of this Code. (Res. No. 2012-23, 3942-8/12)

 

17.75.040 Police Facilities Development Impact Fee
There is imposed a Police Facilities Development Impact Fee on all new nonsubdivided residential and nonresidential development. (Res. No. 2012-23, 3942-8/12)

 

17.75.050 Fund Established
A Police Facilities Development Impact Fee fund is established. The Police Facilities Development Impact Fee fund is a fund to be utilized for payment of the actual or estimated costs of police facilities and equipment as set forth in the Nexus Report which includes the Master Facilities Plan, as well as the City of Huntington Beach Capital Improvement Plan related to new residential and nonresidential construction. (Res. No. 2012-23, 3942-8/12)

 

17.75.060 Fee Imposed
A.    Any person who, 60 days after the effective date of this Development Impact Fee Ordinance, seeks to engage in nonsubdivided residential or nonresidential development including mobile home development by obtaining a building permit or other discretionary approval is required to pay a Police Facilities Development Impact Fee in the manner and amount as set forth in the current City of Huntington Beach Fee Resolution separately adopted.

B.     No certificate of occupancy, temporary certificate of occupancy, or final building permit approval or construction approval for a mobile home pad or pads, as applicable, for the activities listed in this chapter, shall be issued unless and until the Police Facilities Development Impact Fee required by this chapter has been paid to the City. (Res. No. 2012-23, 3942-8/12)

 

17.75.070 Calculation of Police Facilities Development Impact Fee
A.    At the time of the issuance of the building permit, the Director of Planning and Building or his/her designee (“director”) shall calculate the amount of the applicable Police Facilities Development Impact Fee due as specified in the current fee resolution setting the amount of the fee.

B.     The Director of Planning and Building shall calculate the amount of the applicable Police Facilities Development Impact Fee due by:

1.     Determining the number and type of dwelling units in a residential development or mobile home pads in a mobile home park or site, and multiplying the same by the Police Facilities Development Impact Fee amount per dwelling unit or pad as established by the current fee resolution setting the amount of the fee;

2.     Determining the gross square feet of floor area, or number of lodging units, type of use and location in a nonresidential development, and multiplying the same by the Police Facilities Development Impact Fee amount as established by the current fee resolution setting the amount of the fee;

3.     Determining the number and type of dwelling units and the nonresidential number of lodging units or gross square feet of floor area, type of use and location, in a structure containing mixed uses which include a residential use, and multiplying the same by the Police Facilities Development Impact Fee amount for each use as established by the current fee resolution setting the amount of the fee;

4.     Determining the gross square feet of floor area, or number of lodging units, type of use and location in a structure containing mixed uses which include two or more nonresidential principal uses, and multiplying the same by the Police Facilities Development Impact Fee amount as established by the current fee resolution. The gross square feet of floor area of any accessory use will be charged at the same rate as the predominant principal use unless the Department of Planning and Building finds that the accessory use is related to another principal use. (Res. No. 2012-23, 3942-8/12)

 

17.75.075 Fee Payments for Phased Development Projects
If a development project will be constructed in phases, and separate building permits and certificates of occupancy will be issued for each phase, fees imposed pursuant to this chapter shall be calculated on the basis of the development characteristics of the entire development project. Payment of the fees may be made separately for each phase, provided the amount paid for each phase shall be equal to the percentage that that phase represents of the total development project’s development characteristics. The fee shall be the fee in effect at the time payment is due. (Res. No. 2012-23, 3942-8/12)

 

17.75.076 Fee Adjustments
Shall be as set forth in Chapter 17.73 of this Code. (Res. No. 2012-23, 3942-8/12)

 

17.75.080 Payment of Fee
A.    The City shall collect from the applicant the Police Facilities Development Impact Fee prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, temporary certificate of occupancy, final building permit approval or construction approval for mobile home pad or pads, whichever occurs first.

B.     Except for any administrative charge allocated to the City, all funds collected shall be properly identified and promptly transferred for deposit in the Police Facilities Development Impact Fee fund and used solely for the purposes specified in this chapter. (Res. No. 2012-23, 3942-8/12)

 

17.75.090 Use of Funds
A.    Funds collected from the Police Facilities Development Impact Fee shall be used to fund the costs of providing additional police services attributable to new residential and nonresidential construction and shall include:

1.     The acquisition of additional property for law enforcement facilities;

2.     The construction of new facilities for law enforcement services;

3.     The furnishing of new buildings or facilities for law enforcement services;

4.     The purchase of new specialty equipment and vehicles for law enforcement services;

5.     The funding of a master plan to identify capital facilities to serve new police department development;

6.     The cost of financing (e.g., interest payments);

7.     Projects identified in the City of Huntington Beach General Plan, the Master Facilities Plan included in the Nexus Report, the City of Huntington Beach Capital Improvement Plan, adopted annual City of Huntington Beach budget or City Council approved development projects.

B.     Funds shall not be used for periodic or routine maintenance or to maintain or repair existing buildings, and/or existing vehicles or equipment.

C.     Revenue raised would be limited to capitalized cost related to growth.

D.    In the event that bonds or similar debt instruments are issued for advanced provision of capital facilities for which Police Facilities Development Impact Fees may be expended, development impact fees may be used to pay debt service on such bonds or similar debt instruments to the extent that the facilities provided are of the type described in this chapter.

E.     Funds may be used to provide refunds as described in this chapter. (Res. No. 2012-23, 3942-8/12)

 

17.75.100 Refund
A.    Any applicant who has paid a Police Facilities Development Impact Fee pursuant to this chapter may apply for a full or partial refund of same, if, within one year after collection of the Police Facilities Development Impact Fee the fee has been modified as follows: reduction in the number of dwelling units, a change in the type of dwelling units, a reduction in square footage, or the applicability of an exemption pursuant to this chapter. In the event a refund is issued, the City may retain a sum up to 20% of the development impact fee paid by the applicant to offset the administrative costs of refund. In no event shall a refund exceed the amount of the Police Facilities Development Impact Fee actually paid.

B.     Erroneous or Illegal Collection. Fees will be refunded if the applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction of the director that they were erroneously or illegally collected. If the director determines the fees were not erroneously or illegally collected, then the applicant may appeal the decision pursuant to Section 17.73.030, Appeals. An application for a refund pursuant to this section must be filed within 90 days after the payment of the fees.

C.     City Failure to Commit Funds. Pursuant to the Mitigated Fee Act, upon application of the then current landowner, fees will be refunded if the City fails to commit them to a project of the nature or type identified in the Nexus Report within five years from the date that the fees were collected from the applicant. For purposes of this subsection, fees are deemed to have been “committed” if they have been budgeted or otherwise encumbered by the City for an eligible improvement, studies, design drawings or any necessary applications for approval by other governmental agencies have been initiated, construction bidding has been initiated, or improvements are under construction. Eligible refunds, plus interest at the City’s average annual cost of funds will be made only upon an application filed within 180 days of the expiration of the fifth anniversary of the fee payment. (Res. No. 2012-23, 3942-8/12)

 

17.75.110 Exemptions and Credits
A.    Exemptions. Any claim of exemption must be made no later than the time of application for a building permit or mobile home construction approval. Any claim of exemption must be filed in the same manner and will be considered pursuant to the same procedure as for a fee adjustment as provided in Chapter 17.73. The following shall be exempted from payment of the Police Facilities Development Impact Fee:

1.     Residential Development.

a.     Alteration or expansion of an existing residential building in which no additional dwelling units are created, the use is not changed and where no additional police services will be provided over and above those provided by the existing building.

b.     The replacement of a destroyed or partially destroyed building or structure with a new building or structure of the same size and use, provided that no additional police services will be required over and above those provided by the original use of the land.

c.     The construction of residential accessory buildings, structures or uses which will not require additional police services over and above those provided by the principal building or use of the land.

d.     The installation of a replacement mobile home on a lot or other such site when a Police Facilities Development Impact Fee for such mobile home site has previously been paid pursuant to this chapter, or where a mobile home legally existed on such site on or prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter.

e.     Construction, replacement or rebuilding of a single-family dwelling (one unit per lot) on an existing lot of record, or the replacement of one mobile home with another on the same pad, or the moving and relocation of a single-family home from one lot within the City to another lot within the City. This exemption shall not apply to tract development, to the development of more than one unit per lot, nor to the replacement of a single-family dwelling with more than one dwelling unit.

2.     Affordable Housing for Lower Income Households. Property rented, leased, sold, conveyed or otherwise transferred, at a rental price or purchase price which does not exceed the “affordable housing cost,” as defined in Section 50052.5 of the California Health and Safety Code when provided to a “lower income household” as defined in Section 50079.5 of the California Health and Safety Code or “very low-income household” as defined in Section 50105 of the California Health and Safety Code. This exemption shall require the applicant to execute an agreement to guarantee that the units shall be maintained for lower and very low-income households whether as units for rent or for sale or transfer. The agreement shall be in the form of a deed restriction or other legally binding and enforceable document acceptable to the City Attorney and shall bind the owner and any successor-in-interest to the real property being developed. The agreement shall subordinate, if required, to any state or federal program providing affordable housing to lower and very low-income households. The agreement shall be recorded with the Orange County Recorder prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. Applicant or any successor-in-interest shall be required to provide annually, or as requested, the names of all tenants or purchasers, current rents and income certification to ensure compliance. Voluntary removal of the housing restriction or violation of the restriction shall require the applicant or any successor-in-interest to pay the then applicable Police Facilities Development Impact Fee at the time of voluntary conversion or as imposed at the time of violation on the unit in violation, plus any attorneys’ fees and costs of enforcement, if applicable.

B.     Credits. Any applicant whose development is located within a community facilities district (CFD) and/or is subject to the assessments thereof, shall receive an offset credit towards the fees established by this chapter to the extent that the assessments fund improvements within the CFD which would otherwise be funded by the development impact fees established by this chapter. (Res. No. 2012-23, 3942-8/12)

 

17.75.120 Appeals
Shall be as set forth in Chapter 17.73 of this Code. (Res. No. 2012-23, 3942-8/12)

 

17.75.130 Credit for Construction of Non-Site-Related Improvements
A.    Applications for credit for construction of non-site-related improvements shall submit applicable engineering drawings, specifications and construction cost estimates or the like to the director. The director shall determine any credit for improvement based on either these cost estimates or alternative estimates if the director determines reasonably that the estimates submitted by the applicant are either unreliable or inaccurate. In no event shall the amount of the credit exceed the improvement cost specified in the Nexus Report, or other applicable basis for the fee, nor shall the credit exceed the amount that would otherwise apply.

B.     No final inspection or certificate of occupancy for the development project may be issued until: (1) the construction is completed and accepted by the City; (2) a suitable maintenance and warranty bond is received and accepted by the City; and (3) all design, construction, inspection, testing, bonding and acceptance procedures are in strict compliance with City paving, drainage and other applicable requirements. (Res. No. 2012-23, 3942-8/12)

 

17.75.140 Eligible Expenditures From Fee Reserve Account
All monies and interest earnings in any reserve account shall be expended on the projects of the nature or type identified in the Nexus Report, or such other report as may be prepared from time to time to document the reasonable fair share of the costs to mitigate the police services impacts of new development. (Res. No. 2012-23, 3942-8/12)

 

17.75.150 Annual Report and Amendment Procedures
A.    Within 180 days after the last day of each fiscal year, the Police Chief of the City of Huntington Beach shall evaluate progress in implementation of the Police Facilities Development Impact Fee program and shall prepare a report thereon to the City Council in accordance with Government Code Section 66006, incorporating among other things:

1.     The police facilities and equipment commenced, purchased or completed utilizing monies from this Police Facilities Development Impact Fee fund;

2.     The amount of the fees collected and the interest earned;

3.     The amount of Police Facilities Development Impact Fees in the fund; and

4.     Recommended changes to the Police Facilities Development Impact Fee, including, but not necessarily limited to, changes in this chapter or the fee resolution.

B.     Based upon the report and such other factors as the City Council deems relevant and applicable, the City Council may amend the ordinance codified in this chapter or the fee resolution implementing this chapter. Changes to the Police Facilities Development Impact Fee rates or schedules may be made by amending the fee resolution. Any change which increases the amount of the Police Facilities Development Impact Fee shall be adopted by the City Council only after a noticed public hearing. Nothing herein precludes the City Council or limits its discretion to amend the ordinance codified in this chapter or the fee resolution establishing Police Facilities Development Impact Fee rates or schedules at such other times as may be deemed necessary. (Res. No. 2012-23, 3942-8/12)

 

17.75.160 Effect of Police Facilities Development Impact Fee on Zoning and Subdivision Regulations
This chapter shall not affect, in any manner, the permissible use of property, density/intensity of development, design and improvement standards and public improvement requirements or any other aspect of the development of land or construction of buildings, which may be imposed by the City pursuant to the City’s zoning regulations, subdivision regulations or other ordinances or regulations of the City, which shall be operative and remain in full force and effect without limitation with respect to all residential and nonresidential development. (Res. No. 2012-23, 3942-8/12)

 

17.75.170 Violation—Penalty
A violation of this chapter shall be prosecuted in the same manner as misdemeanors are prosecuted; and upon conviction, the violator shall be punishable according to law. However, in addition to or in lieu of any criminal prosecution, the City shall have the power to sue in civil court to enforce the provisions of this chapter. (Res. No. 2012-23, 3942-8/12)

 

17.75.180 Severability
If any section, phrase, sentence, or portion of this chapter is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portions shall be deemed a separate, distinct, and independent provision; and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions thereof. (Res. No. 2012-23, 3942-8/12)

 

Chapter 17.76 PARKLAND ACQUISITION AND PARK FACILITIES DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES
17.76.010 Legislative Findings
A.    The State of California, through the enactment of Government Code Sections 66001 through 66009 has authorized the City to enact development impact fees.

B.     The imposition of development impact fees is a method of ensuring that new development bears a proportionate share of the cost of capital facilities and other costs necessary to accommodate such development. These fees are established to promote and protect the public health, safety and welfare.

C.     A well-planned park system, with a variation in the size and nature of facilities offered is an important amenity to residents of the City. The City considers a mixture of passive and active park space uses optimal. Future residential development that does not require subdivision, will impact the City’s existing park system by creating additional park users thus necessitating additional space for athletic fields, community facilities “tot lots,” and other active uses and passive uses as well as passive space for businesses to enjoy.

D.    Funds to pay for the cost of acquisition and development of additional parkland and development of currently owned but underutilized parkland as well as development of facilities will be needed to serve the increasing users caused by development in the City. Without additional parks, parks development and community facilities, the City’s current parks and community facilities will become overcrowded and overused.

E.     Pursuant to the “Development Impact Fee Calculation and Nexus Report for the City of Huntington Beach” (“Nexus Report”) dated October 2011, as amended April 27, 2012, which is incorporated herein by reference in these findings as though set forth in full, the fees established pursuant to this chapter are derived from, based upon, and do not exceed the costs of parkland acquisition, park development and community facilities attributable to applicable new residential or nonresidential development. This study is based in part upon master planning to more specifically identify capital facilities to serve new development; the acquisition, relocation and expansion of parkland and park development and community facilities.

F.     The fees collected pursuant to this chapter shall be used to finance the acquisition, relocation and expansion of parkland, park development, and community facilities in furtherance of the City General Plan, as well as identified in the Nexus Report, and the attached City of Huntington Beach Master Facilities Development Plan, and the City of Huntington Beach Capital Improvement Plan.

G.    A detailed study of the impacts of future residential and nonresidential construction in the City, along with an analysis of the need for the acquisition, relocation and expansion of parkland and park facilities development is set forth in the Nexus Report.

H.    As set forth in the Nexus Report, there is a reasonable relationship between the need for the acquisition, relocation and expansion of parkland, park development, community facilities, and the impacts of the types of development for which the corresponding fee is charged. In addition, there is a reasonable relationship between the fee’s use and the type of development to which the fee is charged and a reasonable relationship between the amount of the fee and the cost of the facilities or portion thereof attributable to the development on which the fee is imposed. (Res. No. 2012-23, 3946-8/12)

 

17.76.020 Intent and Purpose
A.    A Parkland Acquisition and Park Facilities Development Impact Fee is being created for the purpose of assuring that the impacts created by new development in the City of Huntington Beach pay a fair share of the proportional costs for the acquisition, relocation and expansion of parkland, park development and community use facilities and related costs necessary to accommodate such development. This fee was once identified as a development impact fee in Resolution 2002-129 created pursuant to Huntington Beach Zoning and Subdivision Ordinance Section 230.20.

B.     This chapter is intended to implement the goals, objectives and policies of the City of Huntington Beach General Plan, as well as following the recommendations in the Nexus Report including the Master Facilities Plan and the City of Huntington Beach Capital Improvement Plan by ensuring that the City’s acquisition, relocation and expansion of parkland and community facilities development are maintained when new development is constructed within the City limits. By imposing a fee that is reasonably related to the burdens created by new development on the City’s parklands, together with funding available from other City revenue sources, the City will be able to purchase land and construct the required capital improvements to accommodate projected growth and fulfill the goals, objectives and policies of the City’s General Plan and Master Facilities Plan a part of the Nexus Report.

C.     It is the intent of the City Council that the fee required by this chapter shall be supplementary to any conditions imposed upon a development project pursuant to other provisions of the Municipal Code, the Subdivision Map Act, the California Environmental Quality Act, other state and local laws, ordinances or chapter provisions which may authorize the imposition of conditions on development. (Res. No. 2012-23, 3946-8/12)

 

17.76.030 Definitions
Shall be as set forth in Chapter 17.73 of this Code. (Res. No. 2012-23, 3946-8/12)

 

17.76.040 Parkland Acquisition and Park Facilities Development Impact Fee
There is imposed a Parkland Acquisition and Park Facilities Development Impact Fee on all non-subdivided new residential and nonresidential development. (Res. No. 2012-23, 3946-8/12)

 

17.76.050 Fund Established
A Parkland Acquisition and Park Facilities Development Impact Fee fund is established. The Parkland Acquisition and Park Facilities Development Impact Fee fund is a fund to be utilized for payment of the actual or estimated costs of parkland acquisition and community facilities development as set forth in Chapter 8 of the Nexus Report which includes the City of Huntington Beach Master Facilities Plan, as well as the City of Huntington Beach Capital Improvement Plan related to new residential and nonresidential construction. (Res. No. 2012-23, 3946-8/12)

 

17.76.060 Fee Imposed
A.    Any person who, 60 days after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, seeks to engage in nonsubdivided residential or nonresidential development by obtaining a building permit or other discretionary approval is required to pay a Parkland Acquisition and Park Facilities Development Impact Fee in the manner and amount as set forth in the current City of Huntington Beach Fee Resolution separately adopted.

B.     No certificate of occupancy, temporary certificate of occupancy, or building permit approval for the activities listed in this chapter, shall be issued unless and until the Parkland Acquisition and Park Facilities Development Impact Fee required by this chapter has been paid to the City. (Res. No. 2012-23, 3946-8/12)

 

17.76.070 Calculation of Parkland Acquisition and Park Facilities Development Impact Fee
A.    At the time of the issuance of the building permit, the Director of Planning and Building or his/her designee (“director”) shall calculate the amount of the applicable Parkland Acquisition and Park Facilities Development Impact Fee due as specified in the current fee resolution setting the amount of the fee.

B.     The director shall calculate the amount of the applicable Parkland Acquisition and Park Facilities Development Impact Fee due by:

1.     Determining the number and type of dwelling units in a residential development and multiplying the same by the Parkland Acquisition and Park Facilities Development Impact Fee amount per dwelling unit or pad as established by the current fee resolution setting the amount of the fee;

2.     Determining the gross square feet of floor area or number of lodging units, type of use and location in a nonresidential development, and multiplying the same by the Parkland Acquisition and Park Facilities Development Impact Fee amount as established by the current fee resolution setting the amount of the fee;

3.     Determining the number and type of dwelling units and the nonresidential number of lodging units or gross square feet of floor area, type of use and location, in a structure containing mixed uses which include a residential use, and multiplying the same by the Parkland Acquisition and Park Facilities Development Impact Fee amount for each use as established by the current fee resolution setting the amount of the fee;

4.     Determining the gross square feet of floor area or number of lodging units, type of use and location in a structure containing mixed uses which include two or more nonresidential principal uses, and multiplying the same by the Parkland Acquisition and Park Facilities Development Impact Fee amount as established by the current fee resolution. The gross square feet of floor area of any accessory use will be charged at the same rate as the predominant principal use unless the Department of Planning and Building finds that the accessory use is related to another principal use. (Res. No. 2012-23, 3946-8/12)

 

17.76.075 Fee Payments for Phased Development Projects
If a development project will be constructed in phases, and separate building permits and certificates of occupancy will be issued for each phase, fees imposed pursuant to this chapter shall be calculated on the basis of the development characteristics of the entire development project. Payment of the fees may be made separately for each phase, provided the amount paid for each phase shall be equal to the percentage that that phase represents of the total development project’s development characteristics. The fee shall be the fee in effect at the time payment is due. (Res. No. 2012-23, 3946-8/12)

 

17.76.076 Fee Adjustments
Shall be as set forth in Chapter 17.73 of this Code. (Res. No. 2012-23, 3946-8/12)

 

17.76.080 Payment of Fee
A.    The City shall collect from the applicant the Parkland Acquisition and Park Facilities Development Impact Fee prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, temporary certificate of occupancy, or final building permit approval.

B.     Except for any administrative charge allocated to the City, all funds collected shall be properly identified and promptly transferred for deposit in the Parkland Acquisition and Park Facilities Development Impact Fee fund and used solely for the purposes specified in this chapter. (Res. No. 2012-23, 3946-8/12)

 

17.76.090 Use of Funds
A.    Funds collected from the Parkland Acquisition and Park Facilities Development Impact Fee shall be used to fund the costs of providing the acquisition, relocation and expansion of parkland and park facilities development attributable to new residential and nonresidential construction and shall include:

1.     The acquisition of additional property for the expansion of parkland and community facilities development;

2.     The construction of new parks and park facilities and community use facilities (except for non-residential as set forth in the Nexus Report). Two percent of fee collected shall be used to fund public art in City parks;

3.     The funding of a master plan to identify capital facilities to serve new parkland and park facilities and community use facilities development;

4.     The cost of financing (e.g., interest payments);

5.     Projects identified in City of Huntington Beach General Plan, the Master Facilities Plan included in the Nexus Report, City of Huntington Beach Capital Improvement Plan, adopted annual City of Huntington Beach budget, or City Council approved park acquisition and development projects.

B.     Funds shall not be used for periodic or routine maintenance or to maintain or repair existing parkland or park facilities or community facilities.

C.     Revenue raised would be limited to capitalized cost related to growth.

D.    In the event that bonds or similar debt instruments are issued for advanced provision of capital facilities for which Parkland Acquisition and Park Facilities Development Impact Fees may be expended, impact fees may be used to pay debt service on such bonds or similar debt instruments to the extent that the facilities provided are of the type described in this chapter.

E.     Funds may be used to provide refunds as described in this chapter. (Res. No. 2012-23, 3946-8/12)

 

17.76.100 Refund
A.    Any applicant who has paid a Parkland Acquisition and Park Facilities Development Impact Fee(s) pursuant to this chapter may apply to the director for a full or partial refund of same, if, within one year after collection of the Parkland Acquisition and Park Facilities Development Impact Fee the fee has been modified as follows: reduction in the number of dwelling units, a change in the type of dwelling units, a reduction in square footage, or the applicability of an exemption pursuant to this chapter. In the event a refund is issued, the City may retain a sum up to 20% of the Parkland Acquisition and Park Facilities Development Impact Fee paid by the applicant to offset the administrative costs of refund. In no event shall a refund exceed the amount of the Parkland Acquisition and Park Facilities Development Impact Fee actually paid.

B.     Erroneous or Illegal Collection. Fees will be refunded if the applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction of the director that they were erroneously or illegally collected. If the director determines the fees were not erroneously or illegally collected, then the applicant may appeal the decision pursuant to Section 17.73.030, Appeals. An application for a refund pursuant to this section must be filed within 90 days after the payment of the fees.

C.     City Failure to Commit Funds. Pursuant to the Mitigated Fee Act, upon application of the then current landowner, fees will be refunded if the City fails to commit them to a project of the nature or type identified in the Nexus Report within five years from the date that the fees were collected from the applicant. For purposes of this subsection, fees are deemed to have been “committed” if they have been budgeted or otherwise encumbered by the City for an eligible improvement, studies, design drawings or any necessary applications for approval by other governmental agencies have been initiated, construction bidding has been initiated, or improvements are under construction. Eligible refunds, plus interest at the City’s average annual cost of funds, will be made only upon an application filed within 180 days of the expiration of the fifth anniversary of the fee payment. (Res. No. 2012-23, 3946-8/12)

 

17.76.110 Exemptions and Credits
A.    Exemptions. Any claim of exemption must be made no later than the time of application for a building permit or construction approval. Any claim of exemption must be filed in the same manner and will be considered pursuant to the same procedure as for a fee adjustment as provided in Chapter 17.73. The following shall be exempted from payment of the Parkland Acquisition and Park Facilities Development Impact Fee:

1.     Residential Development.

a.     Alteration or expansion of an existing residential building in which no additional dwelling units are created, the use is not changed, and where no additional relocation and expansion of parkland and park facilities development will be provided over and above those provided by the existing building.

b.     The replacement of a destroyed or partially destroyed building or structure with a new building or structure of the same size and use, provided that no additional relocation or expansion of parkland and park facilities development will be required over and above those provided by the original use of the land.

c.     The construction of residential accessory buildings, structures or uses which will not require additional acquisition, relocation or expansion of parkland and park facilities development over and above those provided by the principal building or use of the land.

d.     Construction, replacement or rebuilding of a single-family dwelling (one unit per lot) on an existing lot of record, or the moving and relocation of a single-family home from one lot within the City to another lot within the City. This exemption shall not apply to tract development, to the development of more than one unit per lot, nor to the replacement of a single-family dwelling with more than one dwelling unit.

2.     Affordable Housing for Lower Income Households. Property rented, leased, sold, conveyed or otherwise transferred, at a rental price or purchase price which does not exceed the “affordable housing cost,” as defined in Section 50052.5 of the California Health and Safety Code when provided to a “lower income household” as defined in Section 50079.5 of the California Health and Safety Code or “very low-income household” as defined in Section 50105 of the California Health and Safety Code. This exemption shall require the applicant to execute an agreement to guarantee that the units shall be maintained for lower and very low-income households whether as units for rent or for sale or transfer. The agreement shall be in the form of a deed restriction or other legally binding and enforceable document acceptable to the City Attorney and shall bind the owner and any successor-in-interest to the real property being developed. The agreement shall subordinate, if required, to any state or federal program providing affordable housing to lower and very low-income households. The agreement shall be recorded with the Orange County Recorder prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. Applicant or any successor-in-interest shall be required to provide annually, or as requested, the names of all tenants or purchasers, current rents and income certification to ensure compliance. Voluntary removal of the housing restriction or violation of the restriction shall require the applicant or any successor-in-interest to pay the then applicable Parkland Acquisition and Park Facilities Development Impact Fee at the time of voluntary conversion or as imposed at the time of violation on the unit in violation, plus any attorneys’ fees and costs of enforcement, if applicable.

B.     Credits. Any applicant whose development is located within a community facilities district (CFD) and/or is subject to the assessments thereof, shall receive an offset credit towards the fees established by this chapter to the extent that the assessments fund improvements within the CFD which would otherwise be funded by the development impact fees established by this chapter. (Res. No. 2012-23, 3946-8/12)

 

17.76.120 Appeals
Shall be as set forth in Chapter 17.73 of this Code. (Res. No. 2012-23, 3946-8/12)

 

17.76.130 Credit for Construction of Non-Site-Related Improvements
A.    Applications for credit for construction of non-site-related improvements shall submit applicable engineering drawings, specifications and construction cost estimates or the like to the director. The director shall determine any credit for improvement based on either these cost estimates or alternative estimates if the director determines reasonably that the estimates submitted by the applicant are either unreliable or inaccurate. In no event shall the amount of the credit exceed the improvement cost specified in the Nexus Report, or other applicable basis for the fee, nor shall the credit exceed the amount that would otherwise apply.

B.     No final inspection or certificate of occupancy for the development project may be issued until: (1) the construction is completed and accepted by the City; (2) a suitable maintenance and warranty bond is received and accepted by the City; and (3) all design, construction, inspection, testing, bonding and acceptance procedures are in strict compliance with City paving, drainage and other applicable requirements. (Res. No. 2012-23, 3946-8/12)

 

17.76.140 Eligible Expenditures From Fee Reserve Account
All monies and interest earnings in any reserve account shall be expended on the projects of the nature or type identified in the Nexus Report, or such other report as may be prepared from time to time to document the reasonable fair share of the costs to mitigate the acquisition, relocation and expansion of parkland and park facilities development impacts of new development. (Res. No. 2012-23, 3946-8/12)

 

17.76.150 Annual Report and Amendment Procedures
A.    Within 180 days after the last day of each fiscal year, the Assistant City Manager of the City of Huntington Beach shall evaluate progress in implementation of the Parkland Acquisition and Park Facilities Development Impact Fee and shall prepare a report thereon to the City Council in accordance with Government Code Section 66006, incorporating among other things:

1.     Any parkland acquisition, park development and community facilities development commenced, purchased or completed utilizing monies from the Parkland Acquisition and Park Facilities Development Impact Fee fund;

2.     The amount of the fees collected and the interest earned;

3.     The amount of Parkland Acquisition and Park Facilities Development Impact Fees in the fund; and

4.     Any recommended changes to the Parkland Acquisition and Park Facilities Development Impact Fee, including, but not necessarily limited to, changes in this Parkland Acquisition and Park Facilities Development Impact Fee chapter or fee resolution.

B.     Based upon the report and such other factors as the City Council deems relevant and applicable, the City Council may amend the ordinance codified in this chapter or the fee resolution implementing this chapter. Changes to the Parkland Acquisition and Park Facilities Development Impact Fee rates or schedules may be made by amending the fee resolution. Any change which increases the amount of the Parkland Acquisition and Park Facilities Development Impact Fee shall be adopted by the City Council only after a noticed public hearing. Nothing herein precludes the City Council or limits its discretion to amend the ordinance codified in this chapter or the fee resolution establishing Parkland Acquisition and Park Facilities Development Impact Fee rates or schedules at such other times as may be deemed necessary. (Res. No. 2012-23, 3946-8/12)

 

17.76.160 Effect of Parkland Acquisition and Park Facilities Development Impact Fee on Zoning and Subdivision Regulations
This chapter shall not affect, in any manner, the permissible use of property, density/intensity of development, design and improvement standards and public improvement requirements or any other aspect of the development of land or construction of buildings, which may be imposed by the City pursuant to the City’s zoning regulations, subdivision regulations or other ordinances or regulations of the City, which shall be operative and remain in full force and effect without limitation with respect to all residential and nonresidential development. (Res. No. 2012-23, 3946-8/12)

 

17.76.170 Violation—Penalty
A violation of this chapter shall be prosecuted in the same manner as misdemeanors are prosecuted; and upon conviction, the violator shall be punishable according to law. However, in addition to or in lieu of any criminal prosecution, the City shall have the power to sue in civil court to enforce the provisions of this chapter. (Res. No. 2012-23, 3946-8/12)

 

17.76.180 Severability
If any section, phrase, sentence, or portion of this chapter is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portions shall be deemed a separate, distinct, and independent provision; and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions thereof. (Res. No. 2012-23, 3946-8/12)

 

Chapter 17.77 REASONABLE ACCOMMODATION PROCEDURES
17.77.010 Purpose
It is the policy of the City of Huntington Beach, pursuant to the Federal Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988 and California Fair Employment and Housing Act, to provide people with disabilities reasonable accommodation in rules, policies, practices and procedures that may be necessary to ensure equal access to housing. The purpose of this chapter is to establish procedures for individuals with disabilities to make requests for reasonable accommodation in the application of the City’s land use, zoning and building standards, regulations, policies and procedures and to establish criteria for consideration of such requests. (3971-4/13)

 

17.77.020 Definitions
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the respective meanings as set forth herein, unless the context in which they are used clearly indicates to the contrary:

“Acts” means the Federal Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988 and the California Fair Employment and Housing Act.

“Applicant” means an individual (or designee) who files a request for reasonable accommodation pursuant to this chapter.

“Director” means the Director of the Planning and Building Department.

“Disabled individual” means any person who has a medical condition, physical disability, or mental disability that substantially limits one or more of the person’s major life activities, as those terms are defined in the California Fair Employment and Housing Act (Government Code Section 12900 et seq.) and Federal Fair Housing Amendments Act.

“Reasonable accommodation” means a modification or exception to the standards, regulations, policies and procedures of the City of Huntington Beach for the siting, development and use of housing or housing-related facilities, that would eliminate regulatory barriers and provide a disabled individual equal opportunity for the use and enjoyment of housing of their choice, and that does not impose undue financial or administrative burdens on the City. (3971-4/13)

 

17.77.030 Applicability
To make specific housing available to a disabled individual, any person may request reasonable accommodation pursuant to this chapter to modify a zoning or building standard, regulation, policy, or procedure as may be necessary to afford the disabled individual equal opportunity to the use and enjoyment of their dwelling. A request for reasonable accommodation may be made on any property zoned or used for housing and may be filed at any time that the accommodation may be necessary to ensure equal access to housing. A request for reasonable accommodation shall be made by filing an application with the Planning and Building Department. If an individual needs assistance in making the request for reasonable accommodation, the City shall provide assistance to ensure that the process is accessible. (3971-4/13)

 

17.77.040 Procedures Established
A.    Application. Requests for reasonable accommodation shall require approval of an administrative permit and require submittal of a general planning application form and accompanying submittal materials as required by the Planning and Building Department. In addition, the application shall include the following information:

1.     The basis for the claim that the individual is considered disabled under the Acts. However, any information related to disability status and identified by an applicant as confidential shall be retained in a manner so as to respect the privacy rights of the applicant and shall not be made available for public inspection.

2.     A description of the reasonable accommodation request and the zoning or building standard, regulation, policy or procedure from which the reasonable accommodation is being requested.

3.     A statement why the reasonable accommodation request is necessary for the disabled individual to use and enjoy the dwelling.

B.     Review with Other Land Use Applications. If the project for which the application for reasonable accommodation is being made requires approval of one or more entitlements pursuant to the provisions of this Code, then the applicant shall file the application for reasonable accommodation concurrent with the application for any other entitlement(s). A reasonable accommodation request does not affect or negate an applicant’s obligations to comply with other applicable regulations that are not the subject of the requested accommodation. A request for reasonable accommodation itself shall not require submittal of a variance request.

C.     Review Authority. A request for reasonable accommodation shall be reviewed and acted upon by the director if no other entitlement is required. Requests for reasonable accommodation submitted concurrent with other entitlement(s) shall be reviewed and acted upon by the reviewing body with authority over the other discretionary entitlement(s).

D.    Public Notification. A request for reasonable accommodation shall require notification to adjacent property owners if the request affects a required setback. The applicant shall submit a copy of the notice mailed, a list of addresses given notice, and proof of mailing upon submittal of the application. The notice shall include the following information:

1.     Name of applicant;

2.     Location/address of reasonable accommodation request;

3.     Nature of reasonable accommodation request;

4.     Contact information including phone number and address for the City of Huntington Beach Planning and Building Department for viewing the application and submittal materials; and

5.     The date by which any comments must be received in writing by the City. The applicant shall allow 10 working days from the date of mailing for adjacent properties to review and comment on the application.

E.     Conditions of Approval. In granting a request for reasonable accommodation, the reviewing authority may impose conditions of approval deemed reasonable and necessary to ensure that the reasonable accommodation would comply with the findings required by this chapter. Conditions may include (but are not limited to) those that would ensure that any removable structures or physical design features that are constructed or installed in association with the reasonable accommodation be removed once those structures or physical design features are no longer necessary to afford the disabled individual for whom the reasonable accommodation was granted the use and enjoyment of the dwelling. (3971-4/13)

 

17.77.050 Findings
A request for reasonable accommodation may be approved or conditionally approved if, on the basis of the application, plans, materials, and testimony submitted, the reviewing authority finds that:

A.    The housing, which is the subject of the request for reasonable accommodation, will be used by an individual protected under the Acts.

B.     The request for reasonable accommodation is necessary to make specific housing available to an individual protected under the Acts.

C.     The requested reasonable accommodation will not impose an undue financial or administrative burden on the City.

D.    The requested reasonable accommodation will not require a fundamental alteration to the nature of a City program, or to the City’s zoning or building laws, policies, or procedures.

E.     For housing located in the coastal zone, a request for reasonable accommodation pursuant to this chapter may be approved or conditionally approved by the City if, in addition to the findings set forth in subsections A through D of this section, it is consistent with the City’s certified Local Coastal Program and the California Coastal Act to the extent feasible, and there are no feasible alternatives for providing an accommodation at the dwelling that would provide greater consistency with the certified Local Coastal Program. (3971-4/13)

 

17.77.060 Appeals
Approval of a reasonable accommodation shall become effective 10 days after action by the reviewing authority unless appealed. Appeals of decisions to approve, conditionally approve, or deny a reasonable accommodation request shall be made pursuant to the provisions of Title 24, Chapter 248 of the Huntington Beach Zoning and Subdivisions Code. (3971-4/13)

 

17.77.070 Fee
Notwithstanding fees required for any other concurrent entitlements, there shall be no fee imposed in connection with an application for reasonable accommodation pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. (3971-4/13)

Title 18 RESERVED

Title 19 RESERVED

ZONING CODE
Title 20 ZONING CODE—GENERAL PROVISIONS
Title 21 ZONING CODE—BASE DISTRICTS
Title 22 ZONING CODE—OVERLAY DISTRICTS
Title 23 ZONING CODE—PROVISIONS APPLYING IN ALL OR SEVERAL DISTRICTS
Title 24 ZONING CODE—ADMINISTRATION
Title 25 ZONING CODE—SUBDIVISIONS

Title 20 ZONING CODE—GENERAL PROVISIONS
Chapter 201 TITLE, COMPONENTS, AND PURPOSE
201.02 Title
Titles 20 through 25 of the Municipal Code shall be known and cited as the “Zoning and Subdivision Code of the City of Huntington Beach.” Titles 20 through 25 shall constitute the Local Coastal Program Implementation Plan. (3334-6/97)

 

201.04 Components
The zoning and subdivision ordinance shall have the following components:

A.    Zoning provisions, establishing various classes of zoning districts and area districts and governing the use of land and the placement of buildings and improvements within districts.

B.     A map or set of maps, known as the zoning map, delineating the boundaries of zoning districts and area districts within the City of Huntington Beach.

C.     Subdivision provisions governing the division of land within the City, supplementing provisions of the California Subdivision Map Act.

A copy of the zoning and subdivision ordinance and the zoning map, together with a record of all amendments, shall be kept on file with the City Clerk and shall constitute the original record. A copy shall also be kept on file with the Department of Community Development.

 

201.06 Purpose
The purpose of the zoning and subdivision ordinance is to implement the policies of the City of Huntington Beach General Plan, and without limiting the Huntington Beach Charter authority regarding local control of land use, as provided in the California Government Code, Title 7, Division 1, Planning and Zoning, and Division 2, Subdivisions, and in the California Constitution, Chapter 11, Section 7. The purpose of the Local Coastal Program Implementation Plan is to implement the policies of the City of Huntington Beach certified Land Use Plan (Coastal Element) and the public access and recreation policies of the Coastal Act. It is further adopted for the purpose of promoting and protecting the public health, safety, and general welfare of Huntington Beach residents and to provide the physical, economic and social advantages which result from a comprehensive and orderly planned use of land resources. This zoning and subdivision ordinance is not intended to authorize, and shall not be construed as authorizing the City of Huntington Beach to exercise its power in a manner which will take or damage private property for public use. This zoning ordinance is not intended to increase or decrease the rights of any owner of property under the constitution of the State of California or the United States. (3334-6/97, 4131-5/18)

 

201.08 Consideration of Discretionary Applications
In the consideration of any discretionary application pursuant to the provisions of this ordinance, the City official or body charged with review responsibility shall not approve any such application unless it is established that the development will be appropriately timed and phased such that the development will be supported by adequate public facilities and services, and such that appropriate measures can be taken to mitigate adverse environmental impacts. Adequacy of public facilities and services shall be determined in accordance with the planned long-term buildout of community areas as provided in capital-improvement programs in which facilities are actually available or funded and the General Plan elements in effect at the time of the consideration of the application.

 

Chapter 202 ORGANIZATION, APPLICABILITY, AND INTERPRETATION
202.02 Organization
A.    Structure of Ordinance. The zoning and subdivision ordinance is divided into six parts:

Title 20:    General Provisions.

Title 21:    Base District Provisions.

Title 22:    Overlay District Provisions.

Title 23:    Provisions Applying in All or Several Districts.

Title 24:    Administrative Provisions.

Title 25:    Subdivisions.

B.     Types of Zoning Provisions. Three types of zoning provisions control the use and development of property:

1.     Land use controls specify land uses permitted, conditionally permitted, or prohibited in each zoning district. These include special requirements applicable to specific uses. Land use controls for base zoning districts are in Title 21; land use controls for overlay districts are in Title 22. Certain provisions, applicable in all or several districts, are in Title 23.

2.     Development standards control the height, bulk, location, and appearance of structures. Development standards for base zoning districts are in Title 21; development standards for overlay districts are in Title 22. Certain development standards, applicable in more than one class of base or overlay districts, are in Title 23. These include requirements for site development, parking and loading, signs and nonconforming uses and structures.

3.     Administrative provisions contain procedures for the administration of the zoning ordinance. Administrative provisions are in Title 24.

 

202.04 General Rules for Applicability of the Zoning and Subdivision Ordinance
A.    Applicability to Property. The Zoning and Subdivision Ordinance shall apply to all land within the City of Huntington Beach. The Local Coastal Program Implementation Plan shall apply to all land within the City of Huntington Beach coastal zone.

B.     Applicability to Streets and Rights-of-Way. Public streets, utility, and other rights-of-way shall be in the same zoning district as contiguous property. Where contiguous properties are classified in different zoning districts, the centerline of the street or right-of-way shall be the district boundary, unless otherwise depicted on the zoning map.

C.     Who Qualifies as an Applicant. Only a qualified applicant (including an agent of the applicant with written authorization from the owner) may file an application for approval on a specific site. A qualified applicant is a person who has a freehold interest in the land which is the subject of the application. The director shall require an applicant to submit proof of the interest. The director shall require an agent to submit evidence of authority to act for the applicant. Any person or agency may file for a zoning text amendment.

D.    Compliance with Ordinances. No land shall be used, and no structure shall be constructed, occupied, enlarged, altered, demolished or moved in any zoning district except in accord with the provisions of Titles 20 through 25. Further, no lot area shall be so reduced or diminished that the yards or other open space shall be smaller than prescribed by these titles nor shall the density be increased in any manner except in conformity with the provisions established herein.

E.     Public Nuisance. Neither the provisions of Titles 20 through 25 nor the approval of any permit authorized by these titles shall authorize the maintenance of any public nuisance.

F.     Compliance with Public Notice Requirements. Compliance with public notice requirements prescribed by Titles 20 through 25 shall be deemed sufficient notice to allow the City to proceed with a public hearing and take action on an application, regardless of actual receipt of mailed or delivered notice.

G.    Requests for Notice. Where Titles 20 through 25 require that notice be given by first class mail to “any person who has filed a written request for such notice,” the request shall be filed with the director and shall be subject to the applicable fees set to cover mailing costs.

H.    Notice to Surrounding Property Owners. Notice shall be mailed to all owners of real property as shown on the latest equalized assessment roll within 300 feet of the property that is the subject of the hearing, as required by state law. Applicants may submit and the director may use records of the County Assessor or Tax Collector which contain more recent information than the assessment roll.

I.      Conflict with Other Ordinances. Where conflict occurs between the provisions of Titles 20 through 25 and any other City code, title, chapter, resolution, guideline, or regulation, the more restrictive provision shall control unless otherwise specified in these titles.

J.      Relation to Private Agreements. It is not intended by applicable provisions of Titles 20 through 25 to interfere with or abrogate or annul any easements, covenants, or other existing agreements between parties or to repeal any ordinance or other section of the Huntington Beach Municipal Code except as set forth in subsection 202.04(I), above.

K.    Annexations/Pre-Zoning. Unincorporated territory adjacent to the City may be pre-zoned for the purpose of determining the zone district which will apply in the event of annexation to the City. The procedure for pre-zoning property shall be the same as that for zone changes within the City. Such zoning shall become effective at the time the annexation becomes effective. Any property which, after annexation or for any other reason, does not have a designation on the zoning map shall be deemed to be zoned RL, low-density residential. Inclusion of an annexed area within the coastal zone into the certified Local Coastal Program shall require approval of a Local Coastal Program amendment by the Coastal Commission.

L.     Application During Local Emergency. The City Council may authorize deviations from any provision of this title during a local emergency. Such deviations may be authorized by resolution of the City Council.

M.    Issuance of Permits or Entitlements Prohibited. No permit or entitlement shall be issued by any department of the City in any case where a permit or entitlement is required to be granted and for which an appeal period is provided by this zoning and subdivision ordinance until the expiration of such appeal period or the final determination of any appeal filed pursuant to this ordinance.

N.    Certificate of Occupancy and Final Building Inspection Withheld. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued or final building inspection shall be made until terms and conditions attached to a permit or entitlement required by this zoning and subdivision ordinance are met. (3334-6/97)

 

202.06 Applicability of Land Use Controls and Development Standards
Land use controls and development standards applicable to specific sites shall be shown on the zoning map by zoning and area district designations consisting of classes of letter designators:

A.    A base zoning district designation, indicating the principal land uses permitted or conditionally permitted in each zoning district, shall be a component of all zoning designations.

B.     A subdistrict designation, indicating a geographic area of the City where specific zoning provisions and development standards apply.

C.     Overlay district designations shall be included in a zoning designation if the provisions of one or more overlay districts are applicable to a site.

 

202.08 Rules for Interpretation—Recordkeeping
A.    Zoning and Subdivision Ordinance. Where uncertainty exists regarding the interpretation of any provision of this ordinance or its application to a specific site, the director shall be empowered to issue policy statements regarding the applicability of the ordinance to a specific situation.

B.     Zoning Map. Where uncertainty exists regarding the boundary of a zoning district, the following rules shall apply:

1.     District boundaries shown as approximately following the property line of a lot shall be construed to follow such property line.

2.     On unsubdivided land, or where a district boundary divides a lot, the location of the district boundary shall be determined by using the scale appearing on the zoning map, unless the boundary location is indicated by dimensions printed on the map.

3.     District boundaries shown as approximately following right-of-way lines of streets, alleys, railroads, or other identifiable boundary lines shall be construed to follow such right-of-way or boundary lines.

4.     District boundaries shown as lying within right-of-way lines of streets, alleys, railroads, or other identifiable boundary lines shall be construed to follow the centerline of such right-of-way or boundary lines.

5.     Should any uncertainty remain as to the location of a district boundary or other feature shown on the zoning map, the location shall be determined by the director. If the area of uncertainty lies within the coastal zone, the determination shall be made in conjunction with the Executive Director of the Coastal Commission.

C.     Record of Interpretation. The director shall keep a record of interpretations (policy statements) made pursuant to this section which shall be available to the public for review.

D.    Appeals. An interpretation of the zoning and subdivision ordinance or zoning map by the director may be appealed to the Planning Commission, as provided in Title 24. (3334-6/97)

 

202.10 Responsibilities
Consistent with Title 2 of the Municipal Code, responsibilities for administration of the Zoning and Subdivision Ordinance shall be as follows:

A.    City Council. The City Council shall have final authority for the approval of zoning map and zoning text amendments, General Plan amendments and final maps; however, no such amendment shall be effective unless certified by the Coastal Commission as an amendment to the Local Coastal Program. The City Council also shall act as the appeals board for hearing appeals of actions by the Planning Commission and Zoning Administrator, as provided by this ordinance. Any decision on a Coastal Development Permit for development located within the appealable area of the coastal zone as described in Section 245.04B may be appealed to the California Coastal Commission; if such a project is appealed, final Coastal Development Permit decision making authority lies with the California Coastal Commission.

B.     Design Review Board. The Design Review Board shall be responsible for reviewing and recommending action or rendering action on certain types of development plans under the procedures established by Chapter 244.

C.     Director. The director’s responsibilities shall include administering, interpreting and enforcing all requirements and standards of Titles 20 through 25. The director or his or her designee may approve administrative permits that meet the requirements of this Code and may approve, conditionally approve, or deny requests for waiver of development standards, as prescribed in the individual titles of this Code. The director, at his or her discretion, may refer matters involving development issues to the Design Review Board, Zoning Administrator or Planning Commission and may consult with the City Attorney on questions of interpretation.

D.    Planning Commission. The Planning Commission’s responsibilities shall include initiating preparation and updating of the General Plan, Local Coastal Program, specific plans, and provisions to implement the planning and zoning power of the City and undertaking other duties as assigned by the City Council. The Commission also shall approve, conditionally approve, or deny applications as prescribed in the individual titles of this Code, and recommend approval or conditional approval of zoning map and text amendments, Specific Plans, Neighborhood Conservation Plans, and review criteria for Interim Study Overlay District. The Planning Commission also shall act as the appeals board for hearing appeals of decisions of the director and actions of the Zoning Administrator and Design Review Board, except where otherwise provided. Finally, the Commission shall hear and decide on proposals for revocation of discretionary permits.

E.     Zoning Administrator. The Zoning Administrator shall approve, conditionally approve or deny applications as prescribed in the individual titles of this Code. The Zoning Administrator shall also act on matters referred by the director. The Zoning Administrator shall hear and decide on proposals for revocation of discretionary permits. (3334-6/97)

 

202.12 Effect of this Ordinance on Approved Projects and Projects in Process
A.    Approved Projects.

1.     Conditional use permits, variances, and other discretionary permits, any of which are valid on the effective date of this ordinance shall remain valid until their expiration date. These projects can be built in accord with the development standards in effect at the time of approval, provided that such permit is valid at the time building permits are issued and that such permit is subject to any time limits imposed pursuant to the Uniform Building Code, adopted by the City. If no expiration date was established, the conditional use permit, variance or the discretionary permit approval shall lapse two years after the effective date of the ordinance unless:

a.     A building permit has been issued, and construction commenced; or

b.     The certificate of occupancy has been issued; or

c.     The use is established.

2.     No provision of this ordinance shall require any change in the plans, construction or designated use of any structure for which a building permit has been issued prior to the effective date of this ordinance or any subsequent amendment.

3.     Any reapplication for any expired building permit must meet the standards in effect at the time of reapplication.

4.     Any modification of a valid building permit issued prior to the effective date of this ordinance that results in a change of use or an increase in square footage may be approved only as a conditional use under the provisions of Chapter 241 by the Planning Commission and in no case may an increase in excess of 2,500 square feet be allowed.

B.     Projects in Process.

1.     Projects for which no discretionary approval or building permit has been granted prior to the effective date of this ordinance shall be subject to the land use regulations, development standards, and other requirements of the new Zoning Ordinance except as stated below.

2.     Applications which were accepted as complete prior to the effective date of this ordinance will be subject to the development standards in effect at the time of submittal.

 

Chapter 203 DEFINITIONS
203.02 Applicability
The meaning and construction of words and phrases defined in this chapter shall apply throughout the zoning and subdivision ordinance, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning or construction. (4037-12/14, 4176-3/19, 4214-8/20)

 

203.04 Rules for Construction of Language
In addition to the General Provisions Chapter 1.04 of the Municipal Code, the following rules of construction shall apply:

A.    The particular shall control the general.

B.     Unless the context clearly indicates the contrary, the following conjunctions shall be interpreted as follows:

1.     “And” indicates that all connected words or provisions shall apply.

2.     “Or” indicates that the connected words or provisions apply singly.

3.     “Either... or” indicates that the connected words or provisions shall apply singly but not in combination.

4.     “And/or” indicates that the connected words or provisions may apply singly or in any combination.

C.     In case of conflict between the text and a diagram, the text shall control.

D.    All references to departments, commissions, boards, or other public agencies are to those of the City of Huntington Beach, unless otherwise indicated.

E.     All references to public officials are to those of the City of Huntington Beach, and include designated deputies of such officials, unless otherwise indicated.

F.     All references to days are to calendar days unless otherwise indicated. If a deadline falls on a weekend or City holiday, it shall be extended to the next working day.

G.    Chapter and section headings contained herein shall not be deemed to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of any section hereof.

H.    The words “activities” and “facilities” include any part thereof. (4037-12/14, 4176-3/19, 4214-8/20)

 

203.06 Definitions
Abutting. Having district boundaries or lot lines or combinations thereof in common.

Access, Lateral. Public access along the coast.

Access, Vertical. Public access from the nearest public roadway to the shoreline.

Alley. A public or private way having an ultimate width of not less than 20 feet permanently reserved primarily for vehicular service access to the rear or side of properties otherwise abutting on a street.

Alter. To make a change in the exterior appearance or the supporting members of a structure, such as bearing walls, columns, beams, or girders that will prolong the life of the structure.

Amendment. A change in the wording, context or substance of this ordinance, or a change in the district boundaries on the zoning map.

Animal, Exotic. Any wild animal not customarily confined or cultivated by man for domestic or commercial purposes but kept as a pet or for display.

Animal, Large. An animal larger than the largest breed of dogs. This term includes horses, cows, and other mammals customarily kept in corrals or stables.

Animal, Small. An animal no larger than the largest breed of dogs. This term includes fish, birds, and mammals customarily kept in kennels.

Antenna. Any structure, including but not limited to a monopole, tower, parabolic and/or disk shaped device in single or multiple combinations of either solid or mesh construction, intended for the purposes of receiving or transmitting communications to or from another antenna, device or orbiting satellite, as well as all supporting equipment necessary to install or mount the antenna.

Antenna, Amateur Radio. An antenna array and its associated support structure, such as a mast or tower that is used for the purpose of transmitting and receiving radio signals in conjunction with an amateur station licensed by the Federal Communications Commission.

Antenna, Communication. All types of receiving and transmitting antenna, except satellite dish antenna, including but not limited to cable television antenna, wireless communication antenna, FM digital communication antenna, microwave telephone communication antenna, amateur radio antenna, and short-wave communication antenna and other similar antenna.

Antenna Height. The distance from the property’s grade to the highest point of the antenna and its associated support structure when fully extended.

Antenna, Satellite Dish. An antenna for the purpose of receiving or transmitting communications to or from an orbiting satellite.

Antenna Whip. An antenna and its support structure consisting of a single, slender, rod-like element which is supported only at or near its base.

Approach-Departure Path. The flight track of the helicopter as it approaches or departs from a designated takeoff and landing area, including a heliport, helipad, or helistop.

Architectural Projections or Appurtenances. Features on a building which provide visual variation and/or relief but do not serve as interior or exterior living or working space.

Area, Net Lot. The total horizontal area within the property lines of a parcel of land exclusive of all rights-of-way or easements which physically prohibit the surface use of that portion of the property for other than vehicular ingress and egress.

 



Lot Area

 

Arterial. Any street, highway or road designated as an arterial street in the General Plan.

Assisted Living Facility. Establishments licensed by the State of California providing care on a 24-hour basis for persons requiring personalized supportive services and health related care, but excluding facilities providing surgical or emergency medical services. This includes State licensed establishments that provide a continuum of care for residents ranging from assistance with daily activities to memory care.

Attached Structures. Two or more structures sharing a common wall or roof.

Balcony. A platform that projects from the wall of a building, typically above the first level, and is surrounded by a rail balustrade or parapet.

Basement. A story partly underground and having at least one-half of its height above the average adjoining grade. A basement shall be considered as a story if the vertical distance from the average adjoining grade to the ceiling is over four feet.

 



Basement

 

Bay Window. A window that projects out from an exterior wall.

Bedroom. The term bedroom includes any room used principally for sleeping purposes, an all-purpose room, a study, a den, a room having 100 square feet or more of floor area or less than 50% of one wall open to an adjacent room or hallway.

Blockface. The properties abutting on one side of a street and lying between the two nearest intersecting or intercepting streets, or nearest intersecting or intercepting street and railroad right-of-way, unsubdivided land, watercourse, or City boundary.



Blockface

 

Boarding House. A residence or dwelling, other than a hotel or convalescent facility, where not more than five guest rooms are rented for more than 30 days under three or more separate written or oral rental agreements, leases, or subleases or combination thereof, whether or not the owner, agent, or rental manager resides within the residence and lodging and meals are provided for no more than 10 persons. Guest rooms numbering six or over shall be considered a hotel.

Building. Any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls for the housing or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels, or property of any kind.

Caretaker’s Quarters. A dwelling unit on the site of a commercial, industrial, public, or semipublic use, occupied by a guard or caretaker.

Carport. A permanent roofed accessory structure with not more than two enclosed sides intended for vehicle storage.

Cart/Kiosk. Any portable, non-motorized unit used by a vendor as described in Section 230.94.

City. The City of Huntington Beach.

Clinic. An establishment where patients, who are not lodged overnight, are admitted for examination and treatment by one or more of a group of physicians, dentists, optometrists, psychologists, or social workers practicing together.

Coastal Zone. A geographic zone adjacent to the shoreline, the boundaries of which are determined by the California Coastal Act of 1976, as amended.

Collection Containers. Containers or buildings with a gross floor area of 500 square feet or less used for the deposit and storage of household articles or recyclables.

Commission. The Huntington Beach Planning Commission.

Community Apartment Project. A project in which an individual interest in land is coupled with the right exclusively to occupy an individual unit, as provided in Section 11004 of the California Business and Professions Code.

Completely Rebuilt. Rebuilding the nonconforming structure or use as it had legally existed immediately prior to its destruction.

Conditional Use. A use of land that, due to the specific nature and unique characteristics of the use, requires special standards and discretionary review.

Condominium. An estate in real property consisting of an undivided interest in common in a portion of a parcel of real property together with a separate interior space in a residential, industrial or commercial building on the real property, such as an apartment, office or store. A condominium may include, in addition, a separate interest in other portions of the real property.

Conforming Building. A building that fully meets the requirements of Title 17 (Building Regulations) and also conforms to all property-development regulations and requirements prescribed for the district in which it is located.

Convenience Market. A retail use in conjunction with gasoline sales in which the sales room exceeds 200 square feet.

Court. An outdoor, unenclosed area intended to provide light, air, and privacy for individual dwelling units in multifamily projects.

Coverage, Lot or Site. The percentage of a lot or site covered by roofs, balconies, fireplaces, architectural projections, or overhangs extending more than two and one-half feet from a wall, decks more than 42 inches in height above grade, and stairs. This also includes the square footage of all building projections into yards or courts containing habitable floor area.

Deck. A platform, either free-standing or attached to a building, but without a roof, that is supported by pillars, posts, or walls (see also Balcony).

Demolition. The deliberate removal or destruction of the frame or foundation of any portion of a building or structure for the purpose of preparing the site for new construction or otherwise.

Density Bonus. An increase in the proposed number of units of 25% or greater over the number permitted pursuant to the current zoning and General Plan designation on the property.

Director. The Director of Community Development or designee.

Disabled. As more specifically defined under the Fair Housing Laws, a person who has a physical or mental impairment that limits one or more major life activities, a person who is regarded as having that type of impairment, or a person who has a record of that type of impairment, not including current, illegal use of a controlled substance.

Distribution Line. An electric power line bringing power from a distribution substation to consumers.

District. A portion of the City within which the use of land and structures and the location, height, and bulk of structures are governed by this ordinance. The zoning ordinance establishes “base zoning districts” for residential, commercial, industrial, public and open space uses, and “overlay districts,” which modify base district provisions and standards.

Drilling. The digging or boring of a new well into the earth for the purpose of exploring for, developing or producing oil, gas or other hydrocarbons, or for the purpose of injecting water, steam or any other substance into the earth.

Dwelling, Accessory Unit. A fully equipped dwelling unit which is ancillary and subordinate to a principal dwelling unit located on the same lot in the RL zone. Also known as second dwelling unit or “granny unit.”

Dwelling, Multiple Unit. A building or buildings designed with two or more dwelling units.

Dwelling, Single Unit. A detached building designed primarily for use as a single dwelling, no portion of which is rented as a separate unit, except as permitted by this Code. Attached single-family dwellings shall be considered as multifamily.

Dwelling, Studio Unit. A dwelling unit consisting of one kitchen, one bathroom, and one combination living room and sleeping room. The gross floor area shall not exceed 500 square feet, or it shall be considered as a one-bedroom unit. Also known as a single, a bachelor, or an efficiency unit.

Dwelling Unit. One or more habitable rooms with only one kitchen, and designed for occupancy as a unit by one or more persons living as a household unit with common access to all living, kitchen, and bathroom areas.

Emergency Shelter. Housing with minimal supportive services for homeless persons that is limited to occupancy of six months or less by a homeless person. No individual or household may be denied emergency shelter because of an inability to pay.

Energy Facility. Any public or private processing, producing, generating, storing, transmitting, or recovering facility for electricity, natural gas, petroleum, coal, or other sources of energy.

Environmental Impact Report (EIR). A report complying with the requirements of the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) and its implementing guidelines.

Environmentally Sensitive (Habitat) Area. A wetland or any area in which plant or animal life or their habitats are either rare or especially valuable because of their special nature or role in an ecosystem and which could be easily disturbed or degraded by human activities and developments.

Exemption, Categorical. An exception from the requirements of the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) for a class of projects, which have been determined to not have a significant effect on the environment.

Fair Housing Laws. The Federal Fair Housing Act, the Americans with Disabilities Act, and the California Fair Employment and Housing Act, as each statute may be amended from time to time, and each statute’s implementing regulations.

Family. A single individual or two or more persons living together as a single housekeeping unit in a dwelling unit.

Feasible. Capable of being accomplished in a successful manner within a reasonable period of time, taking into account economic, environmental, social, and technological factors.

Floor Area, Gross. The total enclosed area of all floors of a building measured to the outside face of the structural members in exterior walls, and including halls, stairways, elevator shafts at each floor level, service and mechanical equipment rooms, and habitable basement or attic areas, but excluding area for vehicle parking and loading.

Floor Area Ratio (FAR). Determined by dividing the gross floor area of all buildings on a lot by the area of that lot.



Floor Area Ratio (FAR)

 

Frontage. The linear length of a building which contains a public entrance or a lot measured along the property line adjacent to a street or easement.

Functional Capacity. The ability of an environmentally sensitive area to be self-sustaining and to maintain natural species diversity.

General Plan. The City of Huntington Beach General Plan.

Grade, Existing. The surface of the ground or pavement at a stated location as it exists prior to disturbance in preparation for a project regulated by this ordinance.

Grade, Street. The top of the curb, or the top of the edge of the pavement or traveled way where no curb exists.

Height of Building. A vertical dimension measured from the top of the highest roof to the top of the subfloor/slab directly underneath. (See Section 230.72.)

Helipad or Helistop. A heliport without auxiliary facilities such as waiting room, helicopter parking, fueling and maintenance equipment.

Heliport. An area, either at ground level or elevated on a structure, that is used or intended to be used for the takeoff and landing of helicopters, and includes some or all the various facilities useful to helicopter operations, including helicopter parking, waiting room, fueling and maintenance equipment.

Home Occupation. Business activity conducted in a dwelling unit in a residential district that is incidental to the principal residential use of a lot or site.

Hotel Owner/Operator. The entity that owns and operates a hotel. If the hotel operator is separate from the hotel owner both are jointly and severally responsible for ensuring compliance with the requirements described in this LCP and/or recorded against the property, as well as jointly and severally liable for violations of said requirements and restrictions.

Household. All the people occupying a dwelling unit, and includes people who live in different units governed by the same operator.

Illumination, Direct. Illumination by means of light that travels directly from its source to the viewer’s eye.

Illumination, Indirect. Illumination by means only of light cast upon an opaque surface from a concealed source.

Incentives. Policies, programs or actions taken by the City designed to ensure that a development will be produced at a lower cost.

Integral Facilities. Any combination of two or more group homes which may or may not be located on the same or contiguous parcels of land, that are under the control and management of the same owner, operator, management company, or licensee or any affiliate of any of them, and are integrated components of one operation shall be referred to as integral facilities and shall be considered one facility for purposes of applying Federal, State, and local laws to its operation. Examples of such integral facilities include, but are not limited to, the provision of housing in one facility and recovery programming, treatment, meals, or any other service or services to program participants in another facility or facilities or by assigning staff or a consultant or consultants to provide services to the same program participants in more than one licensed or unlicensed facility.

Integral Uses. Any two or more residential care programs commonly administered by the same owner, operator, management company, or licensee, or any affiliate of any of them, in a manner in which participants in two or more care programs participate simultaneously in any care or recovery activity or activities so commonly administered. Any such integral use shall be considered one use for purposes of applying Federal, State, and local laws to its operation.

Junk Yard. The use of a lot, or contiguous lots, or any portion thereof for the storage of junk, including scrap metal, or other scrap materials, and/or for the dismantling or wrecking of automobiles or other vehicles or machinery.

Kennel. Any premises where four or more dogs or cats at least four months of age are kept or maintained for any purpose except veterinary clinics and hospitals. For purposes of this section, a detached single-family residence with a maximum of four dogs shall not be considered a kennel when at least one of the dogs is a specially-trained guide dog, signal dog or service dog, as defined in Penal Code Section 365.5, and complies with Section 7.12.160 of the Huntington Beach Municipal Code.

Kitchenette or Kitchen. Any room or part of a room which is designed, built, used, or intended to be used for food preparation and dishwashing; but not including a bar, or similar room adjacent to or connected with a kitchen.

Landscaping. An area devoted to or developed and maintained with native or exotic plantings, lawn, ground cover, gardens, trees, shrubs, and other plant materials, decorative outdoor landscape elements, pools, fountains, water features, paved or decorated surfaces of rock, stone, brick, block, or similar material (excluding driveways, parking, loading, or storage areas), and sculptural elements. Plants on rooftops, porches or in boxes attached to buildings are not considered landscaping.

Landscaping, Interior. A landscaped area or areas within the shortest circumferential line defining the perimeter or exterior boundary of the parking or loading area, or similar paved area, excluding driveways or walkways providing access to the facility (as applied to parking and loading facilities or to similar paved areas).

Landscaping, Perimeter. A landscaped area adjoining the exterior boundary of a parking or loading area, or similar paved area, excluding driveways or walkways which provide access to the facility.



Landscaping: Perimeter Interior

 

Limited Use Overnight Visitor Accommodations. Any hotel, motel, or other similar facility that provides overnight visitor accommodations wherein a purchaser receives the right in perpetuity, for life, or a term of years, to the recurrent, exclusive use or occupancy of a lot, parcel, unit, room(s), or segment of the facility, annually or on some other seasonal or periodic basis, for a period of time that has been or will be allotted from the use or occupancy periods into which the facility has been divided and shall include, but not be limited to timeshare, condominium-hotel, fractional ownership hotel, or uses of a similar nature.

Lodger. Any person other than a member of a family renting a room for living or sleeping purposes.

Lot. Any numbered or lettered parcel shown on a recorded final map, record of survey pursuant to an approved division of land, or a parcel map and abuts a street, alley or recorded access easement.



 

Lot, Corner. A site bounded by two or more adjacent street lines that have an angle of intersection of not more than 135 degrees.

Lot Depth. The horizontal distance from the midpoint of the front lot line to the midpoint of the rear lot line, or to the most distant point on any other lot line where there is no rear lot line.

Lot, Flag. A lot with developable area connected to a street by a narrow strip of land that includes a driveway.

Lot or Property Line, Front. The street property line adjacent to the front yard.

Lot or Property Line, Interior. A lot line not abutting a street.

Lot or Property Line, Rear. A lot line, not a front lot line, that is parallel or approximately parallel to the front lot line. Where no lot line is within 45 degrees of being parallel to the front lot line, a line 10 feet in length within the lot, parallel to and at the maximum possible distance from the front lot line, shall be deemed the rear lot line.

Lot or Property Line, Side. Any lot line that is not a front lot line or a rear lot line.

Lot or Property Line, Street. A lot line abutting a street.

Lot, Reverse Corner. A corner lot, the side line of which is substantially a continuation of the front lot line of the lot to its rear.

Lot, Street-Alley. An interior lot having frontage on a street and an alley.

Lot, Through. A lot having frontage on two dedicated parallel or approximately parallel streets.

Lot Width. The mean of the horizontal distance between the side lot lines measured at right angles to the lot depth at midpoints 20 feet from the front lot line and 20 feet from the rear lot line, or from the rearmost point of the lot depth in cases where there is no rear lot line.



Lot Width

 

Lower Income Household. A household whose annual income is at or below 80% of Orange County median income as defined by the State of California Department of Housing and Community Development.

 

Manufactured Home. A structure transportable in sections which is a minimum of eight feet in width and 40 feet in length, built on a permanent chassis, and designed to be a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation. Manufactured home includes mobile home.

Mezzanine. An intermediate floor within a room containing not more than 33% of the floor area of the room.



Mezzanine

 

Moderate Income Household. A household whose annual income is at or below 120% of Orange County median income as defined by the State of California Department of Housing and Community Development.

Municipal Code. The Municipal Code of the City of Huntington Beach.

Negative Declaration. A written statement briefly describing the reasons that a proposed project will not have a significant impact on the environment which meets the requirements of the California Environmental Quality Act.

Neighborhood Notification. Notification process pursuant to Chapter 241 when no entitlements are required and the use requires such notification as stated in the Zoning and Subdivision Ordinance.

Net Site Area. See Area, Net Lot.

New Well. A new well bore or well hole established at the ground surface. Redrilling from the well bore or well hole of an existing well greater than 150 feet from the existing well bore shall constitute a new well.

Nonconforming Structure. A structure that was lawfully erected but which does not conform with the current development standards.

Nonconforming Use. A use of a structure or land that was lawfully established and maintained, but which does not conform with the current zoning ordinance.

Off-Street Loading Facilities. A site or portion of a site devoted to the loading or unloading of motor vehicles or trailers, including loading berths, aisles, access drives, and landscaped areas.

Off-Street Parking Facilities. A site or portion of a site devoted to the off-street parking of motor vehicles, including parking spaces, aisles, access drives, and landscaped areas.

Oil Operation. The use or maintenance of any installation, facility, or structure used, either directly or indirectly, to carry out or facilitate one or more of the following functions: drilling, rework, repair, redrilling, production, processing, extraction, assisted recovery, stimulation storage or shipping of oil, gas or hydrocarbons from the subsurface of the earth.

Oil Operation Site. The physical location where an oil operation is conducted.

Open Space, Common. A usable open space within a residential development reserved for the exclusive use of residents of the development and their guests.

Open Space, Private. A usable open space adjoining and directly accessible to a dwelling unit, reserved for the exclusive use of residents of the dwelling unit and their guests.

Open Space, Total. The sum of private and common open space.

Open Space, Usable. Outdoor or unenclosed area on the ground, or on a balcony, deck, porch or terrace designed and accessible for outdoor living, recreation, pedestrian access or landscaping. Usable open space does not include parking facilities, driveways, utility or service areas, any required front or street side yard, any space with a dimension of less than six feet in any direction or an area of less than 60 square feet.



Usable Open Space

 

Operator. A company, business, or individual who provides residential services, (i.e., the placement of individuals in a residence), setting of house rules, and governing behavior of the occupants as residents. Operator does not include a property owner or property manager that exclusively handles real estate contracting, property management, and leasing of the property and that does not otherwise meet the definition of operator.

Oversize Vehicle. Any vehicle which exceeds 25 feet in length, seven in width, seven in height, or a weight of 10,000 pounds, motorized or non-motorized. Oversize vehicle also includes any equipment or machinery regardless of size.

Parking Structure. A structure consisting of two or more levels used for parking of vehicles where parking spaces, turning radius, transition ramps, and drive aisles are incorporated within the structure, including automated parking structures. A surface level parking lot with a solid roof above is not considered a parking structure unless there is access for automobiles and parking stalls on the roof.

Parking, Subterranean. A parking area that is wholly or partially recessed into the development site, and which may or may not support additional structures above (e.g., dwelling units or parking structures).

Parking, Tandem. An off-street parking facility which includes parking stalls where one is arranged in front of the other or stacked utilizing mechanical lifts.

Patio. A paved court open to the sky.

Permitted Use. A use of land that does not require approval of a conditional use permit or temporary use permit.

Planned Unit Development (PUD). A large scale development of a parcel or of a combination of related parcels to be developed by a single owner or group of owners acting jointly, involving a related group of uses, planned as an entity and having a predominant developmental feature which serves to unify or organize development.

Porch. An open or covered platform, usually having a separate roof, at an entrance to a dwelling, or an open or enclosed gallery or room, which is not heated or cooled, that is attached to the outside of a building.

Private Property. Property owned in fee by an individual, corporation, partnership, or a group of individuals as opposed to public property.

Project. Any proposal for new or changed use, or for new construction, alteration, or enlargement of any structure, that is subject to the provisions of this zoning ordinance.

Public Property. Property dedicated through acquisition or easement for public use which includes, but is not limited to, streets, alleys, parks, public rights-of-way, and sidewalks.

Qualifying Senior Resident. A person who is 62 years of age or older. (Section 51.2 of the California Civil Code.)

Remodel. The upgrade of the interior or exterior faces of a building or structure without altering to any degree the structural integrity.

Residential Privacy Design Standards. Residential privacy design standards shall apply to:

1.     A lot contiguous to one or more existing single-family residential units, excluding parcels separated by streets or alleys; or

2.     A vacant parcel intended for new single-family development; or

3.     The creation of new floor area above the first floor of an existing single story single-family residence; or

4.     Increasing the number of windows above the first floor of an existing single-family residence; or

5.     Moving the location of existing windows above the first floor of an existing single-family residence.

Resource Protection Area. Within the coastal zone, any area that consists of any of the following: wetlands, environmentally sensitive habitat areas, buffer areas (as these terms are defined in the Glossary of the City’s certified Land Use Plan), and/or land that is zoned Coastal Conservation.

Room, Habitable. A room meeting the requirements of the Uniform Building Code for sleeping, living, cooking, or dining purposes, excluding such enclosed places as closets, pantries, bath or toilet rooms, service rooms, connecting corridors, laundries, attics, foyers, storage spaces, utility rooms, garages, and similar spaces.

Senior Housing. Housing for a family in which at least one person per unit is 60 years old or older, or for a single person who is 60 years old or older.

Setback Line. A line across the front, side, rear of any private or public property which delineates an area adjoining a property line in which erection of a building, fence, or other structure is prohibited except as otherwise provided in the zoning ordinance. All setbacks along streets and alleys shall be measured from the ultimate right-of-way.

Significant Disruption. Having a substantial adverse effect upon the functional capacity.

Single Housekeeping Unit. The occupants of a dwelling unit that have established ties and familiarity with each other, jointly use common areas, interact with each other, share meals, household activities, and expenses and responsibilities. Membership in the single housekeeping unit is fairly stable as opposed to transient, members have some control over who becomes a member of the household, and the residential activities of the household are conducted on a non-profit basis. There is a rebuttal presumption that integral facilities are not single housekeeping units. Evidence that a household is not operating as a single housekeeping unit include, but are not limited to: the occupants do not share a lease agreement or ownership of the property, members of the household have separate, private entrances from other members; members of the household have locks on their bedroom doors; members of the household have separate food storage facilities, such as separate refrigerators.

Single Ownership. Holding record title, possession under a contract to purchase, or possession under a lease, by a person, firm, corporation, or partnership, individually, jointly, in common, or in any other manner where the property is or will be under unitary or unified control.

Site. A lot, or group of contiguous lots not divided by an alley, street, other right-of-way, or City limit, that is proposed for development in accord with the provisions of this ordinance, and is in a single ownership or has multiple owners, all of whom join in an application for development.

Specific Event. A short-term temporary use of public property as defined in Section 5.68.010.

Specific Plan. A plan for a defined geographic area that is consistent with the General Plan.

Stock Cooperative. A corporation formed for the primary purpose of holding title to, either in fee simple or for a term of years, any real property where the shareholders of the corporation receive a right of exclusive occupancy in a portion of such real property and where the right of occupancy is only transferable by the transfer of shares of stock in the corporation.

Story. That portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor or finished undersurface of the roof directly above it.

Street. A public or an approved private thoroughfare or road easement which affords the principle means of access to abutting property, not including an alley.

Structure. Anything constructed or erected that requires a location on the ground, excluding patios, walks, access drives, or similar paved areas.

Structure, Accessory. A structure that is appropriate, subordinate and customarily incidental to the main structure of the site and which is located on the same site as the main structure, including swimming pools, garages, gazebos and patio covers.

Structure, Minor Accessory. An accessory structure that does not exceed 64 square feet in floor area, 80 square feet in roof area and a height of six feet, including storage sheds, pet shelters, playhouses, and decorative elements.

Supportive Housing. Housing with no limit on length of stay that is occupied by the target population and is linked to on-site or off-site services that assist residents to retain the housing, improving his or her health status, and maximizing his or her ability to live and, when possible, work in the community. On-site and off-site services may include, but are not limited to, after-school tutoring, child care, and career counseling.

Takeoff and Landing Area. That area of the helicopter facility where the helicopter actually lands and takes off.

Target Population. Persons with low income having one or more disabilities, including mental illness, HIV or AIDS, substance abuse, or other chronic health conditions, or individuals eligible for services provided under the Lanterman Development Disabilities Services Act (Division 4.5 commencing with Section 4500 of the Welfare and Institutions Code) and may include, among other populations, adults, families, families with children, elderly persons, young adults aging out of the foster care system, individuals exiting from institutional settings, veterans, or homeless people.

Transitional Housing. Buildings configured as rental housing developments, but operated under program requirements that call for the termination of assistance and recirculation of the assisted unit to another eligible program recipient at some predetermined future point in time, which shall be no less than six months.

Transmission Line. An electric power line bringing power to a receiving or distribution substation.

Ultimate Right-of-Way. The adopted maximum width for any street, alley, or thoroughfare, as established by the General Plan, by a precise plan of street, alley, or private street alignment; by a recorded map; or by a standard plan of the Department of Public Works. Such thoroughfare shall include any adjacent public easement used as a walkway and/or utility easement.

Usable Satellite Signals. Satellite signals from all major communication satellites that, when viewed on a conventional television set, are at least equal in picture quality to those received from local commercial television stations or by way of cable televisions.

Use, Accessory. A use that is appropriate, subordinate, and customarily incidental to the main use of the site and which is located on the same site as the main use.

Value. The monetary worth of a structure determined by the valuation figures used by the director for the purpose of calculating building permit fees.

Vehicle Storage. The business of storing or safekeeping of operative and inoperative vehicles for periods of time greater than a 24-hour period.

Very Low Income Household. A household whose annual income is at or below 50% of Orange County median income as defined by the State of California Department of Housing and Community Development.

Wetbar. A fixed installation within a dwelling unit providing cold and/or hot water to a single sink without a garbage disposal at a location other than a kitchen or laundry. A wetbar area shall not include a stove, range, or similar appliance usually found in a kitchen, and if such wetbar is located in a room or a portion of a room with a stove, hot plate, range, oven or other type of kitchen facility, it shall be deemed a separate kitchen.

Wetland. Lands within the coastal zone which may be covered periodically or permanently with shallow water and include salt water marshes, fresh water marshes, open or closed brackish water marshes, swamps, mudflats, and fens.

Window, Required. An exterior opening in a habitable room meeting the area requirements of the Uniform Building Code.

Yard. An open space on the same site as a structure, unoccupied and unobstructed by structures from the ground upward except as otherwise provided in this ordinance, including a front yard, side yard, or rear yard.

Yard, Front. An area between the front lot line and the front setback line extending across the full width of a site. The front yard of a corner lot shall adjoin the shortest street property line along its entire length. Where one street property line is at least 75% of the length of the other street property line, the director shall determine the location of the front yard.

Yard, Rear. An area between the rear lot line and the rear setback line extending across the full width of a site. On a corner lot the rear yard shall extend only to the side yard abutting the street.

Yard, Side. An area between the rear setback line and the front setback line and between the side property line and side setback line. The side yard on the street side of a corner lot shall extend to the rear lot line.



 

Zoning Ordinance. The Zoning Ordinance of the City of Huntington Beach. (3248-6/95, 3301-11/95, 3334-6/97; 3482-12/00, 3520-2/02, 3568-9/02, 3705-6/05, 3756-1/07, 3774-10/07 (certified by the California Coastal Commission 10/07), 3856-2/10, 3903-11/10, 3909-4/11, 4037-12/14, 4089-10/16, 4132-5/18, 4176-3/19, 4194-3/20, 4214-8/20)

 

Chapter 204 USE CLASSIFICATIONS
204.02 Applicability
Use classifications describe one or more uses having similar characteristics, but do not list every use or activity that may appropriately be within the classification. The director shall determine whether a specific use shall be deemed to be within one or more use classifications or not within any classification in this title. The director may determine that a specific use shall not be deemed to be within a classification, if its characteristics are substantially different than those typical of uses named within the classification. The director’s decision may be appealed to the Planning Commission. (3334-6/97, 4175-3/19, 4183-10/19)

 

204.04 Uses Not Classified
Any new use, or any use that cannot be clearly determined to be in an existing use classification, may be incorporated into the zoning provisions by a Zoning and Subdivision Ordinance text amendment, as provided in Chapter 247. Such an incorporation shall not be effective unless certified by the Coastal Commission as a Local Coastal Program amendment. (3334-6/97, 4175-3/19, 4183-10/19)

 

204.06 Residential Use Classifications
A.    Day Care, Limited (or Small-Family). Non-medical care and supervision of six or fewer persons, or eight or fewer persons if two of the persons are six years of age or older, on a less than 24-hour basis. Children under the age of 10 years who reside in the home shall be counted for purposes of these limits. This classification includes nursery schools, preschools, and day-care centers for children and adults.

B.     Group Home. A facility that is being used as a supportive living environment for persons who are considered disabled under State or Federal law. A group home operated by a single operator or service provider (whether licensed or unlicensed) constitutes a single facility, whether the facility occupies one or more dwelling units. Group homes shall not include the following: (1) residential care facilities; (2) any unit operating as a single housekeeping unit.

C.     Group Residential. Shared living quarters without separate kitchen or bathroom facilities for each room or unit. This classification includes boarding houses, but excludes residential hotels or motels, and group homes.

D.    Multifamily Residential. Two or more dwelling units on a site. This classification includes manufactured homes.

E.     Referral Facility. A residential care facility, group home, or sober living home where one or more person’s residency in the facility is pursuant to a court order or directive from an agency in the criminal justice system.

F.     Residential Care Facility. A residential facility licensed by the State where care, services, or treatment is provided to persons living in a supportive community residential setting. Residential care facilities include, but may not be limited to, the following: intermediate care facilities for the developmentally disabled (Health & Safety Code §§ 1267.8 and 1267.9); community care facilities (Health & Safety Code § 1500 et seq.); residential care facilities for the elderly (Health & Safety Code § 1569 et seq.); residential care facilities for the chronically ill (22 C.C.R. § 87801(a)(5); Health & Safety Code § 1568.02); alcoholism and drug abuse facilities (Health & Safety Code §§ 11834.02—11834.30); pediatric day health and respite care facilities (Health & Safety Code § 1760 et seq.); residential health care facilities, including congregate living health facilities (Health & Safety Code §§ 1265—1271.1, 1250(i), 1250(e), (h)); family care home, foster home, group home for the mentally disordered or otherwise disabled persons or dependent and neglected children (Welfare & Institutions Code §§ 5115—5120).

G.    Single-Family Residential. Buildings containing one dwelling unit located on a single lot. This classification includes manufactured homes.

H.    Sober Living Home. A group home for persons who are recovering from a drug and/or alcohol addiction and who are considered disabled under State or Federal law. Sober Living Homes shall not include the following: (1) residential care facilities; (2) any unit operating as a single housekeeping unit.

I.      Supportive Housing. Housing with no limit on length of stay that is occupied by the target population and is linked to on-site or off-site services that assist residents to retain the housing, improving his or her health status, and maximizing his or her ability to live and, when possible, work in the community. On-site and off-site services may include, but are not limited to, after-school tutoring, child care, and career counseling. Supportive housing uses are subject only to those restrictions and processing requirements that apply to other residential dwellings of the same type in the same zone.

J.      Transitional Housing. Temporary housing (generally six months to two years) for a homeless individual or family who is transitioning to permanent housing. This type of housing includes multi-family unit developments and often includes a supportive services component to allow individuals to gain necessary life skills in support of independent living. Transitional housing uses are subject only to those restrictions and processing requirements that apply to other residential dwellings of the same type in the same zone. (3334-6/97, 3669-12/04, 3857-2/10, 4175-3/19, 4183-10/19, 4212-8/20)

 

204.08 Public and Semipublic Use Classifications
A.    Cemetery. Land used or intended to be used for the burial of human remains and dedicated for cemetery purposes. Cemetery purposes include columbariums, crematoriums, mausoleums, and mortuaries operated in conjunction with the cemetery, business and administrative offices, chapels, flower shops, and necessary maintenance facilities.

B.     Clubs and Lodges. Meeting, recreational, or social facilities of a private or nonprofit organization primarily for use by members or guests. This classification includes union halls, social clubs and youth centers.

C.     Community and Human Service Facilities.

1.     Drug Abuse Centers. Facilities offering drop-in services for persons suffering from drug abuse, including treatment and counseling without provision for on-site residence or confinement.

2.     Primary Health Care. Medical services, including clinics, counseling and referral services, to persons afflicted with bodily or mental disease or injury without provision for on-site residence or confinement.

3.     Emergency Kitchens. Establishments offering food for the “homeless” and others in need.

4.     Emergency Shelters. Establishments offering food and shelter programs for “homeless” people and others in need. This classification does not include facilities licensed for residential care, as defined by the State of California, which provide supervision of daily activities.

5.     Residential Care, General. Twenty-four-hour non-medical care for seven or more persons, including wards of the juvenile court, in need of personal services, supervision, protection, or assistance essential for sustaining the activities of daily living. This classification includes only those facilities licensed by the State of California.

D.    Convalescent Facilities. Establishments providing care on a 24-hour basis for persons requiring regular medical attention, but excluding facilities providing surgical or emergency medical services. This classification includes assisted living facilities.

E.     Cultural Institutions. Nonprofit institutions displaying or preserving objects of interest in one or more of the arts or sciences. This classification includes libraries, museums, and art galleries.

F.     Day Care, Large-Family. Non-medical care and supervision for seven to 12 persons, or up to 14 persons if two of the persons are six years of age or older on a less than 24-hour basis. Children under the age of 10 years who reside in the home shall be counted for purposes of these limits.

G.    Day Care, General. Non-medical care for 13 or more persons on a less than 24-hour basis. This classification includes nursery schools, preschools, and day-care centers for children or adults.

H.    Emergency Health Care. Facilities providing emergency medical service with no provision for continuing care on an inpatient basis.

I.      Government Offices. Administrative, clerical, or public contact offices of a government agency, including postal facilities, together with incidental storage and maintenance of vehicles.

J.      Heliports. Pads and facilities enabling takeoffs and landings by helicopter.

K.    Hospitals. Facilities providing medical, surgical, psychiatric, or emergency medical services to sick or injured persons, primarily on an inpatient basis. This classification includes incidental facilities for out-patient treatment, as well as training, research, and administrative services for patients and employees.

L.     Maintenance and Service Facilities. Facilities providing maintenance and repair services for vehicles and equipment, and materials storage areas. This classification includes corporation yards, equipment service centers, and similar facilities.

M.    Marinas. A boat basin with docks, mooring facilities, supplies and equipment for small boats.

N.    Park and Recreation Facilities. Noncommercial parks, playgrounds, recreation facilities, and open spaces.

O.    Public Safety Facilities. Facilities for public safety and emergency services, including police and fire protection.

P.     Religious Assembly. Facilities for religious worship and incidental religious education, but not including private schools as defined in this section.

Q.    Schools, Public or Private. Educational institutions having a curriculum comparable to that required in the public schools of the State of California.

R.     Utilities, Major. Generating plants, electrical substations, above-ground electrical transmission lines, switching buildings, refuse collection, transfer, recycling or disposal facilities, flood control or drainage facilities, water or wastewater treatment plants, transportation or communications utilities, and similar facilities of public agencies or public utilities.

S.     Utilities, Minor. Utility facilities that are necessary to support legally established uses and involve only minor structures such as electrical distribution lines, underground water and sewer lines, and recycling and collection containers. (3334-6/97, 3669-12/04, 4175-3/19, 4183-10/19, 4212-8/20)

 

204.10 Commercial Use Classifications
A.    Ambulance Services. Provision of emergency medical care or transportation, including incidental storage and maintenance of vehicles as regulated by Chapter 5.20.

B.     Animal Sales and Services.

1.     Animal Boarding. Provision of shelter and care for small animals on a commercial basis. This classification includes activities such as feeding, exercising, grooming, and incidental medical care, and kennels.

2.     Animal Grooming. Provision of bathing and trimming services for small animals on a commercial basis. This classification includes boarding for a maximum period of 48 hours.

3.     Animal Hospitals. Establishments where small animals receive medical and surgical treatment. This classification includes only facilities that are entirely enclosed, soundproofed, and air-conditioned. Grooming and temporary (maximum 30 days) boarding of animals are included, if incidental to the hospital use.

4.     Animals, Retail Sales. Retail sales and boarding of small animals, provided such activities take place within an entirely enclosed building. This classification includes grooming, if incidental to the retail use, and boarding of animals not offered for sale for a maximum period of 48 hours.

5.     Equestrian Centers. Establishments offering facilities for instruction in horseback riding, including rings, stables, and exercise areas.

6.     Pet Cemetery. Land used or intended to be used for the burial of animals, ashes or remains of dead animals, including placement or erection of markers, headstones or monuments over such places of burial.

C.     Artists’ Studios. Work space for artists and artisans, including individuals practicing one of the fine arts or performing arts, or skilled in an applied art or craft.

D.    Banks and Savings and Loans. Financial institutions that provide retail banking services to individuals and businesses. This classification includes only those institutions engaged in the on-site circulation of cash money. It also includes businesses offering check-cashing facilities.

With Drive-up Service. Institutions providing services accessible to persons who remain in their automobiles.

E.     Building Materials and Services. Retailing, wholesaling, or rental of building supplies or equipment. This classification includes lumber yards, tool and equipment sales or rental establishments, and building contractors’ yards, but excludes establishments devoted exclusively to retail sales of paint and hardware, and activities classified under Vehicle/Equipment Sales and Services.

F.     Catering Services. Preparation and delivery of food and beverages for off-site consumption without provision for on-site pickup or consumption. (See also Eating and Drinking Establishments.)

G.    Commercial Filming. Commercial motion picture or video photography at the same location more than six days per quarter of a calendar year. (See also Chapter 5.54, Commercial Photography.)

H.    Commercial Recreation and Entertainment. Provision of participant or spectator recreation or entertainment. This classification includes theaters, sports stadiums and arenas, amusement parks, bowling alleys, billiard parlors and poolrooms as regulated by Chapter 9.32; dance halls as regulated by Chapter 5.28; ice/roller skating rinks, golf courses, miniature golf courses, scale-model courses, shooting galleries, tennis/racquetball courts, health/fitness clubs, pinball arcades or electronic games centers, cyber café having more than four coin-operated game machines; card rooms as regulated by Chapter 9.24; and fortune telling as regulated by Chapter 5.72.

Limited. Indoor movie theaters, game centers and performing arts theaters and health/fitness clubs occupying less than 2,500 square feet.

I.      Communications Facilities. Broadcasting, recording, and other communication services accomplished through electronic or telephonic mechanisms, but excluding Utilities (Major). This classification includes radio, television, or recording studios; telephone switching centers; telegraph offices; and wireless communication facilities.

J.      Eating and Drinking Establishments. Businesses serving prepared food or beverages for consumption on or off the premises.

1.     With Fast-Food or Take-Out Service. Establishments where patrons order and pay for their food at a counter or window before it is consumed and may either pick up or be served such food at a table or take it off-site for consumption.

a.     Drive-through. Service from a building to persons in vehicles through an outdoor service window.

b.     Limited. Establishments that do not serve persons in vehicles or at a table.

2.     With Live Entertainment/Dancing. An eating or drinking establishment where dancing and/or live entertainment is allowed. This classification includes nightclubs subject to the requirements of Chapter 5.44 of the Municipal Code.

K.    Food and Beverage Sales. Retail sales of food and beverages for off-site preparation and consumption. Typical uses include groceries, liquor stores, or delicatessens. Establishments at which 20% or more of the transactions are sales of prepared food for on-site or take-out consumption shall be classified as Catering Services or Eating and Drinking Establishments.

With Alcoholic Beverage Sales. Establishments where more than 10% of the floor area is devoted to sales, display and storage of alcoholic beverages.

L.     Food Processing. Establishments primarily engaged in the manufacturing or processing of food or beverages for human consumption and wholesale distribution.

M.    Funeral and Interment Services. Establishments primarily engaged in the provision of services involving the care, preparation or disposition of human dead other than in cemeteries. Typical uses include crematories, columbariums, mausoleums or mortuaries.

N.    Horticulture. The raising of fruits, vegetables, flowers, trees, and shrubs as a commercial enterprise.

O.    Laboratories. Establishments providing medical or dental laboratory services; or establishments with less than 2,000 square feet providing photographic, analytical, or testing services. Other laboratories are classified as Limited Industry.

P.     Maintenance and Repair Services. Establishments providing appliance repair, office machine repair, or building maintenance services. This classification excludes maintenance and repair of vehicles or boats; see (Vehicle/Equipment Repair).

Q.    Marine Sales and Services. Establishments providing supplies and equipment for shipping or related services or pleasure boating. Typical uses include chandleries, yacht brokerage and sales, boat yards, boat docks, and sail-making lofts.

R.     Reserved.

S.     Nurseries. Establishments in which all merchandise other than plants is kept within an enclosed building or a fully screened enclosure, and fertilizer of any type is stored and sold in package form only.

T.     Offices, Business and Professional. Offices of firms or organizations providing professional, executive, management, or administrative services, such as architectural, engineering, graphic design, interior design, real estate, insurance, investment, legal, and veterinary offices. This classification includes medical/dental laboratories incidental to an office use, but excludes banks and savings and loan associations.

U.    Offices, Medical and Dental. A business which is primarily engaged in providing services for health maintenance, diagnosis or treatment of human disease, pain, injury, physical or mental condition, including, but not limited to, offices of acupuncturists, chiropractors, dentists, optometrists, physicians, podiatrists, dermatologists, psychiatrists, psychologists and physical therapists.

V.    Pawn Shops. Establishments engaged in the buying or selling of new or secondhand merchandise and offering loans secured by personal property and subject to Chapter 5.36 of the Municipal Code.

W.    Personal Enrichment Services. Provision of instructional services or facilities, including photography, fine arts, crafts, dance or music studios, driving schools, business and trade schools, and diet centers, reducing salons, fitness studios, and yoga or martial arts studios.

X.    Personal Services. Provision of recurrently needed services of a personal nature. This classification includes barber and beauty shops, permanent and semi-permanent makeup such as microblading, non-surgical medspas such as laser hair removal, eyelash extensions, injectables, coolsculpting, etc., seamstresses, tailors, shoe repair shops, dry-cleaning businesses (excluding large-scale bulk cleaning plants), photo-copying, self-service laundries, and massage as regulated by Chapter 5.24.

Y.    Research and Development Services. Establishments primarily engaged in industrial or scientific research, including limited product testing. This classification includes electron research firms or pharmaceutical research laboratories, but excludes manufacturing, except of prototypes, or medical testing and analysis.

Z.     Retail Sales. The retail sale of merchandise not specifically listed under another use classification. This classification includes department stores, drug stores, clothing stores, and furniture stores, and businesses retailing the following goods: toys, hobby materials, handcrafted items, jewelry, cameras, photographic supplies, medical supplies and equipment, electronic equipment, records, sporting goods, surfing boards and equipment, kitchen utensils, hardware, appliances, antiques, art supplies and services, paint and wallpaper, carpeting and floor covering, office supplies, bicycles, and new automotive parts and accessories (excluding service and installation).

AA.  Secondhand Appliances and Clothing Sales. The retail sale of used appliances and clothing by secondhand dealers who are subject to Chapter 5.36. This classification excludes antique shops primarily engaged in the sale of used furniture and accessories other than appliances, but includes junk shops.

BB.  Sex-Oriented Businesses. Establishments as regulated by Chapter 5.70; and figure model studios as regulated by Chapter 5.60.

CC.  Swap Meets, Indoor/Flea Markets. An occasional, periodic or regularly scheduled market held within a building where groups of individual vendors offer goods for sale to the public.

DD.  Swap Meets, Recurring. Retail sale or exchange of handcrafted or secondhand merchandise for a maximum period of 32 consecutive hours, conducted by a sponsor on a more than twice yearly basis.

EE.   Tattoo Establishment. Premises used for the business of marking or coloring the skin with tattoos as regulated by Chapter 8.70.

FF.   Travel Services. Establishments providing travel information and reservations to individuals and businesses. This classification excludes car rental agencies.

GG.  Vehicle/Equipment Sales and Services.

1.     Automobile Rentals. Rental of automobiles, including storage and incidental maintenance, but excluding maintenance requiring pneumatic lifts.

2.     Automobile Washing. Washing, waxing, or cleaning of automobiles or similar light vehicles.

3.     Commercial Parking Facility. Lots offering short-term or long-term parking to the public for a fee.

4.     Service Stations. Establishments engaged in the retail sale of gas, diesel fuel, lubricants, parts, and accessories. This classification includes incidental maintenance and minor repair of motor vehicles, but excluding body and fender work or major repair of automobiles, motorcycles, light and heavy trucks or other vehicles.

5.     Vehicle/Equipment Repair. Repair of automobiles, trucks, motorcycles, mobile homes, recreational vehicles, or boats, including the sale, installation, and servicing of related equipment and parts. This classification includes auto repair shops, body and fender shops, transmission shops, wheel and brake shops, and tire sales and installation, but excludes vehicle dismantling or salvage and tire retreading or recapping.

Limited. Light repair and sale of goods and services for vehicles, including brakes, muffler, tire shops, oil and lube, and accessory uses, but excluding body and fender shops, upholstery, painting, and rebuilding or reconditioning of vehicles.

6.     Vehicle/Equipment Sales and Rentals. Sale or rental of automobiles, motorcycles, trucks, tractors, construction or agricultural equipment, manufactured homes, boats, and similar equipment, including storage and incidental maintenance.

7.     Offices for Vehicle Retail Sales/Wholesale. This classification includes businesses with the primary building use of office for vehicle retail sales and wholesale businesses which may display the maximum number of vehicles at any given time as required by the California Department of Motor Vehicles.

8.     Vehicle Storage, Impound Yards. The business of storing or safekeeping of operative and inoperative vehicles that have been towed, for periods of time greater than a 24-hour period, but not including vehicle repair or dismantling.

9.     Vehicle Storage, Off-Site Auto Sales. The business of storing or safekeeping new or used automobiles, intended for off-site sale, for periods of time greater than a 24-hour period, but not including vehicle repair or dismantling. This classification only includes storage for vehicle sales businesses located within the City of Huntington Beach.

10.   Vehicle Storage, Recreational Vehicles. The business of storing or safekeeping of operative and inoperative boats, trailers, campers, or other recreational vehicles for periods of time greater than a 24-hour period, but not including vehicle repair or dismantling.

HH.  Visitor Accommodations.

1.     Bed and Breakfast Inns. Establishments offering lodging on a less than weekly basis in a converted single-family or multi-family dwelling or a building of residential design, with incidental eating and drinking service for lodgers only provided from a single kitchen.

2.     Hotels and Motels. Establishments offering lodging on a weekly or less than weekly basis. Motels may have kitchens in no more than 25% of guest units, and “suite” hotels may have kitchens in all units. This classification includes eating, drinking, and banquet service associated with the facility.

3.     Condominium-Hotel. Facility providing overnight visitor accommodations where ownership of at least some of the individual guestrooms (units) within the larger building or complex is in the form of separate condominium ownership interests, as defined in California Civil Code Section 1351(f). The primary function of the Condominium-Hotel is to provide overnight transient visitor accommodations within every unit that is available to the general public on a daily basis year-round, while providing both general public availability and limited owner occupancy of those units that are in the form of separate condominium ownership interests.

4.     Fractional Ownership Hotel. Facility providing overnight visitor accommodations where at least some of the guestrooms (units) within the facility are owned separately by multiple owners on a fractional time basis. A fractional time basis means that an owner receives exclusive right to use of the individual unit for a certain quantity of days per year and each unit available for fractional ownership will have multiple owners.

II.     Warehouse and Sales Outlets. Businesses which store large inventories of goods in industrial-style buildings where these goods are not produced on the site but are offered to the public for sale.

JJ.    Quasi Residential.

1.     Residential Hotels. Buildings with six or more guest rooms without kitchen facilities in individual rooms, or kitchen facilities for the exclusive use of guests, and which are intended for occupancy on a weekly or monthly basis.

2.     Single Room Occupancy. Buildings designed as a residential hotel consisting of a cluster of guest units providing sleeping and living facilities in which sanitary facilities and cooking facilities are provided within each unit; tenancies are weekly or monthly.

3.     Timeshare. Any arrangement, plan, or similar program, other than an exchange program, whereby a purchaser receives ownership rights in or the right to use accommodations for a period of time less than a full year during any given year, on a recurring basis for more than one year, but not necessarily for consecutive years. (3334-6/97, 3378-2/98, 3568-9/02, 3669-12/04, 3757-1/07, 3774-10/07, 3788-12/07, 3842-11/09, 4175-3/19, 4183-10/19, 4195-3/20)

 

204.12 Industrial Use Classifications
A.    Industry, Custom. Establishments primarily engaged in on-site production of goods by hand manufacturing involving the use of hand tools and small-scale equipment.

Small-Scale. Includes mechanical equipment not exceeding two horsepower or a single kiln not exceeding eight kilowatts and the incidental direct sale to consumers of only those goods produced on-site. Typical uses include ceramic studios, candle-making shops, and custom jewelry manufacture.

B.     Industry, General. Manufacturing of products, primarily from extracted or raw materials, or bulk storage and handling of such products and materials. Uses in this classification typically involve a high incidence of truck or rail traffic, and/or outdoor storage of products, materials, equipment, or bulk fuel. This classification includes chemical manufacture or processing, food processing and packaging, laundry and dry cleaning plants, auto dismantling within an enclosed building, stonework and concrete products manufacture (excluding concrete ready-mix plants), small animal production and processing within an enclosed building, and power generation.

C.     Industry, Limited. Manufacturing of finished parts or products, primarily from previously prepared materials; and provision of industrial services, both within an enclosed building. This classification includes processing, fabrication, assembly, treatment, and packaging, but excludes basic industrial processing from raw materials and Vehicle/Equipment Services, but does allow food processing for human consumption.

D.    Industry, Research and Development. Establishments primarily engaged in the research, development, and controlled production of high-technology electronic, industrial or scientific products or commodities for sale, but prohibits uses that may be objectionable in the opinion of the director, by reason of production of offensive odor, dust, noise, vibration, or in the opinion of the Fire Chief by reason of storage of hazardous materials. Uses include aerospace and biotechnology firms, and non-toxic computer component manufacturers.

1.     This classification also includes assembly, testing and repair of components, devices, equipment, systems, parts and components such as but not limited to the following: coils, tubes, semi-conductors; communication, navigation, guidance and control equipment; data processing equipment; filing and labeling machinery; glass edging and silvering equipment; graphics and art equipment; metering equipment; optical devices and equipment; photographic equipment; radar, infrared and ultraviolet equipment; radio and television equipment.

 

2.     This classification also includes the manufacture of components, devices, equipment, parts and systems which includes assembly, fabricating, plating and processing, testing and repair, such as but not limited to the following: machine and metal fabricating shops, model and spray painting shops, environmental test, including vibration analysis, cryogenics, and related functions, plating and processing shops, nuclear and radioisotope.

3.     This classification also includes research and development laboratories including biochemical and chemical development facilities for national welfare on land, sea, or air; and facilities for film and photography, metallurgy; pharmaceutical, and medical and x-ray research.

E.     Wholesaling, Distribution and Storage. Storage and distribution facilities without sales to the public on-site or direct public access except for recycling facilities and public storage in a small individual space exclusively and directly accessible to a specific tenant. This classification includes mini-warehouses.

F.     Alcoholic Beverage Manufacturing. The manufacture or production of beer, wine, cider, or distilled spirits by any person licensed by the Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control of the State of California and includes the sale or distribution of said products both inside and outside the jurisdiction of the City.

G.    RT Flex Space. Any combination of manufacturing, research and development, testing, distribution, warehouse and storage space, including retail and/or showroom (max 10% gross floor area), eating and drinking (max 10% gross floor area), and offices (max. 30% gross floor area) are permitted by right when complying with a minimum 1 parking space per 500 gross square feet parking requirement. (3334-6/97, 4175-3/19, 4183-10/19)

 

204.14 Accessory Use Classifications
Accessory Uses and Structures. Uses and structures that are incidental to the principal permitted or conditionally permitted use or structure on a site and are customarily found on the same site. This classification includes detached or attached garages, home occupations, caretakers’ units, and dormitory type housing for industrial commercial workers employed on the site, and accessory dwelling units. (3334-6/97)

 

204.16 Temporary Use Classifications
A.    Animal Shows. Exhibitions of domestic or large animals for a maximum of seven days.

B.     Festivals, Circuses and Carnivals. Provision of games, eating and drinking facilities, live entertainment, animal exhibitions, or similar activities in a tent or other temporary structure for a maximum of seven days. This classification excludes events conducted in a permanent entertainment facility.

C.     Commercial Filming, Limited. Commercial motion picture or video photography at a specific location six or fewer days per quarter of a calendar year. (See also Chapter 5.54, Commercial Photography.)

D.    Personal Property Sales. Sales of personal property by a resident (“garage sales”) for a period not to exceed 48 consecutive hours and no more than once every six months.

E.     Real Estate Sales. An office for the marketing, sales, or rental of residential, commercial, or industrial development. This classification includes “model homes.”

F.     Retail Sales, Outdoor. Retail sales of new merchandise on the site of a legally established retail business for a period not to exceed 96 consecutive hours (four days) no more than once every three months.

G.    Seasonal Sales. Retail sales of seasonal products, including Christmas trees, Halloween pumpkins and strawberries.

H.    Street Fairs. Provision of games, eating and drinking facilities, live entertainment, or similar activities not requiring the use of roofed structures.

I.      Trade Fairs. Display and sale of goods or equipment related to a specific trade or industry for a maximum period of five days per year.

J.      Temporary Event. Those temporary activities located within the coastal zone that do not qualify for an exemption pursuant to Section 245.08.

K.    Tent Event. Allows for the overflow of any assembly for a period not to exceed 72 consecutive hours and not more than once every three months. (3334-6/97, 3521-2/02, 3669-12/04, 3724-2/06, 4175-3/19, 4183-10/19)

 

204.18 Prohibited Uses—Medical Marijuana Businesses
A.    Purpose. In order to expressly inform the public that any distribution of marijuana by Medical Marijuana Businesses, Collectives, Cooperatives or Dispensaries, etc., is prohibited in the City of Huntington Beach, the City is adding this express prohibition to the Zoning and Subdivision Ordinance.

B.     Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following term is defined:

1.     Medical marijuana business, collective, cooperative or dispensary means any location, structure, facility, vehicle, business, store, co-op, residence, or similar facility used, in full or in part, as a place at or in which marijuana is sold, traded, exchanged, bartered for in any way, made available, located, stored, displayed, placed or cultivated, including any of the foregoing if used in connection with the distribution of marijuana.

C.     Medical Marijuana Businesses, Collectives, Cooperatives or Dispensaries. A Medical Marijuana Business, Collective, Cooperative or Dispensary or any other such business, no matter how so named, is not a permitted use in any zoning district or specific plan in the City. It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to own, manage, establish, conduct or operate a Medical Marijuana Business, Collective, Cooperative or Dispensary. Also, it shall be unlawful for any person to permit to be established, conducted, operated, owned or managed as a landlord, owner, employee, contractor, agent or volunteer, or in any other manner or capacity, any Medical Marijuana Business, Collective, Cooperative or Dispensary in the City.

D.    Public Nuisance. Any use or condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this article is hereby declared a public nuisance and may be abated by the City.

E.     Enforcement.

1.     Violation of this Chapter 204 of the Huntington Beach Zoning and Subdivision Ordinance is a public nuisance and may be enforced pursuant to the provisions of the Municipal Code including the Zoning and Subdivision Ordinance.

2.     Nothing in this article in any way limits any other remedies that may be available to the City, or any penalty that may be imposed by the City, for violations of this article. Such additional remedies include, but are not limited to, injunctive relief or administrative citations. (4059-5/15, 4058-6/15, 4137-10/17, 4175-3/19, 4183-10/19)

 

204.20 Prohibited Uses—Commercial Non-Medical Marijuana Businesses and Deliveries
A.    Purpose. In order to expressly inform the public that any sale or distribution of non-medical marijuana by Commercial Non-Medical Marijuana Businesses, Collectives, Cooperatives or Dispensaries, etc., however named is prohibited in the City of Huntington Beach, the City is adding this express prohibition to the Zoning and Subdivision Ordinance.

B.     Definitions. Unless otherwise specifically defined herein, the definitions contained within Adult Use of Marijuana Act shall apply to this Ordinance.

1.     Commercial non-medical marijuana business, collective, cooperative or dispensary means any location, structure, facility, vehicle, business, store, co-op, residence, or similar facility used, in full or in part, as a place at or in which marijuana (including marijuana for recreational use) is sold, traded, exchanged, bartered for in any way, made available, located, stored, displayed, placed or cultivated, including any of the foregoing if used in connection with the sale or distribution of non-medical marijuana.

2.     Non-medical marijuana delivery means the commercial transfer of non-medical marijuana or non-medical marijuana products to a person, including any technology that enables persons to arrange for or facilitate the commercial transfer of non-medical marijuana or non-medical marijuana products.

3.     Non-medical marijuana products means non-medical marijuana that has undergone a process whereby the plant material has been transformed into a concentrate, including, but not limited to, concentrated cannabis, or an edible or topical product containing marijuana or concentrated cannabis and other ingredients.

 

C.     Commercial Non-Medical Marijuana Businesses, Collectives, Cooperatives or Dispensaries. A Commercial Non-Medical Marijuana Business, Collective, Cooperative or Dispensary or any other such business, no matter how so named, is not a permitted use in any zoning district or specific plan in the City. It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to own, manage, establish, conduct or operate a Commercial Non-Medical Marijuana Business, Collective, Cooperative or Dispensary. Also, it shall be unlawful for any person to permit to be established, conducted, operated, owned or managed as a landlord, owner, employee, contractor, agent or volunteer, or in any other manner or capacity, any Commercial Non-Medical Marijuana Business, Collective, Cooperative or Dispensary in the City.

D.    Non-Medical Marijuana Deliveries. Delivery of non-medical marijuana is not a permitted use in any zoning district or specific plan in the City. No permit or any other applicable license or entitlement for use, nor any business license, shall be approved or issued for the establishment, maintenance or operation of non-medical marijuana deliveries.

E.     Public Nuisance. Any use or condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this section is hereby declared a public nuisance and may be abated by the City.

F.     Enforcement.

1.     Violation of this Chapter 204 of the Huntington Beach Zoning and Subdivision Ordinance is a public nuisance and may be enforced pursuant to the provisions of the Municipal Code including the Zoning and Subdivision Ordinance.

2.     Nothing in this section in any way limits any other remedies that may be available to the City, or any penalty that may be imposed by the City, for violations of this section. Such additional remedies include, but are not limited to, injunctive relief or administrative citations. (4137-10/17, 4175-3/19, 4183-10/19)

 

204.22 Non-Medical Marijuana Cultivation
A.    Purpose. The purpose and intent of this section is to regulate the cultivation of non-medical marijuana in a manner that protects the health, safety and welfare of the community. Health and Safety Code Section 11362.2 authorizes the City to adopt reasonable regulations regarding the cultivation of non-medical marijuana inside a private residence or accessory structure to a private residence. That section also authorizes the City to completely prohibit the cultivation of non-medical marijuana outside, as long as the California Attorney General has not made a determination that the non-medical use of marijuana is lawful in California under federal law. The Attorney General has not made such a determination.

This section is not intended to interfere with the right of an individual 21 years of age or older to possess or cultivate non-medical marijuana, as provided for by Proposition 64. This section is not intended to give any person independent legal authority to grow non-medical marijuana; it is intended simply to impose reasonable regulations on the cultivation of non-medical marijuana when cultivation is authorized by California law.

Furthermore, it is the purpose and intent of this section to require that non-medical marijuana allowed to be cultivated pursuant to Proposition 64 only be done so in appropriately secured, enclosed, and ventilated structures, so as not to be visible to the general public; to provide for the health, safety and welfare of the public; to prevent odor created by non-medical marijuana plants from impacting adjacent properties; and to ensure that marijuana grown in the City remains secured.

B.     Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates otherwise. If a word is not defined in this section, and not otherwise defined in state law, the common and ordinary meaning of the word shall apply.

1.     Cultivation means the planting, growing, harvesting, drying or processing of marijuana plants or any part thereof.

2.     Fully enclosed and secure structure means a space within a building that complies with the applicable Building Code and Zoning and Subdivision Ordinance, and has a complete roof enclosure supported by connecting walls extending from the ground to the roof, a foundation slab or equivalent base to which the floor is secured by bolts or similar attachments, is secure against unauthorized entry, and is accessible only through one or more lockable doors. Walls and roof must be constructed of solid materials that cannot be easily broken through, and must be constructed with non-transparent material.

3.     Indoors means inside a fully enclosed and secure structure or within a residential structure.

4.     Non-medical marijuana means marijuana that is intended to be used for non-medical purposes pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 111362.1 et seq.

5.     Non-medical marijuana cultivation means the planting, growing, harvesting, drying or processing of non-medical marijuana plants or any part thereof pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 11362.1 et seq., as those sections may be amended from time to time.

6.     Outdoors means any location within the City that is not within a fully enclosed and secure structure.

7.     Person means any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, association, joint stock company, corporation, limited liability corporation, collective, cooperative, or combination thereof in whatever form or character.

8.     Private residence means a house, an apartment unit, a mobile home or other similar dwelling.

C.     Cultivation of non-medical marijuana. The following regulations shall apply to the cultivation of non-medical marijuana within the City:

1.     Cultivation Not in Compliance With this Section. It is declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance for any person owning, leasing, occupying or having charge or possession of any parcel or premises within any zoning district or specific plan in the City to cultivate non-medical marijuana except as provided for in this Code. No person other than an individual 21 years of age or older may engage in the cultivation of non-medical marijuana.

2.     Outdoor Cultivation. It is unlawful and a public nuisance for any person owning, leasing, occupying, or having possession of any legal parcel or premises within any zoning district or specific plan in the City to cause or allow such parcel or premises to be used for the outdoor cultivation of non-medical marijuana.

3.     Indoor Cultivation. Indoor cultivation of non-medical marijuana is prohibited in all zoning districts and specific plans of the City, except for residential zones, mixed use zones, or in commercial zones, when such cultivation occurs on a parcel or premises with an approved private residence. All cultivation must be in compliance with this section and state law.

4.     Indoor Cultivation in Private Residence. The indoor cultivation of non-medical marijuana in a residential zone, mixed use zone, or in a commercial zone on a parcel or premises with an approved private residence, shall only be conducted within a fully enclosed and secure structure or within a residential structure. Such cultivation shall be in conformance with the following minimum standards:

a.     The primary use of the property shall be for a residence. Non-medical marijuana cultivation is prohibited as a home occupation.

b.     All areas used for cultivation of non-medical marijuana shall comply with the Huntington Beach Municipal Code including the Zoning and Subdivision Ordinance, as well as applicable law.

c.     Indoor grow lights shall not exceed 1,200 watts per light, and shall comply with the California Building, Electrical and Fire Codes as adopted by the City. Lights shall be located away from combustible materials and a minimum of 30 inches from fire sprinklers.

d.     The use of gas products (CO2, butane, propane, natural gas, etc.) or generators for cultivation of non-medical marijuana is prohibited.

e.     Any fully enclosed and secure structure or residential structure used for the cultivation of non-medical marijuana must have a ventilation and filtration system installed that shall prevent marijuana plant odors from exiting the interior of the structure and that shall comply with the Huntington Beach Municipal Code, including the Zoning and Subdivision Ordinance.

f.      A fully enclosed and secure structure used for the cultivation of non-medical marijuana shall be located in the rear yard area of the parcel or premises, and must maintain a minimum 10-foot setback from any property line as well as any other applicable development standards of the zoning district. The yard where the fully enclosed and secure structure is maintained must be enclosed by a solid fence at least six feet in height. This provision shall not apply to cultivation occurring in a garage.

g.     Adequate mechanical locking or electronic security systems must be installed as part of the fully enclosed and secure structure or the residential structure prior to the commencement of cultivation.

h.     Non-medical marijuana cultivation shall be limited to six marijuana plants per private residence, regardless of whether the marijuana is cultivated inside the residence or a fully enclosed and secure structure. The limit of six plants per private residence shall apply regardless of how many individuals reside at the private residence.

i.      The residential structure shall remain at all times a residence, with legal and functioning cooking, sleeping and sanitation facilities with proper ingress and egress. These rooms shall not be used for non-medical marijuana cultivation where such cultivation will prevent their primary use for cooking of meals, sleeping and bathing.

j.      Cultivation of non-medical marijuana shall only take place on impervious surfaces.

k.     From a public right-of-way, there shall be no exterior evidence of non-medical marijuana cultivation occurring on the parcel.

l.      Non-medical marijuana cultivation area, whether in a fully enclosed and secure structure or inside a residential structure, shall not be accessible to persons under 21 years of age.

m.    Written consent of the property owner to cultivate non-medical marijuana within the residential structure shall be obtained and shall be kept on the premises, and available for inspection by the Chief of Police or his/her designee.

n.     A 2A:10B:C portable fire extinguisher that complies with the regulations and standards adopted by the state fire marshal and applicable law, shall be kept in the fully enclosed and secure structure used for cultivation of non-medical marijuana. If cultivation occurs in a residential structure, the portable fire extinguisher shall be kept in the same room where the cultivation occurs.

D.    Public Nuisance. Any use or condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this section is hereby declared a public nuisance and may be abated by the City.

E.     Enforcement.

1.     Violation of this Chapter 204 of the Huntington Beach Zoning and Subdivision Ordinance is a public nuisance and may be enforced pursuant to the provisions of the Municipal Code including the Zoning and Subdivision Ordinance.

2.     Nothing in this section in any way limits any other remedies that may be available to the City, or any penalty that may be imposed by the City, for violations of this section. Such additional remedies include, but are not limited to, injunctive relief or administrative citations. (4137-10/17, 4175-3/19, 4183-10/19)

Title 21 ZONING CODE—BASE DISTRICTS
Chapter 210 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
210.02 Residential Districts Established
The purpose of the residential districts is to implement the General Plan and Local Coastal Program Land Use Plan residential land use designations. Five residential zoning districts are established by this chapter as follows:

A.    The RL Low Density Residential District provides opportunities for single-family residential land use in neighborhoods, subject to appropriate standards. Cluster development is allowed. Maximum density is seven units per acre.

B.     The RM Medium Density Residential District provides opportunities for housing of a more intense nature than single-family detached dwelling units, including duplexes, triplexes, town houses, apartments, multi-dwelling structures, or cluster housing with landscaped open space for residents’ use. Single-family homes, such as patio homes, may also be suitable. Maximum density is 15 units per acre.

C.     The RMH Medium High Density Residential District provides opportunities for a more intensive form of development than is permitted under the medium density designation while setting an upper limit on density that is lower than the most intense and concentrated development permitted in the City. One subdistrict has been identified with unique characteristics where separate development standards shall apply: RMH-A Small Lot. Maximum density is 25 units per acre.

D.    The RH High Density Residential District provides opportunities for the most intensive form of residential development allowed in the City, including apartments in garden type complexes and high rise where scenic and view potential exists, subject to appropriate standards and locational requirements. Maximum density is 35 units per acre.

E.     The RMP Residential Manufactured Home Park District provides sites for mobile home or manufactured home parks, including parks with rental spaces and parks where spaces are individually owned. Maximum density is nine spaces per acre. (3334-6/97, 4215-8/20)

 

210.04 RL, RM, RMH, RH, and RMP Districts—Land Use Controls
In the following schedules, letter designations are used as follows:

“P” designates use classifications permitted in residential districts.

“L” designates use classifications subject to certain limitations prescribed by the “Additional Provisions” that follow.

“PC” designates use classifications permitted on approval of a conditional use permit by the Planning Commission.

“ZA” designates use classifications permitted on approval of a conditional use permit by the Zoning Administrator.

“TU” designates use classifications allowed upon approval of a temporary use permit by the Zoning Administrator.

“P/U” designates that accessory uses are permitted, however, accessory uses are subject to approval of a conditional use permit if the primary use requires a conditional use permit.

Use classifications that are not listed are prohibited. Letters in parentheses in the “Additional Provisions” column refer to provisions following the schedule or located elsewhere in the zoning ordinance. Where letters in parentheses are opposite a use classification heading, referenced provisions shall apply to all use classifications under the heading.

RL, RM, RMH, RH, and RMP Districts: Land Use Controls

 

       P = Permitted

       L = Limited (see Additional Provisions)

       PC = Conditional use permit approved by Planning Commission

       ZA = Conditional use permit approved by Zoning Administrator

       TU = Temporary use permit

       P/U = Requires conditional use permit on site of conditional use

        - = Not Permitted

 

 

 

RL

RM

RMH, RH

RMP

Additional Provisions

Residential Uses

 

 

 

 

(A)(M)(Q)

Day Care, Ltd.

P

P

P

P

 

Group Homes Incl. Sober Living Homes

L-8

L-8

L-8

L-8

 

Group Residential

-

-

PC

-

 

Multifamily Residential

 

 

 

 

(B)(C)(D)(R)

2 - 4 units

ZA

P

P

-

 

5 - 9 units

ZA

ZA

ZA

-

 

10 or more units

PC

PC

PC

-

 

Manufactured Home Parks

ZA

ZA

-

ZA

(E)(F)

Referral Facility

-

L-9

L-9

L-9

L-9

Residential Care Facility

P/PC

P/PC

P/PC

P/PC

(T)

Single-Family Residential

P

P

P

P

(B)(D)(F)(P)(R)(S)

Supportive Housing

L-7

L-7

L-7

L-7

 

Transitional Housing

L-7

L-7

L-7

L-7

 

Public and Semipublic

 

 

 

 

(A)(O)

Clubs & Lodges

PC

PC

ZA

ZA

 

Day Care, Large-family

L-6

L-6

L-6

L-6

 

Day Care, General

L-1

ZA

ZA

ZA

 

Park & Recreation Facilities

L-2

L-2

L-2

L-2

 

Public Safety Facilities

PC

PC

PC

PC

 

Religious Assembly

L-3

PC

PC

PC

 

Residential Care, General

-

PC

PC

PC

 

Schools, Public or Private

PC

PC

PC

PC

 

Utilities, Major

PC

PC

PC

PC

 

Utilities, Minor

P

P

P

P

 

Commercial

 

 

 

 

 

Communication Facilities

L-5

L-5

L-5

L-5

 

Horticulture

ZA

ZA

ZA

ZA

 

Nurseries

ZA

ZA

ZA

ZA

 

Visitor Accommodations

 

 

 

 

 

Bed and Breakfast Inns

-

-

L-4

-

 

Accessory Uses

P/U

P/U

P/U

P/U

(A)(G)(H)(I)(L)(M)

Temporary Uses

 

 

 

 

(J)(M)

Commercial Filming, Limited

P

P

P

P

 

Real Estate Sales

P

P

P

P

(N)

Personal Property Sales

P

P

P

P

 

Street Fairs

TU

TU

TU

TU

 

Nonconforming Uses

 

 

 

 

(K)(L)

 

RL, RM, RMH, RH, and RMP Districts: Additional Provisions

L-1   A conditional use permit from the Planning Commission is required and only allowed on lots 1.0 acre (gross acreage) or greater fronting an arterial in RL District.

L-2   Public facilities permitted, but a conditional use permit from the Zoning Administrator is required for private noncommercial facilities, including swim clubs and tennis clubs.

L-3   A conditional use permit from the Planning Commission is required, and only schools operating in conjunction with religious services are permitted as an accessory use. A general day care facility may be allowed as a secondary use, subject to a conditional use permit, if the Planning Commission finds that it would be compatible with adjacent areas and not cause significant traffic impacts.

L-4   A conditional use permit from the Zoning Administrator is required and only allowed on lots 10,000 square feet or greater in RMH-A subdistrict. See also Section 230.42, Bed and Breakfast Inns.

L-5   Only wireless communication facilities permitted subject to Section 230.96, wireless communication facilities.

L-6   Neighborhood notification is required pursuant to Section 241.24. No architectural plans shall be required.

L-7   Supportive housing and transitional housing shall be considered a residential use of property and shall be subject only to those restrictions and processing requirements that apply to other residential dwellings of the same type in the same zone.

L-8   Group Homes and Sober Living Homes.

A.    A group home or sober living home with six or fewer residents in the RL, RM, RMH, RH, RMP, a Specific Plan Residential, or a Specific Plan Mixed Use zone shall require a Special Use Permit from the Community Development Director, and:

1.     As measured from the property line to property line, a sober living home shall be at least 1,000 feet from any other property that contains a group home, sober living home, or State-licensed residential care facility. Refer to the procedures and location requirements of Section 230.28.

B.     A group home or sober living home with seven or more residents is not permitted in the RL zone. In the RM, RMH, RH, RMP, Specific Plan Residential, or Specific Plan Mixed Use zone, a group home or sober living home with seven or more residents shall require a Conditional Use Permit from the Planning Commission, and:

1.     As measured from the property line to property line, the group home or sober living home shall be at least 1,000 feet from any other property that contains a group home, sober living home, or State-licensed residential care facility;

2.     An application for an operator’s permit that complies with Chapter 5.110 of the Huntington Beach Municipal Code (HBMC) shall be required for and may be granted to permit the operation of a group home or sober living home.

C.     An applicant may seek relief from the strict application of this section by submitting a reasonable accommodation application to the Community Development Director setting forth specific reasons as to why accommodation over and above this section is necessary under State and Federal laws, pursuant to Chapter 17.77 of the Huntington Beach Municipal Code.

L-9   A referral facility is any individual residential care facility, group home, or sober living home where one or more person’s residency in the facility is pursuant to a court order or directive from an agency in the criminal justice system. The following standards are applicable to referral facilities:

A.    Referral facilities are not permitted in the Residential Low Density (RL) zone, and no referral facility may be located within 500 feet of property that is zoned either Residential Low Density (RL) or Specific Plan Residential Low Density areas, or within 500 feet of a school, park, place of worship, or licensed day care facility.

B.     A referral facility must have a manager on-site, 24 hours every day to ensure the orderly operation of the facility and its compliance with all applicable laws, regulations, and conditions.

C.     No referral facility shall admit a resident who has been convicted of any crime involving physical force against a person, illegal possession of a weapon, possession or use of a weapon in the commission of a crime, or a felony involving a controlled substance.

(A)   Any addition or modification subsequent to the original construction that would result in an increase in the amount of building area, or a structural or architectural alteration to the building exterior, shall require an amendment to the previously approved conditional use permit, if any, or approval of a new conditional use permit.

(B)   A conditional use permit from the Planning Commission is required for residential uses requesting reduction in standards for senior citizens (See Section 210.08), for affordable housing (See Sections 210.10 and 230.14), or for density bonus (See Section 230.14).

(C)   A conditional use permit from the Zoning Administrator is required for any multiple family residential development that:

(1)    Abuts an arterial highway;

(2)    Includes a dwelling unit more than 150 feet from a public street; or

(3)    Includes buildings exceeding 25 feet in height.

(D)   See Section 210.12, Planned Unit Development Supplemental Standards. In addition, a conditional use permit is required for condominium conversion pursuant to Chapter 235.

 

(E)   See Section 210.14, RMP District Supplemental Standards. In addition, Neighborhood Notification pursuant to Chapter 241 is required for the addition of manufactured home space(s) to an existing manufactured home park.

(F)    See Section 230.16, Manufactured Homes.

(G)   See Section 230.12, Home Occupation in R Districts.

(H)   See Section 230.08, Accessory Structures.

(I)    See Section 230.10, Accessory Dwelling Units.

(J)    See Section 241.20, Temporary Use Permits.

(K)   See Chapter 236, Nonconforming Uses and Structures.

(L)   See Chapter 233, Signs.

(M)  Tents, trailers, vehicles, or temporary structures shall not be used for dwelling purposes.

(N)   See Section 230.18, Subdivision Sales Offices and Model Homes.

(O)   Limited to facilities on sites of fewer than two acres.

(P)    See Section 230.22, Residential Infill Lot Developments.

(Q)   See Section 230.20, Payment of Parkland Dedication In-Lieu Fee.

(R)   Small Lot Development Standards for RM, RMH, and RH Districts. A conditional use permit from the Planning Commission is required for small lot residential subdivisions, including condominium maps for detached single-family dwellings. See also Section 230.24, Small Lot Development Standards.

(S)    See Coastal Element Land Use Plan, Table C-2, for permitted uses, development requirements and restrictions applicable to development within Subarea 4K as depicted in Figures C-6a and C-10 of the Coastal Element Land Use Plan. Subdivision design and development within Subarea 4K shall incorporate the information from the plans and studies required in Table C-2 for development of that subarea. If there is a conflict between the requirements and restrictions of Table C-2 and other provisions of the Zoning and Subdivision Ordinance, the requirements and restrictions included in Table C-2 shall prevail.

(T)   Unlicensed residential care facilities are not permitted in any R district.

(1)    State licensed residential care facilities serving six or fewer persons are permitted in the in the RL, RM, RMH, RH, RMP, a Specific Plan Residential, or a Specific Plan Mixed Use zones.

(2)    State licensed residential care facilities serving seven or more persons in the RL (See Provision L-1), RM, RMH, RH, RMP, a Specific Plan Residential, or a Specific Plan Mixed Use zone are subject to a CUP by the Planning Commission pursuant to the requirements of Section 230.28. (3334-6/97, 3410-3/99, 3455-5/00, 3568-9/02, 3706-6/05, 3724-2/06, 3761-2/07, 3832-7/09, 3858-2/10, 4215-8/20)

 

210.06 RL, RM, RMH, RH, and RMP Districts—Property Development Standards
A.    The following schedule prescribes development standards for residential zoning districts and subdistricts designated on the zoning map. The columns establish basic requirements for permitted and conditional uses; letters in parentheses in the “Additional Provisions” column refer to “Additional Development Standards” following the schedule.

 

B.     In calculating the number of units permitted on the site, density is calculated on the basis of net site area. Fractional numbers shall be rounded down to the nearest whole number except that one dwelling unit may be allowed on a legally created lot complying with minimum lot area. All required setbacks shall be measured from ultimate right-of-way and in accordance with the definitions set forth in Chapter 203, Definitions.

C.     Any new parcel created pursuant to Title 25, Subdivisions, shall comply with the minimum building site requirements of the district in which the parcel is located unless approved as a part of a planned unit development.

Property Development Standards for Residential Districts

 

 

RL

RM

RMH-A Subdistrict

RMH

RH

RMP

Additional Provisions

Min. Building Site

6,000

6,000

2,500

6,000

6,000

10 ac.

(A)(B)(C)

Width (ft.)

60

60

25

60

60

N/A

 

Cul-de-sac frontage

45

45

-

45

45

N/A

 

Min. Setbacks

 

 

 

 

 

 

(D)(R)

Front (ft.)

15

15

12

10

10

10

(E)(F)

Side (ft.)

3; 5

3; 5

3; 5

3; 5

3; 5

-

(G)(I)(J)

Street Side (ft.)

6; 10

6; 10

5

6; 10

6; 10

10

(H)

Rear (ft.)

10

10

7.5

10

10

-

(I)(J)

Accessory Structure

 

 

 

 

 

 

(U)

Garage

 

 

 

 

 

 

(K)

Projections into Setbacks

 

 

 

 

 

 

(L)(R)

Max. Height (ft.)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Dwellings

35

35

35

35

35

20

(M)

Accessory Structures

15

15

15

15

15

15

(M)(R)

Max. Floor Area Ratio (FAR)

-

-

1.0

-

-

-

 

Min. Lot Area per Dwelling Unit (sq. ft.)

6,000

2,904

*

1,742

1,244

-

 

Max. Lot Coverage (%)

50

50

50

50

50

75

(V)

Min. Floor Area

 

 

 

 

 

 

(N)

Min. Usable Open Space

 

 

 

 

 

 

(O)

Courts

 

 

 

 

 

 

(P)

Accessibility within Dwellings

 

 

 

 

 

 

(Q)

Waterfront Lots

 

 

 

 

 

 

(R)

Landscaping

See Ch. 232

 

 

 

 

(S)

Fences and Walls

See Section 230.88

 

 

 

 

 

Lighting

 

 

 

 

 

(T)

Residential Privacy Design Standards

 

 

 

 

 

(W)

Relocating Structures

See HBMC Ch. 17.28

 

 

 

 

(X)

Underground Utilities

See Ch. 17.64

 

 

 

 

 

Screening of Mechanical Equipment

See Section 230.76

 

 

 

 

 

Refuse Storage Areas

See Section 230.78

 

 

 

 

 

Antenna

See Section 230.80

 

 

 

 

 

Performance Standards

See Section 230.82

 

 

 

 

 

Off-Street Parking and Loading

See Ch. 231 & Section 210.12

 

 

 

 

Signs

See Ch. 233

 

 

 

 

 

Nonconforming Structures

See Ch. 236

 

 

 

 

 

Accessory Structures

See Section 230.08

 

 

 

 

 

*       Lots 50 feet or less in width = 1 unit per 25 feet of frontage

         Lots greater than 50 feet in width = 1 unit per 1,900 square feet

         N/A = Not applicable

 

RL, RM, RMH, RH, and RMP Districts: Additional Development Standards

(A)   See Section 230.62, Building Site Required and Section 230.64, Development on Substandard Lots.

(B)   See Section 230.66, Development on Lots Divided by District Boundaries.

(C)   The minimum lot area shall be 12,000 square feet for general day care, general residential care, and public or private schools, except minimum lot area for general day care in the RL district shall be one gross acre.

(D)   Building Separation. The minimum spacing between buildings including manufactured home units shall be 10 feet.

(E)   Variable Front Setback for Multifamily Projects. Projects with more than four units in the RM District, more than eight units in the RMH District, or more than 14 units in the RH District shall provide a minimum setback of 15 feet from any public right-of-way. Minimum 50% of the garages shall be set back 20 feet from the front property line. (See Section 210.12B.)

(F)    Upper-Story Setbacks for Multifamily Structures. The covered portion of all stories above the second story in any multi-family structure shall be set back an average of 10 feet from the second floor front facade (see Exhibit).

 



Upper Story Setback

 

(G)   Interior Side Setback.

(1)    In the RL, RM, RMH, including RMH-A subdistrict, and RH Districts, interior side setbacks shall be minimum 10% of lot width, but not less than three feet and need not exceed five feet, except as stated below.

(2)    For projects in the RM, RMH, including RMH-A subdistrict, and RH Districts adjoining an RL District, interior side setbacks shall be at least:

(a)    10 feet for units in single-story or two-story buildings.

(b)    14 feet for units above two stories.

Subject to approval of a conditional use permit, the Zoning Administrator or the Planning Commission, may approve upper-story setbacks in lieu of an increased side setback if the second and third stories are set back the required distance.

(H)   Street Side Setbacks.

(1)    In the RL, RM, RMH (excluding RMH-A subdistrict), and RH districts, the street side yard shall be 20% of the lot width, minimum six feet and need not exceed 10 feet.

(2)    In the RMH-A subdistrict, street side setback shall be minimum five feet.

(3)    For projects with 10 or more multi-family units (including RMH-A subdistrict), the street side setback shall be the same as the front setback.

(I)    Building Walls Exceeding 25 Feet in Height. The required interior side or rear setback adjoining a building wall exceeding 25 feet in height, excluding any portion of a roof, and located on a lot 45 feet wide or greater, shall be increased three feet over the basic requirement.

(J)    Zero Side or Rear Setback.

(1)    A zero interior side setback may be permitted provided that the opposite side setback on the same lot is minimum 20% of the lot width, not less than five feet, and need not exceed 10 feet, and shall be subject to the requirements listed in paragraph (3) of this subsection.

(2)    A zero rear setback may be permitted provided that the opposite rear setback for the adjacent lot is either zero or a minimum of 10 feet, and subject to the requirements listed in paragraph (3) of this section.

(3)    A zero side or rear setback may be permitted subject to the following requirements:

(a)    The lot adjacent to the zero side or rear setback shall either be held under the same ownership at the time of application or a deed restriction or agreement approved as to form by the City Attorney shall be recorded giving written consent of the adjacent property owner.

(b)    A maintenance easement, approved as to form by the City Attorney, shall be recorded between the property owner and the owner of the adjacent lot to which access is required in order to maintain and repair a zero lot line structure. Such easement shall be an irrevocable covenant running with the land. No building permits shall be issued until such recorded maintenance easement has been submitted.

(c)    Separation between the proposed structure and any structure on an adjacent lot shall either be zero or a minimum of five feet.

(d)    No portion of the dwelling or any architectural features shall project over the property line.

(e)    The zero setback shall not be adjacent to a public or private right-of-way.

(f)    Exposure protection between structures shall be provided as specified by the Fire Department and Building Division.

(4)    Double zero side setbacks may be permitted for planned unit development projects subject to approval of a conditional use permit and compliance with Section 210.12(B).

(K)   Garage Setbacks.

(1)    Setbacks for the main dwelling shall apply, except as specifically stated below:

(a)    Front entry garage: 20 feet.

(b)    Side entry garage: 10 feet.

(c)    Garage with alley access: 5 feet.

(2)    For garages with rear vehicular access from an alley and located on a lot 27 feet wide or less, the side setback adjacent to a street or another alley may be reduced to three feet.

(3)    A minimum 25-foot turning radius is required from the garage to the opposite side of the street, alley, drive aisle or driveway.

 



 

(L)   Projections into Setbacks.

(1)    See Section 230.68, Building Projections into Yards.

(2)    Balconies and bay windows may project into required setbacks and usable open space areas subject to Section 230.68, provided that balconies have open railings, glass, or architectural details with openings to reduce visible bulk. Balconies composed solely of solid enclosures are not allowed to project into required setbacks.

(M)  Height Requirements. See Section 230.70, Measurement of Height, and Section 230.72, Exceptions to Height Limits.

(1)    Single-family dwellings in all residential districts, except lots in the RMH-A subdistrict with less than 50 feet of frontage shall comply with the following standards:

(a)    Second story top plate height shall not exceed 25 feet measured from the top of the subfloor/slab directly below.

(b)    Roofs shall have a minimum 5/12 pitch if building height exceeds 30 feet.

(c)    Maximum building height for main dwellings shall be 35 feet; however, main dwellings exceeding 30 feet in height shall require approval of a conditional use permit by the Zoning Administrator.

(d)    Habitable area, which includes rooftop decks and balconies, above the second story top plate line shall require approval of a conditional use permit by the Zoning Administrator. Habitable area above the second story plate line shall be within the confines of the roof volume, with the following exceptions:

1.     Dormers, decks and other architectural features may be permitted as vertical projections above the roof volume provided the projections are set back five feet from the building exterior and do not exceed the height limits as stated above.

2.     Windows and deck areas above the second story plate line shall orient toward public rights-of-way only.



(e)    Access to any habitable area above the second story top plate line shall be provided within the main dwelling and shall be consistent with internal circulation. Exterior stairways between the ground floor and a habitable area above the second story plate line shall be prohibited.

Two vertical cross-sections through the property (front-to-back and side-to-side) that show the relationship of each level in a new structure and new levels added to an existing structure to both existing and finished grade on the property and adjacent land within five feet of the property line shall be submitted in order to determine compliance with this subsection.

(2)    Single-family dwellings in the RMH-A subdistrict on lots with less than 50 feet of frontage shall comply with the following standards:

(a)    Second story top plate height shall not exceed 25 feet measured from the top of the subfloor/slab directly below.

(b)    Roofs shall have a minimum 5/12 pitch if building height exceeds 30 feet.

(c)    In the front and rear 25 feet of the lot, maximum building height for all structures, including railings and architectural features, shall be 25 feet. Otherwise, maximum building height shall be 35 feet.



Maximum Building Height for Single-Family Dwellings

on Lots Less Than 50 Feet Wide in RMH-A Subdistrict

 

(d)    Access to any habitable area above the second story top plate line shall be provided within the main dwelling and shall be consistent with internal circulation. Exterior stairways between the ground floor and a habitable area above the second story plate line shall be prohibited.

Two vertical cross-sections through the property (front-to-back and side-to-side) that show the relationship of each level in a new structure and new levels added to an existing structure to both existing and finished grade on the property and adjacent land within 5 feet of the property line shall be submitted in order to determine compliance with this subsection.

(3)    Accessory Structures. See Section 230.08, Accessory Structures. Accessory structures located on projecting decks abutting a waterway shall comply with the height established in subsection (R).

(4)    Recreation Buildings. The maximum height of a recreation building for multi-family, planned residential, and mobile home park projects shall be established by the conditional use permit.

(N)   Minimum Floor Area. Each dwelling unit in a multifamily building and attached single-family dwellings shall have the following minimum floor area.

 

 

Unit Type

Minimum Area (Sq. Ft.)

Studio

500

One bedroom

650

Two bedrooms

900

Three bedrooms

1,100

Four bedrooms

1,300

 

All detached single-family dwellings shall have a minimum 1,000 square feet of floor area not including the garage and shall be a minimum of 17 feet in width.

(O)   Open Space Requirements.

(1)    The minimum open space area (private and common) for multi-family residential projects in RM, RMH, including RMH-A subdistrict, and RH Districts shall be 25% of the residential floor area per unit (excluding garages).

(2)    Private Open Space.

(a)    Private open space shall be provided in courts or balconies within which a horizontal rectangle has no dimension less than 10 feet for courts and six feet for balconies. A minimum patio area of 70 square feet shall be provided within the court.

(b)    The following minimum area shall be provided:

 

 

Unit Type

Minimum Area (Sq. Ft.)

Ground Floor Units

Units Above

Ground Floor

Studio/1 bedroom

200

60

2 bedrooms

250

120

3 bedrooms

300

120

4 or more bedrooms

400

120

 

(c)    Private open space shall be contiguous to the unit and for the exclusive use of the occupants. Private open space shall not be accessible to any dwelling unit except the unit it serves and shall be physically separated from common areas by a wall or hedge exceeding 42 inches in height.

(d)    A maximum of 50% of the private open space requirement, may be on open decks above the second story subject to approval of a conditional use permit by the Zoning Administrator, provided that no portion of such deck exceeds the height limit.

(e)    Patio and balcony enclosures within existing planned developments or apartment complexes shall be subject to the following conditions:

1.     A maximum of one enclosure per unit shall be allowed.

2.     The existing balcony or patio area shall not be enlarged.

3.     The balcony or patio enclosure shall comply with the current setback and height requirements for the district in which the site is located.

4.     The enclosure shall consist entirely of transparent materials, i.e., no solid walls or opaque walls, except an existing solid roof may be part of the enclosure.

5.     No structural change shall occur to the interface wall and doorway between the enclosure and the adjacent inside room of the building, unless the balcony/patio is replaced with equivalent unenclosed area for use as private open space.

6.     The enclosed area shall be considered as private open space and may be counted toward current private open space requirements.

7.     Required egress for fire escape routes shall be maintained.

(3)    Common Open Space.

(a)    Common open space, provided by interior side yards, patios, and terraces, shall be designed so that a horizontal rectangle has no dimension less than 10 feet, shall be open to the sky, and shall not include driveways, parking areas, or area required for front or street side yards.

(b)    Projects with more than 20 units shall include at least one amenity, such as a clubhouse, swimming pool, tennis court, volleyball court, outdoor cooking facility, or other recreation facility.

(4)    The director may allow a reduction in the open space requirement to 10% of the livable area per unit for projects with less than 10 units and located within walking distance of 1,000 feet of a public park or beach.

(P)    Courts Opposite Windows in RM, RMH, and RH Districts (Excluding the RMH-A Sub-District). Courts shall be provided in all multi-family projects in the RM, RMH, and RH Districts subject to the following requirements:

(1)    Courts Opposite Walls on the Same Site. The minimum depth of a court shall be one-half the height of the opposite wall but not less than 20 feet opposite a living room and 14 feet opposite a required window for any other habitable room (see diagrams that follow).

(2)    Courts Opposite Interior Property Line. The minimum distance between a required window of a habitable room and a property line shall be 10 feet.

(3)    Court Dimensions. Courts shall be minimum 20 feet wide (minimum 10 feet on either side of the centerline of the required window) and shall be open to the sky. Eaves may project a maximum two feet into a court.

 



Courts Opposite Windows

 

(Q)   All habitable rooms in a dwelling unit must be accessible from within the dwelling.

(R)   Waterfront Lots. Projecting decks, windscreens, fencing, patio covers and solariums on waterfront lots may be permitted subject to the development standards set forth in this chapter, Chapter 245, Chapter 17.24, and the following requirements:

(1)    Projecting Decks. Decks on waterfront lots may project five feet beyond the bulkhead provided the decks comply with the side setbacks required for the main dwelling.

(2)    Windscreens. Windscreens may be permitted if constructed of light-weight materials such as plastic, canvas, fiberglass, tempered glass or metal, except for necessary bracing and framing. The maximum height for windscreens shall be seven feet above the finished surface of the deck at the bulkhead line.

(3)    Fencing. All portions of fencing within the required rear setback area shall comply with Section 230.88 and the visibility provisions below.

(4)    Solariums. Solariums (patio enclosures) may project a maximum of 30 inches over the bulkhead. In all cases, the solarium shall maintain a 45 degree visibility angle as measured from the main dwelling building line extended to the side property line. The maximum height shall not exceed the top of the first floor ceiling joist.

(5)    Patio Covers. Patio covers (including eaves) may be permitted to project five feet into the rear yard setback; however, construction materials shall allow compliance with visibility provisions below.

(6)    Visibility. The portion of any windscreen, fence or patio cover in the rear yard setback or solarium above 36 inches in height shall be composed of materials and design which allow a minimum of 85% transmission of light and visibility through the structure in each direction when viewed from any angle.

(7)    Removal. Decks, solariums and windscreens projecting over waterways which do not comply with the above provisions may be removed by the City upon 30 days’ written notice. Such projections are declared to be a privilege which can be revoked for noncompliance and not a vested right.



Waterfront Lot Projections

 

(S)    Landscaping.

(1)    A minimum 40% of the front yard shall be landscaped. For single-family residences in the RMH-A subdistrict, a minimum three-foot wide landscape planter along the front property line (excluding maximum five-foot-wide walkway) may be provided in lieu of the 40% requirement. A maximum 18-inch high planter wall may be constructed along the front property line.

(2)    All required trees specified in Chapter 232 shall be provided.

(3)    All subdivisions shall provide a minimum five-foot-wide landscaped area along arterial street/highway property lines. The actual required width shall be determined during the planning process. Maintenance of said landscaped area shall be by a homeowners association, property owner or other method approved by the City of Huntington Beach.

(T)   Lighting. A lighting system shall be provided in all multi-family projects along all vehicular accessways and major walkways. Lighting shall be directed onto the driveways and walkways within the development and away from adjacent properties. A lighting plan shall be submitted for approval by the director.

(U)   See Section 230.08, Accessory Structures.

(V)   Solid patio covers open on at least two sides may be permitted an additional five percent site coverage. Open lattice patio covers are exempted from site coverage standards.

(W)  Properties subject to residential privacy design standards shall:

(1)    Off-set bedroom and bathroom windows above the first floor from bedroom and bathroom windows above the first floor on existing adjacent single-family residences.

(2)    Orient upper story balconies toward the subject home’s front or rear yard areas, a public street, or permanent open space. The yard area or direction faced by the longest side of the balcony shall determine the orientation. A minimum 20-foot separation between the exterior face of the balcony or deck and the existing adjacent structure may be provided if orientation requirements cannot be met.

(X)   No person, firm or corporation shall move any building, structure, or portion of a building or structure into the City or relocate within the City, or cause the same to be done without first obtaining a separate relocation permit for each building or structure. See HBMC Chapter 17.28 – Moving Buildings. (3268-12/94, 3334-6/97, 3410-3/99, 3706-6/05, 3885-8/10, 4183-3/20, 4193-3/20)

 

210.08 Development Standards for Senior Projects
This section establishes development standards for senior residential projects that may be permitted by the Planning Commission.

A.    Minimum Floor Area. Each dwelling unit shall have a minimum floor area of 450 square feet.

B.     Minimum Setbacks. The project shall comply with the minimum setback requirements of the district applicable to the site.

C.     Minimum Distance between Buildings. Minimum building separation shall be 10 feet.

D.    Building Design. No structure shall exceed 180 feet in length. To provide variation in building facades, two of the following architectural elements are required as part of each building: sloped roofs; bay windows; awnings; roof eaves; cornices; balconies; or patios.

E.     Open Space Requirements.

1.     Private Open Space. A minimum of 60 square feet of private open space for studios or one bedroom units and 120 square feet for two or more bedrooms, with minimum dimensions of six feet.

2.     Common Open Space. A minimum of 2,500 square feet for the first 50 units, and an additional 50 square feet for each unit over 50.

3.     Community Club House. An enclosed community or clubhouse facility containing minimum seven square feet per unit, and a total area of minimum 400 square feet, may satisfy up to 50% of the common open space requirement. The clubhouse shall include handicapped bathrooms and kitchen facilities to be used by project residents and their guests only.

F.     Elevators. Buildings with more than two levels, including living areas or parking, shall have elevators.

G.    Parking. Parking shall comply with Chapter 231. Any parking space over and above the one space per unit shall be marked for guest use. (3334-6/97, 3410-3/99)

 

210.10 Modifications for Affordable Housing
The Planning Commission may approve a conditional use permit modifying the minimum property development standards in this chapter for affordable housing, as provided in Section 230.14. The proposed modifications shall be requested in writing by the applicant, accompanied by a detailed pro-forma, rental guidelines, deed restrictions, financial subsidies, and other types of documentation which will serve to demonstrate the need for a reduction of development standards. Modifications to the standards may include, but are not limited to, the parking requirements and open space. The specific standard(s) from which the applicant is requesting relief shall be identified and alternative development standard(s) proposed. (3334-6/97, 3410-3/99)

 

210.12 Planned Unit Development Supplemental Standards and Provisions
This section establishes supplemental development standards and provisions that shall apply to all planned unit developments.

A planned unit development shall provide a mutual benefit for the residents of the project as well as the general public. Examples of public benefits that may be provided in a planned unit development include, but are not limited to the creation of permanent open space, usable and appropriately located recreation facilities, the conservation of natural elements, land features and energy, and other public improvements. (3885-8/10)

A.    Maps. A tentative and final or parcel map shall be approved pursuant to Title 25, Subdivisions.

B.     Project Design.

1.     Driveway parking for a minimum of 50% of the units shall be provided when units are attached side by side.

2.     A maximum of six units may be attached side by side and an offset on the front of the building a minimum of four feet for every two units shall be provided.

3.     A minimum of one-third of the roof area within a multi-story, multi-unit building shall be one story less in height than the remaining portion of the structure’s roof area.

4.     The number of required parking spaces for each dwelling unit shall be provided in accordance with Chapter 231. In addition, one or more of the following alternative parking configurations may be permitted in a planned unit development if it is determined that such configuration and location thereof will be accessible and useful in connection with the proposed dwelling units of the development:

a.     Required enclosed spaces may be provided in a tandem configuration provided that the minimum parking space dimensions comply with Section 231.14.

b.     Required open spaces may be provided with a combination of off-street and on-street spaces as long as the total number of required parking spaces is provided with the development site.

C.     Common Areas. Every owner of a lot or dwelling unit shall own as an appurtenance to such unit or lot either an undivided interest in the common areas and facilities or a share in the corporation, community association, or limited partnership owning the common areas and facilities.

D.    Covenants. The developer shall submit a covenant setting forth a plan or manner of permanent care and maintenance of all common areas and communal facilities. Such covenant shall be included in the Covenant, Conditions, and Restrictions (CC&Rs) applying to the property and shall be approved by the City Attorney and director. The CC&Rs shall be approved prior to final or parcel map approval and when approved, shall be recorded in the office of the Orange County Recorder.

E.     Maintenance. The corporation, community association, or limited partnership shall have the responsibility of maintaining the common areas and facilities as shown on the final development plans, the buildings and use of property for planned unit development.

F.     Sale of Lots. No dwelling unit or lot shall be sold or encumbered separately from an interest in the common areas and facilities in the development which shall be appurtenant to such dwelling unit or lot. No lot shall be sold or transferred in ownership from the other lots in the total development or approved phase of the development unless all approved community buildings, structures and recreational facilities for the total development, or approved phase thereof, have been completed, or completion is assured, by bonding or other method satisfactory to the City.

G.    Management Agreement. No lot or dwelling unit in the development shall be sold unless a corporation, community association, or limited partnership has been formed with the right to assess all those properties which are jointly owned with interests in the common areas and facilities in the development to meet the expenses of such entity, and with authority to control, and the duty to maintain, all of said mutually available features of the development. Said entity shall operate under recorded CC&Rs which shall include compulsory membership of all owners of lots and/or dwelling units, and flexibility of assessments to meet changing costs of maintenance, repairs and services. The developer shall submit evidence of compliance with this requirement to and receive approval of the City prior to making any such sale. This condition shall not apply to land dedicated to the City for public purposes. (3334-6/97, 3885-8/10)

 

210.14 RMP District Supplemental Development Standards
This section establishes supplemental standards for the development of manufactured home parks.

A.    Individual space setbacks for manufactured homes and accessory structures shall be landscaped and are as follows:

1.     Front: Minimum five feet.

2.     Side: Ten feet aggregate; minimum three feet on any side.

3.     Rear: Minimum five feet.

B.     Each space shall be provided with a minimum 150 cubic feet of enclosed, usable storage space.

C.     The undercarriage of all manufactured homes shall be screened from view on all sides.

D.    A six-foot-high concrete or masonry wall shall be provided along all interior property lines of the manufactured home park. In addition, a 20-foot-wide landscaped berm or a 10-foot-wide landscaped area and a six-foot-high wall shall be located at the minimum front setback line.

E.     A boat or trailer storage area shall be provided and screened from view by a 6-foot-high fence or wall.

F.     Maximum site coverage for each individual manufactured home space shall be 75%.

G.    Projects in the RMP district shall provide a minimum common open space area of 200 square feet per manufactured home space. (3334-6/97, 3410-3/99)

 

210.16 Review of Plans
All applications for new construction and exterior alterations and additions shall be submitted to the Community Development Department for review. Discretionary review shall be required as follows:

A.    Zoning Administrator Review. Projects requiring a conditional use permit from the Zoning Administrator; projects on substandard lots; see Chapter 241.

B.     Design Review Board. See Chapter 244.

C.     Planning Commission. Projects requiring a conditional use permit from the Planning Commission; see Chapter 241.

D.    Projects in the Coastal Zone. A Coastal Development Permit is required unless the project is exempt; see Chapter 245. (3334-6/97, 3410-3/99, 3867-4/10, 4090-10/16)

 

Chapter 211 C COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
211.02 Commercial Districts Established
The purpose of the commercial districts is to implement the General Plan and Local Coastal Program commercial land use designations. Three commercial zoning districts are established by this chapter as follows:

A.    The CO Office Commercial District provides sites for offices for administrative, financial, professional, medical and business needs.

B.     The CG General Commercial District provides opportunities for the full range of retail and service businesses deemed suitable for location in Huntington Beach.

C.     The CV Visitor Commercial District implements the Visitor Serving Commercial land use designation within the coastal zone and provides uses of specific benefit to coastal visitors. More specifically, the CV district provides opportunities for visitor-oriented commercial activities, including specialty and beach related retail shops, restaurants, hotels, motels, theaters, museums, and related services. (3334-6/97, 3774-10/07, 4038-12/14, 4174-3/19)

 

211.04 CO, CG, and CV Districts—Land Use Controls
In the following schedules, letter designations are used as follows:

“P” designates use classifications permitted in commercial districts.

“L” designates use classifications subject to certain limitations prescribed by the “Additional Provisions” that follow.

“PC” designates use classifications permitted on approval of a conditional use permit by the Planning Commission.

“ZA” designates use classifications permitted on approval of a conditional use permit by the Zoning Administrator.

“TU” designates use classifications allowed upon approval of a temporary use permit.

“P/U” for an accessory use means that the use is permitted on the site of a permitted use, but requires a conditional use permit on the site of a conditional use.

Use classifications that are not listed are prohibited. Letters in parentheses in the “Additional Provisions” column refer to provisions following the schedule or located elsewhere in the Zoning Ordinance. Where letters in parentheses are opposite a use classification heading, referenced provisions shall apply to all use classifications under the heading.

 

CO, CG, and CV Districts: Land Use Controls

 

       P = Permitted

       L = Limited (see Additional Provisions)

       PC = Conditional use permit approved by Planning Commission

       ZA = Conditional use permit approved by Zoning Administrator

       TU = Temporary use permit

       P/U = Requires conditional use permit on site of conditional use

        - = Not Permitted

 

 

 

CO

CG

CV

Additional Provisions

Residential

 

 

 

(J)(Q)(R)(V)

Group Residential

PC

PC

PC

 

Multifamily Residential

-

-

PC

 

 

 

 

 

 

Public and Semipublic

 

 

 

(J)(Q)(R)(V)

Clubs and Lodges

P

P

-

 

Community and Human Services

 

 

 

 

Drug Abuse Centers

-

PC

-

 

Primary Health Care

L-11

L-11

-

 

Emergency Kitchens

-

L-2

-

 

Emergency Shelters

-

L-2

-

 

Residential Alcohol Recovery, General

-

PC

-

 

Residential Care, General

ZA

ZA

-

 

Convalescent Facilities

ZA

ZA

-

 

Cultural Institutions

L-14

L-14

L-14

 

Day Care, General

L-3

L-3

-

 

Day Care, Large-Family

P

P

-

(Y)

Emergency Health Care

L-2

L-2

-

 

Government Offices

P

P

ZA

 

Heliports

PC

PC

PC

(B)

Hospitals

PC

PC

-

 

Park & Recreation Facilities

L-9

L-9

L-9

 

Public Safety Facilities

ZA

ZA

ZA

 

Religious Assembly

ZA

ZA

PC

 

Schools, Public or Private

PC

PC

-

 

Utilities, Major

PC

PC

PC

 

Utilities, Minor

P

P

P

(L)

 

 

 

 

 

Commercial Uses

 

 

 

(J)(Q)(R)

Ambulance Services

-

ZA

-

 

Animal Sales & Services

 

L-16

 

 

Animal Boarding

-

ZA

-

 

Animal Grooming

-

P

-

 

Animal Hospitals

-

ZA

-

 

Animals—Retail Sales

-

P

-

 

Equestrian Centers (CG Zone)

-

PC

-

(S)

Pet Cemetery

-

PC

-

 

Artists’ Studios

P

P

P

 

Banks and Savings & Loans

P

P

P

 

With Drive-Up Service

P

P

P

 

Building Materials and Services

-

P

-

 

Catering Services

P

P

P

 

Commercial Filming

P

P

P

(F)

Commercial Recreation and Entertainment

-

PC

PC

(D)

Communication Facilities

L-13

L-13

L-13

 

Eating and Drinking Establishments

P

P

P

 

W/Alcohol

ZA

ZA

ZA

(N)

W/Drive Through

-

P

P

 

W/Live Entertainment

ZA

ZA

ZA

(W)(Y)

W/Dancing

PC

PC

PC

(H)

W/Outdoor Dining

ZA

ZA

ZA

(X)

Food & Beverage Sales

-

P

L-12

 

W/Alcoholic Beverage Sales

-

ZA

ZA

(N)

Funeral & Interment Services

-

ZA

-

 

Laboratories

L-1

L-1

-

 

Maintenance & Repair Services

-

P

-

 

Marine Sales and Services

-

P

P

 

Nurseries

-

ZA

-

 

Offices, Business & Professional

P

P

P

 

Offices, Medical & Dental

P

P

P

 

Pawn Shops

-

ZA

-

 

Personal Enrichment Services

L-10

L-10

-

 

Personal Services

P

P

P

 

Research & Development Services

L-1

ZA

-

 

Retail Sales

-

P

P

(U)(V)

Secondhand Appliances/Clothing

-

P

-

 

Swap Meets, Indoor/Flea Markets

-

PC

-

(T)

Swap Meets, Recurring

-

ZA

-

 

Tattoo Establishments

-

ZA

-

 

Travel Services

P

P

P

 

Vehicle Equipment/Sales & Services

 

 

 

 

Automobile Rentals

-

L-8

L-8

L-12

Automobile Washing

-

ZA

-

 

Commercial Parking

-

ZA

ZA

(P)

Service Stations

-

PC

PC

(E)

Vehicle Equip. Repair

-

L-5

-

 

Vehicle Equip. Sales & Rentals

ZA

ZA

-

L-12

Vehicle Storage, Impound Yards

-

PC

-

(AA)

Vehicle Storage, Off-Site Auto Dealers

-

P/ZA

-

L-17 (BB)

Vehicle Storage, Recreational Vehicles

-

ZA

-

(CC)

Offices for Vehicle Equip. Sales & Rentals

L-15

L-15

-

 

Visitor Accommodations

 

 

 

 

Bed & Breakfast Inns

ZA

ZA

ZA

(K)

Hotels, Motels

-

PC

PC

(I)

Condominium-Hotel

-

-

PC

(Z)

Fractional Ownership Hotel

 

 

 

 

Quasi Residential

 

 

 

 

Timeshares

-

PC

-

(I)(J)

Residential Hotel

-

PC

-

(J)

Single Room Occupancy

-

PC

-

 

 

 

 

 

 

Industrial

 

 

 

(J)(Q)(R)(V)

Industry, Custom

-

L-6

L-6

 

 

 

 

 

 

Accessory Uses

 

 

 

(J)(V)

Accessory Uses & Structures

P/U

P/U

P/U

 

 

 

 

 

 

Temporary Uses

 

 

 

(F)(J)(V)

Animal Shows

-

TU

-

 

Circus and Carnivals and Festivals

-

TU

-

 

Commercial Filming, Limited

-

P

P

(M)

Real Estate Sales

P

P

P

 

Retail Sales, Outdoor

-

TU

TU

(M)

Seasonal Sales

TU

TU

TU

(M)

Tent Event

-

P

-

 

Trade Fairs

-

P

-

 

 

 

 

 

 

Nonconforming Uses

 

 

 

(G)(J)(V)

 

CO, CG, and CV Districts: Additional Provisions

L-1   Permitted if the space is 5,000 square feet or less; allowed with Neighborhood Notification pursuant to Chapter 241 if the laboratory space exceeds 5,000 square feet.

L-2   Allowed with a conditional use permit from the Zoning Administrator if the space is 5,000 square feet or less; allowed with a conditional use permit from the Planning Commission if the space exceeds 5,000 square feet. (See Section 230.52, Emergency Shelters.)

L-3   Allowed with a conditional use permit from the Zoning Administrator if the space is 2,500 square feet or less; allowed with a conditional use permit from the Planning Commission if the space exceeds 2,500 square feet.

L-4   Reserved.

L-5   Only limited facilities are allowed subject to approval of a conditional use permit from the Zoning Administrator, and body and fender shops are permitted only as part of a comprehensive automobile-service complex operated by a new vehicle dealer.

L-6   Only “small-scale” facilities, as described in use classifications, are permitted with a maximum seven persons employed full time in processing or treating retail products, limited to those sold on the premises.

L-7   Repealed.

L-8   On-site storage limited to two rental cars or two cars for lease.

L-9   Public facilities permitted, but a conditional use permit from the Zoning Administrator is required for commercial facilities.

L-10 Permitted if the space is 5,000 square feet or less; allowed with Administrative Permit approval if space exceeds 5,000 square feet.

In addition, personal enrichment uses within a retail building parked at a ratio of one space per 200 square feet, shall require no additional parking provided the use complies with the following:

•       Maximum number of persons per classroom does not exceed the number of parking spaces allocated to the suite based upon the square footage of the building; and

•       The instruction area does not exceed 75% of total floor area of the personal enrichment building area.

L-11 Permitted if the space is 5,000 square feet or less; allowed with a conditional use permit from the Zoning Administrator if the space exceeds 5,000 square feet.

L-12 Permitted for existing facilities proposing to expand up to 20% of existing floor area or display area.

L-13 For wireless communication facilities see Section 230.96, Wireless Communication Facilities. All other communication facilities permitted.

L-14 Allowed with Neighborhood Notification pursuant to Chapter 241 if space is 5,000 square feet or less; allowed with a conditional use permit from the Planning Commission if the space exceeds 5,000 square feet.

L-15 Includes businesses with the primary building use of office for vehicle retail sales and wholesale businesses which may display the maximum number of vehicles at any given time as required by the California Department of Motor Vehicles.

L-16 No person shall keep or maintain upon premises owned or controlled by him or her in the City, any kennel within 200 feet of any residential use. Refer to HBMC Section 7.12.150 - Kennels.

L-17 Permitted pursuant to an Administrative Permit if the property is 300 feet or more from a parcel used or zoned for residential development. Permitted pursuant to a conditional use permit from the Zoning Administrator if less than 300 feet from a parcel used or zoned for residential development.

(A)   Reserved.

(B)   See Section 230.40, Helicopter Takeoff and Landing Areas.

(C)   Repealed.

(D)   See Section 230.38, Game Centers; Chapter 5.28, Dance Halls; Chapter 9.24, Card Rooms; Chapter 9.32, Poolrooms and Billiards; and Chapter 9.28, Pinball Machines.

(E)   See Section 230.32, Service Stations.

(F)    See Section 241.20, Temporary Use Permits.

(G)   See Chapter 236, Nonconforming Uses and Structures.

(H)   For teen dancing facilities, bicycle racks or a special bicycle parking area shall be provided. These may not obstruct either the public sidewalk or the building entry. See also Chapter 5.28, Dancing Halls; Chapter 5.44, Restaurants - Amusement and Entertainment Premises; and Chapter 5.70, Adult Entertainment Businesses.

(I)    Only permitted on a major arterial street, and a passive or active outdoor recreational amenity shall be provided.

(J)    In the CV District the entire ground floor area and at least one-third of the total floor area shall be devoted to visitor-oriented uses as described in the certified Local Coastal Program Land Use Plan. Any use other than visitor serving commercial shall be located above the ground level, and a conditional use permit from the Planning Commission or the Zoning Administrator is required. Any use other than visitor serving commercial uses shall only be permitted if visitor serving uses are either provided prior to the other use or assured by deed restriction as part of the development. No office or residential uses shall be permitted in any visitor serving designation seaward of Pacific Coast Highway.

(K)   See Section 230.42, Bed and Breakfast Inns.

(L)   Collection containers are permitted in all commercial districts; recycling facilities as an accessory use to a permitted use shall be permitted upon approval by the director with Neighborhood Notification pursuant to Chapter 241. See Section 230.44, Recycling Operations.

(M)  Subject to approval by the Police Department, Public Works Department, Fire Department and the director. See also Section 230.86, Seasonal Sales.

(N)   The following businesses proposing to sell alcoholic beverages for on-site or off-site consumption are exempt from the conditional use permit process:

(1)    Retail markets with no more than 10% of the floor area devoted to sales, display, and storage of alcoholic beverages provided the sale of alcoholic beverages is not in conjunction with the sale of gasoline or other motor vehicle fuel.

(2)    Restaurants, bars, and liquor stores located 300 feet or more from any R or PS district, public or private school, church, or public use.

(3)    Florist shops offering the sale of a bottle of an alcoholic beverage together with a floral arrangement.

(O)   See Section 230.46, Single Room Occupancy.

(P)    See Chapter 231 for temporary and seasonal parking.

(Q)   Development of vacant land or additions of 10,000 square feet or more in floor area; or additions equal to or greater than 50% of the existing building’s floor area; or additions to buildings on sites located within 300 feet of a residential zone or use for a permitted use requires approval of a conditional use permit from the Zoning Administrator. The Community Development Director may refer any proposed addition to the Zoning Administrator if the proposed addition has the potential to impact residents or tenants in the vicinity (e.g., increased noise, traffic).

(R)   Projects within 500 feet of a PS District; see Chapter 244.

(S)    See Section 230.48, Equestrian Centers.

(T)   See Section 230.50, Indoor Swap Meets/Flea Markets.

(U)   See Section 230.94, Carts and Kiosks.

(V)   In the coastal zone, the preferred retail sales uses are those identified in the visitor serving commercial land use designation which provide opportunities for visitor-oriented commercial activities including specialty and beach related retail shops, restaurants, hotels, motels, theaters, museums, and related services.

(W)  Non-amplified live entertainment greater than 300 feet from a residential zone or use shall be permitted without a conditional use permit.

(X)   Outdoor dining with alcohol sales shall be permitted with a conditional use permit from the Zoning Administrator. Outdoor dining without alcohol sales that is 400 square feet or less shall be permitted without a conditional use permit. If over 400 square feet with no alcohol sales, Neighborhood Notification shall be required pursuant to Chapter 241.

(Y)   Neighborhood Notification requirements pursuant to Chapter 241.

(Z)   In the CV District, condominium-hotels and/or fractional interest hotels are allowed only at the Pacific City (Downtown Specific Plan District 7) and Waterfront (Downtown Specific Plan District 9) sites. Refer to Downtown Specific Plan.

(AA) Storage areas shall be screened from view on all sides by a solid wall made of either block, masonry, wood, vinyl or other similar material. The wall shall not be less than six feet in height and set back a minimum 10 feet from abutting streets with the entire setback area permanently landscaped and maintained.

(BB) Storage areas shall be screened from view on all sides adjacent to a public right-of-way by a solid wall made of either brick, block, masonry, wood, vinyl or other similar material. The wall shall include a minimum ten foot return on all sides. The wall shall not be less than six feet in height and set back a minimum 10 feet from abutting streets with the entire setback area permanently landscaped and maintained.

(CC) Storage areas shall be screened from view on all sides adjacent to a public right-of-way by a solid wall made of either block, masonry, wood, vinyl or other similar material. The wall shall include a minimum 10-foot return on all sides. The wall shall not be less than six feet in height and set back a minimum 10 feet from abutting streets with the entire setback area permanently landscaped and maintained. Screening on the remaining sides shall be evaluated based on proposed site conditions as determined during the entitlement process. (3248-6/95, 3334-6/97, 3341-10/96, 3378-2/98, 3482-12/00, 3522-2/02, 3553-5/02, 3568-9/02, 3707-6/05, 3774-10/07, 3848-1/10, 3859-2/10, 4038-12/14, 4091-10/16, 4174-3/19, 4199-3/20)

 

211.06 CO, CG, and CV Districts—Development Standards
The following schedule prescribes development standards for the CO, CG and CV districts. The first three columns prescribe basic requirements for permitted and conditional uses in each district. Letters in parentheses in the “Additional Requirements” column refer to standards following the schedule or located elsewhere in the zoning ordinance. In calculating the maximum gross floor area as defined in Chapter 203, the floor area ratio is calculated on the basis of net site area. Fractional numbers shall be rounded down to the nearest whole number. All required setbacks shall be measured from ultimate right-of-way and in accordance with definitions set forth in Chapter 203, Definitions.

 

CO, CG, and CV Districts: Development Standards

 

 

CO

CG

CV

Additional Requirements

Residential Development

 

 

 

(A)(B)

 

 

 

 

 

Nonresidential Development

 

 

 

(B)

Minimum Lot Area (sq. ft.)

10,000

10,000

10,000

(C)

Minimum Lot Width (ft.)

100

100

100

 

Minimum Setbacks

 

 

 

 

Front (ft.)

10

10

0

(D)(E)(O)

Side (ft.)

5

0

0

(F)

Street Side (ft.)

10

10

0

(E)

Rear (ft.)

5

0

0

(F)

Maximum Height of Structures (ft.)

40

50

50

(F)(G)

Maximum Wall Dimensions

 

 

 

(N)

Maximum Floor Area Ratio (FAR)

1.0

1.5

0.5

 

Minimum Site Landscaping (%)

8

8

8

(H)(I)

Building Design Standards

 

 

 

(O)

Fences and Walls

 

 

 

(J)(K)

Off-Street Parking/Loading

 

 

 

(L)

Outdoor Facilities

See § 230.74

(M)

Screening of Mechanical Equipment

See § 230.76

(M)

Refuse Storage Areas

See § 230.78

 

Underground Utilities

See Ch. 17.64

 

Performance Standards

See § 230.82

 

Nonconforming Structures

See Ch. 236

 

Signs

See Ch. 233

 

 

CO, CG, and CV Districts: Additional Development Standards

(A)   Dwelling units shall be subject to the standards for minimum setbacks, height limits, maximum density, open space, balconies and bay windows, and parking for the RMH District. The setback standards shall apply only to the stories of a building that are intended for residential use.

(B)   See Section 230.62, Building Site Required, and Section 230.64, Development on Substandard Lots.

(C)   The minimum site area for a hotel or motel is 20,000 square feet.

(D)   See Section 230.68, Building Projections into Yards and Required Open Space. Double-frontage lots shall provide front yards on each frontage.

(E)   A minimum 50-foot setback is required along Beach Boulevard, Pacific Coast Highway and Edinger Avenue or 25-foot setback with the setback area entirely landscaped.

(F)    Along a side or rear property line abutting an R district, a 10-foot setback is required, and structures within 45 feet of the district boundary shall not exceed 18 feet in height.

(G)   See Section 230.70, Measurement of Height, and Section 230.72, Exceptions to Height Limits.

(H)   Planting Areas.

(1)    Required front and street side yards shall be planting areas except properties with 50-foot setback shall provide a minimum 10-foot-wide planting area along street frontages.

(2)    Required side and rear yards shall be planting areas or shall be enclosed by a solid concrete or masonry wall at least six feet in height.

(3)    Hotels and Motels. A 15-foot-wide landscaped strip shall be provided along all street frontages, except for necessary driveways and walks.

(I)    See Chapter 232, Landscape Improvements.

(J)    See Section 230.88, Fencing and Yards.

(K)   A solid masonry or concrete wall at least six feet in height shall adjoin the site of an existing ground-floor residential use. However, where the portion of the site within 10 feet of the front property line is occupied by planting area or by a building having no openings except openings opposite a street property line, the director may grant an exception to this requirement. A wall within 15 feet of a street property line shall not exceed 3.5 feet in height.

(L)   See Chapter 231, Off-Street Parking and Loading.

(M)  See Section 230.44, Recycling Operations and Section 230.80, Antennae.

(N)   A front or street side wall surface shall be no longer than 100 feet without a break, a recess or offset measuring at least 20 feet in depth and one-quarter of the building length, or a series of offsets, projections or recesses at intervals of not more than 40 feet that vary the depth of the building wall by a minimum of four feet. The director may grant exceptions or allow these standards to be modified for exceptional or unique structures subject to Design Review, Chapter 244.

Maximum Wall Length and Required Break

 



Single Horizontal Offsets: 20 Feet

 



Variable Offsets: 20 Feet and 4 Feet

 

(O)   Two building design standards are established to make commercial areas more attractive and provide a unified streetscape:

(1)    In the CV District a 10-foot minimum upper-story setback is required above the second story along street frontages.



CV District: Upper-Story Setback

 

(2)    In the CO and CV Districts, and on frontages adjacent to major or primary arterials in the CG District at least 40% of a building surface may be located at the minimum setback line if additional landscaping is provided on the site.



Building Face at Setback Line

 

(3707-6/05, 3774-10/07, 4038-12/14, 4174-3/19)

 

211.08 Review of Plans
All applications for new construction, initial establishment of use, exterior alterations and additions shall be submitted to the Community Development Department for review. Discretionary review shall be required as follows:

A.    Zoning Administrator Review. Projects requiring a conditional use permit from the Zoning Administrator; projects on substandard lots; see Chapter 241.

B.     Design Review Board. See Chapter 244.

C.     Planning Commission. Projects requiring a conditional use permit from the Planning Commission; see Chapter 241.

D.    Projects in the Coastal Zone. A Coastal Development Permit is required unless the project is exempt; see Chapter 245. (3522-2/02, 3868-3/10, 3774-10/07, 4038-12/14, 4091-10/16, 4174-3/19)

 

Chapter 212 I INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS
212.02 Industrial Districts Established
Three Industrial zoning districts are established by this chapter as follows:

A.    The IG General Industrial District provides sites for the full range of manufacturing, industrial processing, resource and energy production, general service, and distribution.

B.     The IL Limited Industrial District provides sites for moderate- to low-intensity industrial uses, commercial services and light manufacturing.

C.     The RT Research and Technology District provides sites for manufacturing, research and development, technology, and professional offices in addition to traditional industrial uses.

These three districts will herein be referred to as the “Industrial Districts.” (3254-10/94, 4039-12/14, 4183-10/19)

 

212.04 IG, IL, and RT Districts—Land Use Controls
In the following schedules, letter designations are used as follows:

“P” designates use classifications permitted in the Industrial Districts.

“L” designates use classifications subject to certain limitations prescribed by the “Additional Provisions” which follow.

“PC” designates use classifications permitted on approval of a conditional use permit by the Planning Commission.

“ZA” designates use classifications permitted on approval of a conditional use permit by the Zoning Administrator.

“TU” designates use classifications allowed upon approval of a temporary use permit by the Zoning Administrator.

“P/U” for an accessory use means that the use is permitted on the site of a permitted use, but requires a conditional use permit on the site of a conditional use.

Use classifications that are not listed are prohibited. Letters in parentheses in the “Additional Provisions” column refer to requirements following the schedule or located elsewhere in this zoning code. Where letters in parentheses are opposite a use classification heading, referenced provisions shall apply to all use classifications under the heading.

 

IG, IL, and RT Districts: Land Use Controls

 

         P = Permitted

         L = Limited (see Additional Provisions)

         PC = Conditional use permit approved by Planning Commission

         ZA = Conditional use permit approved by Zoning Administrator

         TU = Temporary use permit

         P/U = Requires conditional use permit on site of conditional use

         - = Not Permitted

 

 

 

IG

IL

RT

Additional Provisions

Residential

 

 

 

 

Group Residential

PC

PC

PC

(I)

 

 

 

 

 

Public and Semipublic

 

 

 

(A)(L)

Community and Human Service Facilities

P

P

P

(K)

Day Care, General

ZA

ZA

ZA

 

Heliports

PC

PC

PC

(N)

Maintenance & Service Facilities

ZA

ZA

ZA

 

Public Safety Facilities

P

P

P

 

Religious Assembly

ZA

ZA

ZA

 

Schools, Public or Private

L-6

L-6

L-6

 

Utilities, Major

PC

PC

PC

 

Utilities, Minor

L-7

L-7

L-7

(O)

 

 

 

 

 

Commercial Uses

 

 

 

(D)(L)

Ambulance Services

ZA

ZA

ZA

 

Animal Sales and Services

 

 

 

 

Animal Boarding

ZA

ZA

ZA

 

Animal Hospitals

ZA

ZA

ZA

 

Artists’ Studios

P

P

P

 

Banks and Savings and Loans

L-1

L-1

L-1

 

Building Materials and Services

P

P

P

 

Catering Services

-

P

P

 

Commercial Filming

ZA

ZA

ZA

 

Commercial Recreation and Entertainment

L-2

L-2

PC

 

Communication Facilities

L-12

L-12

L-12

 

Eating & Drinking Establishments

L-2

L-2

L-2

 

w/Live Entertainment

ZA

ZA

ZA

(R)

w/Alcohol

ZA

ZA

ZA

 

Food & Beverage Sales

ZA

ZA

ZA

 

Hospitals and Medical Clinics

-

PC

PC

 

Laboratories

P

P

P

 

Maintenance & Repair Services

P

P

P

 

Marine Sales and Services

P

P

P

 

Nurseries

P

P

P

 

Offices, Business & Professional

L-10

L-10

L-10

(C)

Personal Enrichment

L-9

L-9

L-9

 

Personal Services

L-1

L-1

L-1

 

Quasi-Residential

PC

PC

PC

(J)

Research & Development Services

P

P

P

 

Sex-Oriented Businesses (regulated by Ch. 5.70)

L-11

L-11

L-11

 

Sex-Oriented Businesses (regulated by Ch. 5.60)

PC

PC

PC

(Q)

Swap Meets, Indoor/Flea Markets

PC

PC

PC

(P)

Vehicle/Equipment Sales & Services

 

 

 

 

Service Stations

L-4

L-4

L-4

 

Vehicle/Equipment Repair

P

P

P

 

Vehicle/Equipment Sales/Rentals

L-5

L-5

L-5

 

Vehicle Storage, Impound Yards

PC

PC

PC

(T)

Vehicle Storage, Off-Site Auto Dealers

P/ZA

P/ZA

P/ZA

(H)(U)(W)

Vehicle Storage, Recreational Vehicles

P/ZA

P/ZA

P/ZA

(H)(V)

Visitor Accommodations

ZA

ZA

ZA

 

Warehouse and Sales Outlets

L-8

L-8

L-8

 

 

 

 

 

 

Industrial (See Chapter 204)

 

 

 

(B)(L)(M)

Industry, Custom

P

P

P

 

Industry, General

P

P

P

 

Industry, Limited

P

P

P

 

Industry, R & D

P

P

P

 

Wholesaling, Distribution & Storage

 

 

 

 

150,000 square feet or less

P

P

P

 

Greater than 150,000 square feet

P

P

ZA

 

RT Flex Space

-

-

P

 

Alcoholic Beverage Manufacturing

P

P

P

(L-13)

 

 

 

 

 

Accessory Uses

 

 

 

 

Accessory Uses and Structures

P/U

P/U

P/U

(C)

 

 

 

 

 

Temporary Uses

 

 

 

 

Commercial Filming, Limited

P

P

P

(S)

Real Estate Sales

P

P

P

 

Trade Fairs

P

P

P

(E)

 

 

 

 

 

Nonconforming Uses

 

 

 

(F)

 

IG, IL, and RT Districts: Additional Provisions

L-1   Only allowed upon approval of a conditional use permit by the Zoning Administrator for a mixed use project, subject to the following requirements:

A.    Minimum site area: three acres.

B.     Maximum commercial space: 35% of the gross floor area and 50% of the ground floor area of buildings fronting on an arterial highway.

C.     Phased development: 25% of the initial phase must be designed for industrial occupancy. For projects over 500,000 square feet, the initial phase must include five percent of the total amount of industrial space or 50,000 square feet of industrial space, whichever is greater.

L-2   Permitted only when designed and operated for principal use by employees of the surrounding industrial development as an ancillary use to a primary industrial use. When designed for general public use, permitted after considering vehicular access and complying with minimum parking requirements.

L-3   Reserved.

L-4   Only fueling stations offering services primarily oriented to businesses located in an Industrial District are allowed with a conditional use permit by the Planning Commission.

L-5   No new or used automobile, truck or motorcycle retail sales are permitted.

L-6   Only schools offering higher education curriculums are allowed with conditional use permit approval by the Planning Commission. No elementary or secondary schools are permitted.

L-7   Recycling operations as an accessory use are permitted if more than 150 feet from R districts; recycling operations as an accessory use less than 150 feet from R districts or recycling operations as a primary use are allowed upon approval of a conditional use permit by the Zoning Administrator. See Section 230.44, Recycling Operations.

L-8   Allowed upon conditional use permit approval by the Planning Commission when a single building with a minimum area of 100,000 square feet is proposed on a site fronting an arterial. The primary tenant shall occupy a minimum 95% of the floor area and the remaining 5% may be occupied by secondary tenants.

L-9   Permitted if the space is 5,000 square feet or less; allowed by conditional use permit from the Zoning Administrator if the space is over 5,000 square feet.

L-10 Accessory administrative, management, regional or headquarters offices incidental to a primary industrial use within the IG and IL Districts are limited to 10% of the floor area of the primary industrial use. Accessory office uses incidental to a primary use within the RT District are limited to 30% of the floor area of the primary use.

Accessory office spaces exceeding the limits above shall require a conditional use permit to the Zoning Administrator supported by a parking demand study for all uses on site.

Medical/dental offices, insurance brokerage offices, and real estate brokerage offices, except for on-site leasing offices, are not permitted in any Industrial District.

L-11 Allowed subject to the following requirements:

A.    A proposed sex-oriented business shall be at least 500 feet from any residential use, school, park and recreational facility, or any building used for religious assembly (collectively referred to as a “sensitive use”) and at least 750 feet from another sex-oriented business. For purposes of these requirements, all distances shall be measured from the lot line of the proposed sex-oriented business to the lot line of the sensitive use or the other sex-oriented business. The term “residential use” means any property zoned RL, RM, RMH, RH, RMP, and any properties with equivalent designations under any specific plan.

To determine such distances the applicant shall submit for review a straight line drawing depicting the distances from the lot line of the parcel of land on which the sex-oriented business is proposed which includes all the proposed parking and:

1.     The lot line of any other sex-oriented business within 750 feet of the lot line of the proposed sex-oriented business; and

2.     The lot line of any building used for religious assembly, school, or park and recreational facility within 500 feet of the lot line of the proposed sex-oriented business; and

3.     The lot line of any parcel of land zoned RL, RM, RMH, RH, and RMP and any parcels of land with equivalent designations under any specific plans within 500 feet of the lot line of the proposed sex-oriented business.

B.     The front façade of the building, including the entrance and signage, shall not be visible from any major, primary or secondary arterial street as designated by the circulation element of the General Plan adopted May 1996, with the exception of Argosy Drive.

C.     Prior to or concurrently with applying for a building permit and/or a certificate of occupancy for the building, the applicant shall submit application for Community Development Department staff review of a sex-oriented business zoning permit with the drawing described in subsection A, a technical site plan, floor plans and building elevations, and application fee. Within 10 days of submittal, the director shall determine if the application is complete. If the application is deemed incomplete, the applicant may resubmit a completed application within 10 days. Within 30 days of receipt of a completed application, the director shall determine if the application complies with the applicable development and performance standards of the Huntington Beach Zoning and Subdivision Ordinance. Said standards include but are not limited to the following:

1.     Chapter 203, Definitions; Chapter 212, Industrial Districts; Chapter 230, Site Standards; Chapter 231, Off-Street Parking and Loading Provisions; Chapter 232, Landscape Improvements; and Chapter 236, Nonconforming Uses and Structures.

2.     Section 233.08(B), Signs. Signage shall conform to the standards of the Huntington Beach Zoning and Subdivision Ordinance except:

a.     Such signs shall contain no suggestive or graphic language, photographs, silhouettes, drawings, statues, monuments, sign shapes or sign projections, or other graphic representations, whether clothed or unclothed, including without limitation representations that depict “specified anatomical areas” or “specified sexual activities”; and

b.     Only the smallest of the signs permitted under Section 233.08(B) shall be visible from any major, primary or secondary arterial street, such streets shall be those designated in the circulation element of the General Plan adopted May 1996, with the exception of Argosy Drive.

3.     Compliance with Huntington Beach Municipal Code Chapter 5.70.

D.    The director shall grant or deny the application for a sex-oriented business zoning permit for a sex-oriented business. There shall be no administrative appeal from the granting or denial of a permit application thereby permitting the applicant to obtain prompt judicial review.

E.     Ten working days prior to submittal of an application for a sex-oriented business zoning permit for staff review, the applicant shall: (1) cause notice of the application to be printed in a newspaper of general circulation; and (2) give mailed notice of the application to property owners within 1,000 feet of the proposed location of the sex-oriented business; and (3) the City of Huntington Beach, Department of Community Development by first class mail.

The notice of application shall include the following:

1.     Name of applicant;

2.     Location of proposed sex-oriented business, including street address (if known) and/or lot and tract number;

3.     Nature of the sex-oriented business, including maximum height and square footage of the proposed development;

4.     The City Hall telephone number for the Department of Community Development to call for viewing plans;

5.     The date by which any comments must be received in writing by the Department of Community Development. This date shall be 10 working days from staff review submittal; and

6.     The address of the Department of Community Development.

F.     A sex-oriented business may not apply for a variance pursuant to Chapter 241 nor a special sign permit pursuant to Chapter 233.

G.    A sex-oriented business zoning permit shall become null and void one year after its date of approval unless:

1.     Construction has commenced or a certificate of occupancy has been issued, whichever comes first; or

2.     The use is established.

H.    The validity of a sex-oriented business zoning permit shall not be affected by changes in ownership or proprietorship provided that the new owner or proprietor promptly notifies the director of the transfer.

I.      A sex-oriented business zoning permit shall lapse if the exercise of rights granted by it is discontinued for 12 consecutive months.

L-12 For wireless communication facilities see Section 230.96, Wireless Communication Facilities. All other communication facilities permitted.

L-13 Alcoholic Beverage Manufacturing Requirements.

1.     Alcoholic Beverage Manufacturing uses without eating and drinking for public sales or service are permitted.

2.     A maximum 1,000 square feet of indoor and/or outdoor eating and drinking area per business shall be permitted through an Administrative Permit with Neighborhood Notification pursuant to Chapter 241.

3.     Indoor and/or outdoor eating and drinking areas greater than 1,000 square feet per business shall require a conditional use permit by the Zoning Administrator.

(A)   Repealed.

(B)   A conditional use permit from the Zoning Administrator is required for any new use or enlargement of an existing use, or exterior alterations and additions for an existing use located within 150 feet of an R district. The director may waive this requirement if there is no substantial change in the character of the use which would affect adjacent residential property in an R District.

(C)   Accessory office uses greater than the maximum allowable percentage of the floor area of the primary industrial use shall require a conditional use permit from the Zoning Administrator and a parking demand study demonstrating the adequate provision of on-site parking for all uses contained onsite.

(D)   In IG and IL Districts only, commercial space excluding business and professional office, not to exceed 25% of the floor area of the primary industrial use, is allowed with a conditional use permit from the Zoning Administrator, provided that it is intended primarily to serve employees of the industrial use, no exterior signs advertise the adjunct use, the adjunct use is physically separated from the primary industrial use, and the primary industrial fronts on an arterial.

(E)   See Section 241.22, Temporary Use Permits.

(F)    See Chapter 236, Nonconforming Uses and Structures.

(G)   Reserved.

(H)   Permitted pursuant to an Administrative Permit if the property is 300 feet or more from a parcel used or zoned for residential development. Permitted pursuant to a conditional use permit from the Zoning Administrator if less than 300 feet from a parcel used or zoned for residential development.

(I)    Limited to facilities serving workers employed on-site.

(J)    Limited to single room occupancy uses. (See Section 230.46.)

(K)   Limited to emergency shelters. (See Section 230.52, Emergency Shelters.)

(L)   Development of vacant land and/or additions of 10,000 square feet or more in floor area; or additions equal to or greater than 50% of the existing building’s floor area; or additions to buildings on sites located within 300 feet of a residential zone or use for a permitted use requires approval of a conditional use permit from the Zoning Administrator. The Community Development Director may refer any proposed addition to the Zoning Administrator if the proposed addition has the potential to impact residents or tenants in the vicinity (e.g., increased noise, traffic).

(M)  Major outdoor operations require conditional use permit approval by the Planning Commission. Major outside operations include storage yards and uses utilizing more than one-third of the site for outdoor operation.

(N)   See Section 230.40, Helicopter Takeoff and Landing Areas.

(O)   See Section 230.44, Recycling Operations.

(P)    See Section 230.50, Indoor Swap Meets/Flea Markets.

(Q)   See L-11(A) relating to locational restrictions.

(R)   Non-amplified live entertainment greater than 300 feet from a residential zone or use shall be permitted without a conditional use permit. Neighborhood Notification requirements when no entitlement required pursuant to Chapter 241.

(S)    Subject to approval by the Police Department, Public Works Department, and Fire Department and the Community Development Director.

(T)   In all districts, storage areas shall be screened from view on all sides by a solid wall made of either block, masonry, wood, vinyl or other similar material. The wall shall not be less than six feet in height and set back a minimum 10 feet from abutting streets with the entire setback area permanently landscaped and maintained.

(U)   In all districts, storage areas shall be screened from view on all sides adjacent to a public right-of-way by a solid wall made of either brick, block, masonry, wood, vinyl or other similar material. The wall shall include a minimum 10-foot return on all sides. The wall shall not be less than six feet in height and set back a minimum 10 feet from abutting streets with the entire setback area permanently landscaped and maintained.

(V)   In all districts, storage areas shall be screened from view on all sides adjacent to a public right-of-way by a solid wall made of either block, masonry, wood, vinyl or other similar material. The wall shall include a minimum ten foot return on all sides. The wall shall not be less than six feet in height and set back a minimum 10 feet from abutting streets with the entire setback area permanently landscaped and maintained. Screening on the remaining sides shall be evaluated based on proposed site conditions as determined during the entitlement process.

(W)  Auto storage uses on public agency owned property shall be permitted by right pursuant to submittal of a Parking Area Plan. See Section 231.26. (3254-10/94, 3378-2/98, 3523-2/02, 3568-9/02, 3703-3/05, 3708-6/05, 3724-02/06, 3788-12/07, 3843-11/09, 3860-2/10, 4039-12/14, 4092-10/16, 4183-10/19, 4198-3/20)

 

212.06 IG, IL, and RT Districts—Development Standards
The following schedule prescribes development standards for the Industrial Districts. The first three columns prescribe basic requirements for permitted and conditional uses in each district. Letters in parentheses in the “Additional Requirements” column reference requirements following the schedule or located elsewhere in this title. In calculating the maximum gross floor area as defined in Chapter 203, the floor area ratio is calculated on the basis of net site area. Fractional numbers shall be rounded down to the nearest whole number. All required setbacks shall be measured from ultimate right-of-way and in accordance with definitions set forth in Chapter 203, Definitions.

 

 

IG

IL

RT

Additional Requirements

Residential Development

 

 

 

(M)

Nonresidential Development

 

 

 

 

Minimum Lot Area (sq. ft.)

20,000

20,000

15,000

(A)(B)

Minimum Lot Width (ft.)

100

100

75

(A)(B)

Minimum Setbacks

 

 

 

(A)(C)

Front (ft.)

10; 20

10; 20

10; 20

(D)

Side (ft.)

0

15

0

(E)(F)

Street Side (ft.)

10

10

10

 

Rear (ft.)

0

0

0

(E)

Maximum Height of Structures (ft.)

40

40

40

(G)

Maximum Floor Area Ratio (FAR)

0.75

0.75

1.0

 

Minimum Site Landscaping (%)

8

8

8

(H)(I)

Fences and Walls

See § 230.88

 

 

Off-Street Parking and Loading

See Ch. 231

 

(J)

Outdoor Facilities

See § 230.74

 

 

Screening of Mechanical Equipment

See § 230.76

 

(K)

Refuse Storage Area

See § 230.78

 

 

Underground Utilities

See Ch. 17.64

 

 

Performance Standards

See § 230.82

 

(L) (N)

Nonconforming Uses and Structures

See Ch. 236

 

 

Signs

See Ch. 233

 

 

 

IG, IL, and RT Districts: Additional Development Standards

(A)   See Section 230.62, Building Site Required, and Section 230.64, Development on Substandard Lots.

(B)   Smaller lot dimensions for new parcels may be permitted by the Zoning Administrator with an approved development plan and tentative subdivision map.

(C)   See Section 230.68, Building Projections into Yards and Required Open Space. Double-frontage lots shall provide front yards on each frontage.

(D)   The minimum front setback shall be 10 feet and the average setback 20 feet, except for parcels fronting on local streets where only a 10-foot setback is required.

All Industrial Districts. An additional setback is required for buildings exceeding 25 feet in height (one foot for each foot of height) and for buildings exceeding 150 feet in length (one foot for each 10 feet of building length) up to a maximum setback of 30 feet.

(E)   In all Industrial Districts, a 15-foot setback is required abutting an R district and no openings in buildings within 45 feet of an R district.

(F)    A zero-side yard setback may be permitted in the Industrial Districts, but not abutting an R district, provided that a solid wall at the property line is constructed of maintenance-free masonry material and the opposite side yard is a minimum of 30 feet.

Exception. The Zoning Administrator or Planning Commission may approve a conditional use permit to allow a 15-foot interior side yard opposite a zero-side yard on one lot, if an abutting side yard at least 15 feet wide is provided and access easements are recorded ensuring a minimum 30-foot separation between buildings. This 30-foot accessway must be maintained free of obstructions and open to the sky, and no opening for truck loading or unloading shall be permitted in the building face fronting on the accessway unless a 45-foot long striped area is provided solely for loading and unloading entirely within the building.

(G)   See Section 230.70, Measurement of Height. Within 45 feet of an R district, no building or structure shall exceed a height of 18 feet.

(H)   Planting Areas. Required front and street-side yards adjacent to a public right-of-way shall be planting areas except for necessary drives and walks. A six-foot wide planting area shall be provided adjacent to an R district and contain one tree for each 25 lineal feet of planting area.

(I)    See Chapter 232, Landscape Improvements.

(J)    Truck or rail loading, dock facilities, and the doors for such facilities shall not be visible from or be located within 45 feet of an R district.

(K)   See Section 230.80, Antennae.

(L)   Noise. No new use shall be permitted, or exterior alterations and/or additions to an existing use allowed, within 150 feet of an R district until a report prepared by a California state-licensed acoustical engineer is approved by the director. This report shall include recommended noise mitigation measures for the industrial use to ensure that noise levels will conform with Chapter 8.40 of the Municipal Code. The director may waive this requirement for change of use or addition or exterior alteration to an existing use if it can be established that there had been no previous noise offense, that no outside activities will take place, or if adequate noise mitigation measures for the development are provided.

(M)  Group residential or accessory residential uses shall be subject to standards for minimum setbacks and height of the RH District.

(N)   Performance Standards. The following regulations provided herein apply to all activities, processes, and uses within the Industrial Districts and are provided solely for reference in conjunction with Chapter 230.82. Existing and proposed uses within the Industrial Districts must conform to all federal, state, and City laws, ordinances, and standards at all times.

1.     Dust, Fumes and Odors. Emissions of dust, odors, smoke, fumes or particulate must comply with all rules established by the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) (Code of Federal Regulations, Title 40), the California Air Resources Board (CARB), and the South Coast Air Quality Management District (SCAQMD) or their successor agencies.

2.     Electromagnetic Interference. No electromagnetic interference with electronic equipment beyond the property line shall be permitted and shall be in compliance with applicable Federal Communications Commission (FCC) regulations.

3.     Glare. Significant, direct glare shall not be visible beyond the property line of the applicable use.

4.     Heat and Humidity. Heat emitted shall not increase the temperature of another property in excess of five degrees Fahrenheit.

5.     Noise. Chapter 8.40 of the Municipal Code, Noise Control, shall be enforced.

6.     Waste Disposal Discharge. Discharge of any liquids or solids into any body of water, watercourse, sewage system, or ground shall not be permitted, except in compliance with applicable regulations of the State of California Santa Ana Regional Water Quality Control Board or their successor agency.

7.     Waste Containment. Storage and handling of wastes shall be practiced so as to prevent nuisance, health, safety and fire hazards. Any hazardous waste shall be stored in a closed container.

8.     Vibration. Vibration transmitted through the ground shall not be produced with the exception of vibration from temporary uses, i.e. construction and vehicles entering and exiting.

9.     Location of Measurements. Measurements for determining compliance with the standards of this Section shall be taken at the lot line of the establishment or use that is the source of a potentially objectionable condition, hazard, or nuisance. (3254-10/94, 4039-12/14, 4183-10/19)

 

212.08 Review of Plans
All applications for new construction and exterior alterations and additions shall be submitted to the Community Development Department for review. Discretionary review shall be required as follows:

A.    Zoning Administrator Review. Projects requiring a conditional use permit from the Zoning Administrator; projects including a zero-side yard exception; projects on substandard lots.

 

B.     Design Review Board. See Chapter 244.

C.     Planning Commission. Projects requiring a conditional use permit from the Commission.

D.    Projects in the Coastal Zone. A Coastal Development Permit is required unless the project is exempt; see Chapter 245. (3254-10/94, 3708-6/05, 3869-3/10, 4039-12/14, 4092-10/16, 4183-10/19)

 

Chapter 213 OS OPEN SPACE DISTRICT
213.02 Open Space District Established
An Open Space District is established by this chapter. This district provides areas for public or private use and areas for preservation and enhancement. Three subdistricts have been identified:

A.    OS-PR Open Space-Parks and Recreation Subdistrict.

B.     OS-S Open Space-Shoreline.

C.     OS-WR Open Space-Water Recreation Subdistrict. (3334-6/97)

 

213.04 Applicability
The OS District shall be the base district for the use classifications listed in Section 213.06 where these classifications have a minimum contiguous site area of two acres, including alleys, streets or other rights-of-way. Open-space use classifications on sites of less than two acres shall be subject to the provisions of the base and overlay districts in which they are located. (3334-6/97)

 

213.06 OS District—Land Use Controls
In the following schedule, letter designations are used as follows:

“P” designates use classifications permitted in the OS District.

“L” designates use classifications subject to certain limitations prescribed by the “Additional Provisions” which follow.

“PC” designates use classifications permitted on approval of a conditional use permit by the Planning Commission.

“ZA” designates use classifications permitted on approval of a conditional use permit by the Zoning Administrator.

“TU” designates use classifications permitted on approval of a temporary use permit.

“P/U” for an accessory use means that the use is permitted on the site of a permitted use, but requires a use permit on the site of a conditional use.

Use classifications that are not listed are prohibited. Letters in parentheses in the “Additional Provisions” column refer to provisions following the schedule or located elsewhere in the Zoning Ordinance. Where letters in parentheses are opposite a use classification heading, referenced provisions shall apply to all use classifications under the heading.

 

OS District Land Use Controls

       P = Permitted

       L = Limited (see Additional Provisions)

       PC = Conditional use permit approved by Planning Commission

       ZA = Conditional use permit approved by Zoning Administrator

       TU = Temporary Use Permit

       P/U = Requires conditional use permit on site of conditional use

        - = Not Permitted

 

 

 

OS-PR

OS-S

OS-WR

Additional Provisions

Public and Semipublic

 

 

 

(F)

Marinas

-

-

PC

 

Park & Recreation Facilities

PC

PC

-

 

Public Safety Facilities

-

PC

-

 

Utilities, Major

-

-

-

 

Utilities, Minor

ZA

-

ZA

 

 

 

 

 

 

Commercial Uses

 

 

 

(F)

Animal Sales and Services

 

 

 

 

Equestrian Centers

PC

-

-

(E)

Commercial Recreation and Entertainment

PC

-

-

 

Communication Facilities

L-4

 

 

 

Eating & Drinking Establishments

L1

L1

-

 

With Alcohol

ZA

-

-

L-5

With Take-Out Service, Limited

L1

L3

-

 

Vehicle/Equipment Sales and Services

 

-

 

 

Commercial Parking Facility

L2

L2

-

 

 

 

 

 

 

Accessory Uses

 

 

 

(A)(D)

Accessory Uses and Structures

P/U

P/U

P/U

 

 

 

 

 

 

Temporary Uses

 

 

 

(B)

Animal Shows

TU

-

-

 

Circuses and Carnivals

TU

-

-

 

Commercial Filming

TU

TU

TU

 

 

 

 

 

 

Nonconforming Uses

 

 

 

(C)

 

OS District: Additional Provisions

L-1   Allowed with a conditional use permit approval by the Zoning Administrator only as an ancillary use that is compatible with and part of a park or recreational facility. Only in the coastal zone overlay district, in public parks in both the Parks and Recreation and the Shoreline Subdistricts, only the following type of eating and drinking establishment shall be permitted: take-out service establishments where patrons order and pay for their food at a counter or window before it is consumed and may either pick up or be served such food at a table or take it off-site for consumption; and persons are not served in vehicles.

L-2   Public parking is permitted, but commercial parking facilities on City-owned land require a conditional use permit approval by the Planning Commission. Recreational vehicle overnight parking is limited to 10% of available public parking. No encroachment onto sandy beach area shall be permitted.

 

L-3   Beach concession stands for sale of refreshments and sundries (not to exceed 2,500 square feet) must be located a minimum 1,000 feet apart. Beach concession structures shall be located within or immediately adjacent to paved parking or access areas.

L-4   Only wireless communication facilities permitted subject to Section 230.96, Wireless Communication Facilities.

L-5   Eating and drinking establishments with full table service, with or without outdoor dining, located in Central Park may provide on-site sales, service and consumption of beer and wine upon obtaining a Conditional Use Permit approved by the Zoning Administrator. Public or private golf courses, with or without outdoor dining, may provide on-site sales, service and consumption of alcohol upon obtaining a Conditional Use Permit approved by the Zoning Administrator.

(A)   Limited to facilities incidental to an open space use.

(B)   See Section 241.22, Temporary Use Permits.

(C)   See Chapter 236, Nonconforming Uses and Structures.

(D)   Private cantilevered decks abutting residential uses; private boat ramps, slips, docks, windscreen and boat hoists in conjunction with adjacent single family dwellings. See Residential Districts and Chapter 17.24.

(E)   See Section 230.48, Equestrian Centers.

(F)    The permitted uses for recreation areas on the Huntington Beach mesa shall be limited to low-intensity uses including picnic grounds, arboretums, bird sanctuaries, trails. High-intensity uses such as tennis courts, athletic fields, stables, campgrounds or other commercial or recreation uses shall be conditional only, and shall be located in nodes adjacent to existing developed areas or roads and shall avoid adverse impacts on environmentally sensitive habitats. (3334-6/97, 3568-9/02, 4156-6/18)

 

213.08 OS District—Development Standards
The following schedule prescribes development standards for the OS-PR, OS-S and OS-WR subdistricts. The first three columns prescribe basic requirements for permitted and conditional uses in each subdistrict. Letters in parentheses in the “Additional Requirements” column refer to standards following the schedule or located elsewhere in the zoning ordinance. All required setbacks shall be measured from ultimate right-of-way and in accordance with definitions set forth in Chapter 203, Definitions.

OS-PR, OS-S, and OS-WR Districts: Development Standards

 

 

OS-PR

OS-S

OS-WR

Additional Requirements

Nonresidential Development

 

 

 

 

Minimum Lot Area (sq. ft.)

5 ac

-

-

 

Minimum Lot Width (ft.)

100

-

-

 

Minimum Setbacks

 

 

 

 

Front (ft.)

25

50

-

 

Side (ft.)

25

-

-

 

Street Side (ft.)

-

25

-

 

Rear (ft.)

25

20

-

 

Maximum Height of Structures (ft.)

45

20

-

(A)(E)

Maximum Lot Coverage (%)

25

-

-

 

Minimum Site Landscaping

See Ch. 232

 

 

(B)(F)

Building Design

 

 

 

(A)(C)

Fences and Walls

See § 230.88

 

 

 

Off-Street Parking/Loading

See Ch. 231

 

 

 

Outdoor Facilities

See § 230.74

 

 

 

Screening of Mechanical Equipment

See § 230.76

 

 

 

Refuse Storage Areas

See § 230.78

 

 

 

Underground Utilities

See Ch. 17.64

 

 

(D)

Performance Standards

See § 230.82

 

 

 

Nonconforming Structures

See Ch. 236

 

 

 

Signs

See Ch. 233

 

 

 

 

OS District: Additional Development Standards

(A)   All development shall be compatible with the established physical scale of the area and shall not encroach on major view corridors. Public visual resources within the coastal zone shall be preserved and enhanced. Maximum height limit for development within the coastal zone in the Open Space Recreation Subdistrict shall be 35 feet.

(B)   To the extent feasible, mature trees shall be protected. Development shall ensure maximum protection of native vegetation and sensitive wildlife habitats.

(C)   All buildings and structures shall be sited and designed to ensure stability and structural integrity for their expected economic life span and to minimize alterations to natural landforms.

(D)   Underground utilities shall be provided unless underground installation would have a substantial adverse impact on the environment.

(E)   Facilities necessary for public safety may exceed maximum height.

(F)    All setback areas along street frontages in OS-PR shall be fully landscaped. (3334-6/97)

 

213.10 Review of Plans
All applications for new construction and exterior alterations and additions shall be submitted to the Community Development Department for review. Discretionary review shall be required as follows:

A.    Zoning Administrator Review. Projects requiring a conditional use permit from the Zoning Administrator; projects on substandard lots.

B.     Design Review Board. See Chapter 244.

C.     Planning Commission. Projects requiring a conditional use permit from the Commission.

D.    Projects in the Coastal Zone. A Coastal Development Permit is required unless the project is exempt; see Chapter 245. (3870-3/10, 4093-10/16)

 

Chapter 214 PS PUBLIC-SEMIPUBLIC DISTRICT
214.02 Public-Semipublic District Established
The PS Public-Semipublic District is established by this chapter. This district provides areas for large public or semipublic uses. The intent of this district in the coastal zone is to implement the public, quasi-public, and institutional land use designation of the certified Local Coastal Program Land Use Plan. (3334-6/97, 4173-3/19)

 

214.04 Applicability
The PS District shall be the base district for the use classifications listed in Section 214.06 where these have a contiguous site area of two acres or more, including alleys, streets, or other rights-of-way. This requirement does not apply to public-semipublic use classifications in commercial districts. Public-semipublic use classifications on sites of less than two acres shall be subject to the provisions of the base and overlay districts in which they are located. (3553-5/02, 4173-3/19)

 

214.06 PS District—Land Use Controls
In the following schedule, letter designations are used as follows:

“P” designates use classifications permitted in PS districts.

“L” designates use classifications subject to certain limitations prescribed by the “Additional Provisions” which follow.

“PC” designates use classifications permitted on approval of a conditional use permit by the Planning Commission.

“TU” designates use classifications allowed on approval of a temporary use permit.

“P/U” for an accessory use means that the use is permitted on the site of a permitted use but requires a conditional use permit on the site of a conditional use.

Use classifications that are not listed are prohibited. Letters in parentheses in the “Additional Provisions” column refer to provisions following the schedule or located elsewhere in the zoning ordinance. Where letters in parentheses are opposite a use classification heading, referenced provisions shall apply to all use classifications under the heading.

 

PS District: Land Use Controls

 

         P = Permitted

         L = Limited (see Additional Provisions)

         PC = Conditional use permit approved by Planning Commission

         TU = Temporary use permit

         P/U = Requires conditional use permit on site of a conditional use

 

 

 

PS

Additional Provisions

Public and Semipublic

 

 

Cemetery

PC

 

Convalescent Facilities

PC

 

Cultural Institutions

PC

 

Day Care, General

PC

 

Government Offices

L-1

 

Hospitals

PC

 

Maintenance & Service Facilities

L-1

 

Park & Recreation Facilities

PC

 

Public Safety Facilities

PC

 

Religious Assembly

ZA

 

Residential Care, General

PC

 

Schools, Public or Private

PC

 

Utilities, Major

PC

 

Utilities, Minor

P

 

 

 

 

Commercial Uses

 

 

Commercial Parking Facility

L-3

 

Communication Facilities

L-4

 

Eating and Drinking Establishments

L-2

 

Vehicle/Equipment Sales and Services

L-1

 

 

 

 

Accessory Uses

 

 

Accessory Uses and Structures

P/U

 

 

 

 

Temporary Uses

 

(A)

Animal Shows

TU

 

Circuses and Carnivals

TU

 

Commercial Filming, Limited

TU

 

Trade Fairs

P

 

 

 

 

Nonconforming Uses

 

(B)

 

PS District: Additional Provisions

L-1   City-owned facilities are permitted; all other facilities require a conditional use permit from the Zoning Administrator.

L-2   Permitted as an accessory use in a cultural, educational, hospital, or medical institution occupying no more than 5,000 square feet, only if there is no separate entrance or sign.

L-3   Public parking permitted, but commercial parking facilities on City-owned land require a conditional use permit from the Zoning Administrator.

L-4   Only wireless communication facilities permitted subject to Section 230.96, Wireless Communication Facilities.

 

(A)   See Section 241.20, Temporary Use Permits.

(B)   See Chapter 236, Nonconforming Uses and Structures. (3524-2/02, 3568-9/02, 3673-12/04, 4173-3/19)

 

214.08 PS District—Development Standards
The following schedule prescribes development standards for the PS District. The first column prescribes basic requirements for permitted and conditional uses in the district. Letters in parentheses in the “Additional Requirements” column refer to standards following the schedule or located elsewhere in the zoning ordinance. In calculating the maximum gross floor area as defined in Chapter 203, the floor area ratio is calculated on the basis of net site area. Fractional numbers shall be rounded down to the nearest whole number. All required setbacks shall be measured from ultimate right-of-way and in accordance with definitions set forth in Chapter 203, Definitions.

 

PS District: Development Standards

 

 

PS

Additional Requirements

Nonresidential Development

 

(A)

Minimum Lot Area

2 ac

 

Minimum Lot Width (ft.)

100

 

Minimum Setbacks

 

 

Front (ft.)

10

(B)(C)(M)

Side (ft.)

0

(D)

Street Side (ft.)

10

(C)

Rear (ft.)

0

(D)

Maximum Height of Structures (ft.)

50

(D)(E)(N)

Maximum Floor Area Ratio (FAR)

1.5

 

Minimum Site Landscaping (%)

8

(F)(G)

Building Design Standards

 

(L)(M)

Fences and Walls

 

(H)(I)

Off-Street Parking/Loading

 

(J)

Outdoor Facilities

See Section 230.74

(K)

Screening of Mechanical Equipment

See Section 230.76

(K)

Refuse Storage Areas

See Section 230.78

 

Underground Utilities

See Ch. 17.64

 

Performance Standards

See Section 230.82

 

Nonconforming Structures

See Ch. 236

 

Signs

See Ch. 233

 

PS District: Additional Development Standards

(A)   See Section 230.62, Building Site Required.

(B)   See Section 230.68, Building Projections into Yards and Required Open Space. Double-frontage lots shall provide front yards on each frontage.

(C)   A minimum 50-foot setback is required along Beach Boulevard, Edinger Avenue, and Pacific Coast Highway or 25-foot setback with the setback area entirely landscaped.

(D)   Along a side or rear property line abutting an R district, a 10-foot setback is required, and structures within 45 feet of the district boundary shall not exceed 18 feet in height.

(E)   See Section 230.70, Measurement of Height, and Section 230.72, Exceptions to Height Limits.

(F)    Planting Areas.

(1)    Required side and rear yards shall be planting areas or shall be enclosed by a solid concrete or masonry wall at least six feet in height.

(2)    A 10-foot wide landscaped strip shall be provided along all street frontages, except for necessary driveways and walks.

(G)   See Chapter 232, Landscape Improvements.

(H)   See Section 230.88, Fencing and Yards.

(I)    A solid masonry or concrete wall at least six feet in height shall adjoin the site of an existing ground-floor residential use. However, where the portion of the site within 10 feet of the front property line is occupied by planting area or by a building having no openings except openings opposite a street property line, the director may grant an exception to this requirement. A wall within 15 feet of a street property line shall not exceed 3.5 feet in height.

(J)    See Chapter 231, Off-Street Parking and Loading.

(K)   See Section 230.44, Recycling Operations, and Section 230.80, Antennae.

(L)   A front or street side wall surface shall be no longer than 100 feet without a break, a recess or offset measuring at least 20 feet in depth and one-quarter of the building length, or a series of offsets, projections or recesses, at intervals of not more than 40 feet that vary the depth of the building wall by a minimum of four feet. The director may grant exceptions or allow these standards to be modified for exceptional or unique structures subject to Design Review, Chapter 244.

(M)  On frontages adjacent to major or primary arterials at least 40% of a building surface may be located at the minimum setback line if additional landscaping is provided on the site.

(N)   In the coastal zone, the maximum allowable height of structures shall be reduced as necessary to retain compatibility with the established physical scale of the area and to preserve and enhance public visual resources. (3334-6/97, 3673-12/04, 4173-3/19)

 

214.10 Review of Plans
All applications for new construction and exterior alterations and additions shall be submitted to the Community Development Department for review. Discretionary review shall be required for projects requiring conditional use permits. Design Review shall be required for all projects except temporary uses pursuant to Chapter 244. A Coastal Development Permit is required for projects in the Coastal Zone unless the project is exempt (see Chapter 245). (3871-3/10, 4103-10/16, 4173-3/19)

 

Chapter 215 SP SPECIFIC PLAN DISTRICT
215.02 Specific Plan District Established
The SP Specific Plan District is established by this chapter. This district provides areas for the development and administration of specific plans, prepared in accord with the City of Huntington Beach Charter, consistent with the General Plan and, for specific plans located within the coastal zone, the Local Coastal Program. (3334-6/97, 4133-5/18)

 

215.04 SP District Land Use Controls
No use other than an existing use shall be permitted in an SP District except in accord with a valid specific plan. Any permitted or conditional use authorized by this title may be included in an adopted specific plan, consistent with the General Plan and, for development located within the coastal zone, Local Coastal Program Land Use Plan land-use designation(s) for land within the SP District. (3334-6/97)

 

215.06 SP District Development Standards
A.    Minimum Area. The minimum net area of an SP District shall be two acres, provided that an SP district may be subdivided in accord with a valid specific plan.

B.     Residential Unit Density. The total number of dwelling units in a specific plan shall not exceed the maximum number permitted by the General Plan and Local Coastal Program Land Use Plan density for the total area of parcels designated for residential use.

C.     Performance Standards. The performance standards prescribed by Section 230.82 shall apply.

D.    Other Development Standards. Other development standards shall be as prescribed by the specific plan. (3334-6/97)

 

215.08 Initiation
An amendment to reclassify property to an SP District may be initiated by a property owner or authorized agent, the Planning Commission, or the City Council. If the property is not under a single ownership, all owners shall join in the application, and a map showing the extent of ownerships shall be submitted with concept plans and materials. (3334-6/97)

 

215.10 Required Plans and Materials
In addition to the plans and materials required to accompany an application for a zoning map amendment by Chapter 247, an application for rezoning to an SP District shall include a specific plan incorporating the following information:

A.    A map showing proposed district boundaries and the relationship of the district to uses and structures within a 300-foot radius of the district boundaries.

B.     A map or aerial photo of the proposed district and 100 feet beyond its boundary showing sufficient topographic data to indicate clearly the character of the terrain; the type, location, and condition of trees and other natural vegetation; and the location of existing development.

C.     The proposed pattern of land use, with acreage and residential density computations.

D.    The proposed street and lot pattern.

E.     Typical building elevations and sections.

F.     A statement explaining the reasons that justify use of an SP District for the project in relation to the findings required by Section 215.12(A). (3334-6/97)

 

215.12 Planning Commission Action
A.    The Planning Commission shall consider an application for reclassification to an SP District as prescribed in Chapter 247 and shall at the same time consider the proposed specific plan accompanying the application. A recommendation of the Commission to reclassify to an SP District shall be accompanied by a resolution recommending a specific plan.

B.     Required Findings. The Planning Commission shall recommend to the City Council approval or conditional approval of a specific plan upon finding that:

1.     The specific plan is consistent with the adopted land use element of the General Plan and, if in the coastal zone, with the certified Local Coastal Program Land Use Plan, and other applicable policies and is compatible with surrounding development;

2.     The specific plan will enhance the potential for superior urban design in comparison with the development under the base district provisions that would apply if the plan were not approved;

3.     Deviations from the base district provisions that otherwise would apply are justified by compensating benefits of the specific plan; and

4.     The specific plan includes adequate provisions for utilities, services, and emergency vehicle access; and public service demands will not exceed the capacity of existing and planned systems. (3334-6/97)

 

215.14 Status of Specific Plan
A specific plan adopted by resolution of the City Council shall be administered as prescribed by the Council, and adopted pursuant to the City of Huntington Beach Charter authority. A specific plan shall not become effective unless a Local Coastal Program amendment is effectively certified by the California Coastal Commission. (3334-6/97, 4144-5/18)

 

215.16 Zoning Map Designation
An SP District shall be noted by the designation “SP,” followed by the number of the SP District based on order of adoption. Specific plans shall be noted by the designation “SP” followed by the name and number of the SP District and the name of the specific plan. (3334-6/97)

 

215.18 Review of Plans
Application for building permits for projects in an SP District shall be accepted only if project plans are consistent with a valid specific plan and with all other applicable requirements of the Huntington Beach Municipal Code. (3334-6/97)

 

Chapter 216 CC COASTAL CONSERVATION DISTRICT
216.02 Purpose
A.    The purpose of the CC Coastal Conservation District is to implement the General Plan and Local Coastal Program Land Use designation of Open Space: Conservation; and provide for the protection, maintenance, restoration and enhancement of wetlands and environmentally sensitive habitat areas located within the coastal zone while allowing for appropriate utilization to occur.

B.     The CC District specifies permitted uses within areas with a CC zoning designation, consistent with the California Coastal Act of 1976 (Division 20 of the Public Resources Code), the General Plan and the Local Coastal Program Land Use Plan.

C.     The application of the CC District is not intended to authorize, and shall not be construed as authorizing the City of Huntington Beach to exercise its power in a manner which will take or damage private property for public use. This zoning ordinance is not intended to increase or decrease the rights of any owner of property under the constitution of the State of California or the United States. (3326-5/96, 3833-7/09)

 

216.04 Definitions
Coastal Dependent Development or Use. Any development or use which requires a site on, or adjacent to, the sea to be able to function at all.

Energy Facility. Any public or private processing, producing, generating, storing, transmitting, or recovering facility for electricity, natural gas, petroleum, coal, or other source of energy.

Environmentally Sensitive (Habitat) Area. A wetland or any area in which plant or animal life or their habitats are either rare or especially valuable because of their special nature or role in an ecosystem and which could be easily disturbed or degraded by human activities and developments.

Feasible. Capable of being accomplished in a successful manner within a reasonable period of time, taking into account economic, social, and technological factors.

Functional Capacity. The ability of an environmentally sensitive area to be self sustaining and to maintain natural species diversity.

Resource Protection Area. Any area that consists of any of the following: wetlands, environmentally sensitive habitat areas, buffer areas (as these terms are defined in the Glossary of the City’s certified Land Use Plan) and/or land that is zoned Coastal Conservation.

Significant Disruption. Having a substantial adverse effect upon the functional capacity.

Wetland. Lands within the Coastal Zone which may be covered periodically or permanently with shallow water and include saltwater marshes, freshwater marshes, open or closed brackish water marshes, swamps, mudflats and fens. (3833-7/09, 3903-12/10)

 

216.06 Designation of the Project Area
Development or subdivision of any parcel in whole or in part within the CC District shall be permitted only pursuant to an overall development plan for the entirety of all parcels that are geographically contiguous and in common ownership at the time of application. For purposes of determining common ownership pursuant to this chapter, parcels which are owned in fee, as well as parcels subject to existing purchase options, shall be treated as commonly owned. Consistent with Government Code Section 66424, property shall be considered as contiguous pursuant to this chapter even if separated by roads, streets, utility easements or railroad rights-of-way. (3326-5/96)

 

216.08 Permitted Uses and Structures
A.    The following principal uses and structures shall be permitted in the CC District where no feasible, less environmentally damaging alternative exists and where feasible mitigation measures have been provided and are subject to issuance of a conditional use permit by the Zoning Administrator. Said permit shall ensure that the uses are developed in a manner compatible with the purpose of this district. Such permitted uses are:

1.     Incidental public service projects such as, but not limited to, burying cables and pipes.

2.     Maintenance of existing streets and utility structures.

B.     The extension of Hamilton Avenue shall be permitted between Beach Boulevard and Newland Street. The precise alignment of Hamilton Avenue shall not be approved without documentation that the least environmentally damaging feasible alternative is the chosen alternative. Before the precise alignment of Hamilton Avenue can be approved, an environmental impact report shall be certified which addresses the alternative alignments for Hamilton Avenue and the mitigation needs generated from each alternative. The alternatives analysis shall include, at a minimum, the following:

1.     Placing the roadway in an alignment which is most protective of wetland habitats, including the construction of the road on pilings or bridging the road over the wetlands; and

2.     Limiting the width of the roadway by narrowing lanes and eliminating shoulders; and

3.     Requiring full mitigation for any impacted wetlands.

No net loss of wetland shall occur. Any wetland which is filled or reduced in productivity by the project will be replaced by restoring otherwise degraded or non-functioning wetland as close as feasible to the project site.

C.     The following uses and structures may be permitted in the CC District subject to Planning Commission approval of a conditional use permit where there is no feasible, less environmentally damaging alternative and where feasible mitigation measures have been provided.

1.     New or expanded energy and coastal dependent industrial facilities where no feasible, less environmentally damaging alternative exists and where consistent with the study titled Designation of Coastal Zone Areas Where Construction of an Electric Power Plant Would Prevent Achievement of the Objectives of the California Coastal Act of 1976 (re-adopted by the California Coastal Commission December 1985).

2.     Diking, dredging and filling which are necessary for the protection, maintenance, restoration or enhancement of the environmentally sensitive habitat area’s functional capacity.

3.     Flood Control Facilities.

a.     Maintenance of existing modified flood control facilities where the primary purpose is to maintain existing flood control capacity and where such maintenance is necessary for public safety or to protect existing development where there is no other feasible method for protecting structures in the flood plain. No maintenance activities shall be permitted which have the effect of draining wetlands.

Maintenance activities may include maintenance dredging of less than 100,000 cubic yards within a 12-month period; lining of existing in-place artificial channels; increasing the height of existing levees; or changes in the cross section of the interior channel to accommodate the design capacity of existing channels when no widening of the top dimensions or widening of the outer levees is required.

b.     Only in conjunction with restoration plans, new flood control facilities where necessary for public safety and to protect existing development where there is no other feasible method for protecting structures in the flood plain.

4.     Mineral extraction, including sand for restoring beaches, except in environmentally sensitive areas.

5.     Pedestrian trails and observation platforms for passive nature study; i.e., bird watching and the study of flora and fauna native to the site. Such uses may be located within an environmentally sensitive habitat area provided that said use(s) are immediately adjacent to the area’s peripheral edge.

6.     Maintaining existing, or restoring previously dredged depths in existing navigational channels, turning basins, vessel berthing and mooring areas, and boat launching ramps.

7.     Nature study, aquaculture, or similar resource dependent activities.

8.     Habitat restoration projects.

9.     For the portion of any parcel which is not designated Conservation under the certified land use plan, any use authorized by and in conformance with the CV District.

10.   In addition to the above uses, coastal dependent industrial facilities shall also be allowed even where inconsistent with other provisions of the certified Local Coastal Program if:

a.     To locate elsewhere is infeasible or causes greater environmental damage, and

b.     To do otherwise would adversely affect the public welfare, and

c.     Adverse environmental effects are mitigated to the maximum extent feasible, and

d.     Where findings consistent with Section 216.20 can be made.

D.    Permitted uses, development requirements and restrictions applicable to development within Subarea 4K as depicted in Figures C-6a and C-10 of the Coastal Element Land Use Plan are provided in the Coastal Element Land Use Plan, Table C-2. Subdivision design and development within Subarea 4K shall incorporate the information from the plans and studies required in Table C-2 for development of that subarea. If there is a conflict between the requirements and restrictions of Table C-2 and other provisions of the Zoning and Subdivision Ordinance, the requirements and restrictions included in Table C-2 shall prevail. (3326-5/96, 3833-7/09)

 

216.10 Economically Viable Use Determination
A.    Any applicant that proposes a use other than one permitted in the CC District based on the contention that the uses permitted in this district will not provide an economically viable use of his or her property shall apply for an economic viability determination in conjunction with their Coastal Development Permit application. The application for an economic viability determination shall include the entirety of all parcels that are geographically contiguous and held by the applicant in common ownership at the time of the application. Before any application for a Coastal Development Permit and economic viability determination is accepted for processing, the applicant shall provide the following information:

1.     The date the applicant purchased or otherwise acquired the property, and from whom.

2.     The purchase price paid by the applicant for the property.

3.     The fair market value of the property at the time the applicant acquired it, describing the basis upon which the fair market value is derived, including any appraisals done at the time.

4.     The General Plan, zoning or similar land use designations applicable to the property at the time the applicant acquired it, as well as any changes to these designations that occurred after acquisition.

5.     Any development restrictions or other restrictions on use, other than government regulatory restrictions described in paragraph 4 of this subsection, that applied to the property at the time the applicant acquired it, or which have been imposed after acquisition.

6.     Any change in the size of the property since the time the applicant acquired it, including a discussion of the nature of the change, the circumstances and the relevant dates.

7.     A discussion of whether the applicant has sold or leased a portion of, or interest in, the property since the time of purchase, indicating the relevant dates, sales prices, rents, and nature of the portion or interests in the property that were sold or leased.

8.     Any title reports, litigation guarantees or similar documents in connection with all or a portion of the property of which the applicant is aware.

9.     Any offers to buy all or a portion of the property which the applicant solicited or received, including the approximate date of the offer and offered price.

10.   The applicant’s costs associated with the ownership of the property, annualized for each of the last five calendar years, including property taxes, property assessments, debt service costs (such as mortgage and interest costs), and operation and management costs.

11.   Apart from any rent received from the leasing of all or a portion of the property, any income generated by the use of all or a portion of the property over the last five calendar years. If there is any such income to report it should be listed on an annualized basis along with a description of the uses that generate or have generated such income.

B.     The decision-making authority shall hold a public hearing on any application for an economically viable use determination. Prior to approving a Coastal Development Permit for a use other than one provided for in the CC District, the decision-making authority shall make the following findings:

1.     Based on the economic information provided by the applicant, as well as any other relevant evidence, each use provided for in the CC District would not provide an economically viable use of the applicant’s property.

2.     Restricting the use of the applicant’s property to the uses provided for in the CC District would interfere with the applicant’s reasonable investment-backed expectations.

The findings adopted by the decision-making authority shall identify the evidence supporting the findings.

C.     Where the decision-making authority finds that the uses provided for in the CC District would not provide an economically viable use, and that restricting the use of the applicant’s property to these uses would interfere with their reasonable investment-backed expectations, the uses provided for in the visitor serving commercial zoning district may be allowed as a conditional use and in the area located west of Newland Street and north of the Orange County Flood Channel only, the uses provided for in the IL Limited Industrial District may be allowed as a conditional use. A specific development proposal for a visitor serving commercial use or limited industrial use, may be denied, however, if a feasible, less environmentally damaging visitor serving commercial or limited industrial alternative also would provide the applicant with an economically viable use. In addition to the other performance standards of Section 216.18 applicable to projects in the CC District, such a visitor serving commercial or limited industrial use shall be subject to the following development standards:

1.     The area in which visitor serving commercial or limited industrial uses shall be permitted shall be the minimum amount necessary to provide the applicant with an economically viable use of his or her property.

2.     The portion of the project involving visitor serving commercial or limited industrial uses shall also be subject to the standards of the CV District or the IL District.

3.     Access through wetlands or environmentally sensitive habitat areas to an area proposed for visitor serving commercial or limited industrial uses shall only be allowed if necessary to provide an economically viable use of the overall development plan area. (3326-5/96)

 

216.12 Prohibited Principal Uses and Structures
Any principal use or structure not expressly permitted is prohibited herein. (3326-5/96)

 

216.14 Required Permits/Agreements
Before the application can be considered complete, the project shall receive the following state and federal regulatory permits/agreements or a statement from the regulatory body that said permit/agreement is inapplicable. The required regulatory permits/agreements shall be forwarded to the director prior to the submittal of said project to a decision-making body.

A.    United States Army Corps of Engineers Section 404 and Section 10 permits;

B.     California Department of Fish and Game 1601—1603 agreements;

C.     State Water Resource Control Board (permit depends on the operation);

D.    Regional Water Quality Control Board (permit depends on the operation);

E.     A permit from the California State Lands Commission may also be required. (3326-5/96)

 

216.16 Required Consideration of Alternatives
Before any application is accepted for processing, the applicant shall provide topographic, vegetative, hydrologic and soil information prepared by a qualified professional which identifies the extent of the wetlands on the property. This submittal shall also include an analysis of alternatives to the proposed project and an assessment of how the proposed project is the least environmentally damaging alternative. The analysis of alternatives shall include an assessment of how the proposed project will impact all adjacent wetlands and environmentally sensitive habitat areas, including those within the overall development plan area. (3326-5/96)

 

216.18 Performance Standards
Before the Coastal Development Permit can be issued, the project shall comply with the following standards to the satisfaction of the director:

A.    Wetlands and environmentally sensitive habitat areas that are designated for preservation after a permit hearing granting project approval on the property shall be preserved through a conservation easement, deed restriction or other similar mechanism consistent with Public Resources Code Section 30010. Such easements or restrictions need not authorize any public right of access or use. Exclusive use and possession of the area may remain with the applicant.

1.     All feasible mitigation measures shall be incorporated into projects to minimize adverse environmental effects.

a.     If the project involves dredging, mitigation measures must include the following:

i.      Dredging and spoils disposal must be planned and carried out to avoid significant disruption to wetland habitats and to water circulation;

ii.     Limitations may be imposed on the timing of the operation, the type of operation, the quantity of dredged material removed, and the location of the spoil site;

iii.    Dredge spoils suitable for beach replenishment shall, where feasible, be transported to appropriate beaches or into suitable longshore current systems;

iv.    Other mitigation measures may include opening up areas to tidal action, removing dikes, improving tidal flushing, or other restoration measures.

b.     If the project involves diking or filling of a wetland, the following minimum mitigation measures shall apply. These mitigation measures shall not be required for temporary or short-term fill or diking if a bond or other evidence of financial responsibility is provided to ensure that restoration will be accomplished in the shortest feasible time.

i.      If an appropriate restoration site is available, the applicant shall submit a detailed restoration plan to the director which includes provisions for purchase and restoration of an equivalent area of equal or greater biological productivity and dedication of the land to a public agency or otherwise permanently restricting its use for open space purposes. The site shall be purchased before the dike or fill development may proceed.

ii.     The applicant may, in some cases, be permitted to open equivalent areas to tidal action or provide other sources of surface water. This method of mitigation is appropriate if the applicant already owns filled, diked areas which themselves are not environmentally sensitive habitat areas but may become so, if such areas were opened to tidal action or provided with other sources of surface water.

iii.    If no appropriate restoration sites under subparagraphs (A)(1)(b)(i) and (ii) are available, the applicant shall pay an in-lieu fee, determined by the City Council, which shall be of sufficient value to an appropriate public agency for the purchase and restoration of an area of equivalent productive value, or equivalent surface area.

c.     The third option (subparagraph (A)(1)(b)(iii)) shall be allowed only if the applicant is unable to find a willing seller of a potential restoration site. Since the public agency may also face difficulties in acquiring appropriate sites, the in-lieu fee shall reflect the additional costs of acquisition, including litigation and attorney’s fees, as well as the cost of restoration, relocation and other costs. If the public agency’s restoration project is not already approved by the Coastal Commission, the public agency may need to be a co-applicant for a Coastal Development Permit to provide adequate assurance that conditions can be imposed to ensure that the purchase of the mitigation site shall occur prior to the issuance of the permit. In addition, such restoration shall occur in the same general region (e.g., within the same stream, lake, or estuary where the fill occurred).

2.     Any areas where vegetation is temporarily removed shall be replanted with a native or non-invasive species in a quantity and quality equal to the vegetation removed.

3.     Pedestrian trails, observation platforms and other incidental structures shall be designed to reduce disturbance of wildlife and vegetation; examples of improvements so designed would be elevated walkways and viewing platforms, and vegetative and structural barriers to decrease disturbances from permitted uses and inhibit internal access.

4.     Passive nature study uses shall include a program to control litter; examples include litter containers and “no littering” signs posted in the project area.

5.     Environmentally sensitive habitat areas shall be restored and enhanced to lessen the risk of flood damage to adjacent properties.

6.     Any construction, alteration or other improvement shall generally be carried out between September 15th and April 15th to avoid disturbing rare, threatened, or endangered species which utilize the area for nesting. This requirement shall not apply if it can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the director that no such disturbance would occur, in which case construction shall be timed to cause the least disturbance to wetland dependent species; e.g., migratory waterfowl and shorebirds.

7.     Construction/maintenance activities shall be carried out in areas of minimal size. Preconstruction topography shall be restored subsequent to the conclusion of the project unless such topography is to be altered to conform with an approved restoration project.

8.     Habitat Management Plan.

a.     A habitat management plan shall be prepared and carried out for all ESHA, wetland and buffer areas and provide for restoration, enhancement, and perpetual conservation and management. Issues to be addressed include, but are not limited to, methods to ensure continuance of a water source to feed all wetland areas, enhancement of habitats and required buffer areas, restoration and enhancement of wetlands and environmentally sensitive habitats and required buffer areas, and fuel modification requirements to address fire hazard and avoid disruption of habitat values in buffers.

b.     The habitat management plan shall identify goals, objectives and performance standards; procedures and technical specifications for wetland and upland planting; methodology and specifications for removal of exotic species; soil engineering and soil amendment criteria; identification of plant species and density; maintenance measures and schedules; temporary irrigation measures; protective fencing both during construction and post-construction; restoration success criteria; measures to be implemented if success criteria are not met; and long-term adaptive management of the restored areas for a period of not less than 10 years.

9.     Protective fencing or barriers shall be installed along any interface with developed areas, to deter human and pet entrance into all restored and preserved wetland and ESHA buffer areas; however, access to designated passive public recreational use areas shall be protected and visual impact of any barriers from open space areas shall be minimized.

10.   Conservation easements (or other instruments) that serve to permanently protect the restored areas shall be recorded.

B.     The applicant shall demonstrate that the functional capacity is maintained or augmented through the criteria set out below unless relieved of any one or more of these requirements by the California Department of Fish and Game, and that the project does not significantly:

1.     Alter existing plant and animal populations in a manner that would impair the long-term stability of the ecosystem; i.e., natural species diversity, abundance and composition are essentially unchanged as a result of the project;

2.     Harm or destroy a species or habitat that is rare or endangered;

3.     Harm a species or habitat that is essential to the natural biological function of a wetland or estuary;

4.     Reduce consumptive (e.g., fishing, aquaculture and hunting) or nonconsumptive (e.g., water quality and research opportunity) values of a wetland or estuarian ecosystem.

C.     If the proposed project involves restoration of a degraded wetland, the applicant shall comply with California Public Resources Code Sections 30411 and 30233 to the satisfaction of the director.

D.    Any areas that constituted wetlands or ESHA that are removed, altered, filled or degraded as the result of activities carried out without compliance with Coastal Act requirements shall be protected as required by the City’s Coastal Element Land Use Plan. (3326-5/96, 3833-7/09, 3903-12/10)

 

216.20 Required Findings
It is the intent of this section to ensure an environment which is suitable for the self-perpetuation of environmentally sensitive habitat areas.

A.    Prior to energy production facilities being approved, the approving authority shall make the following finding with statement of facts: provision has been made for enhancement of a significant portion of the project area, to ensure preservation of plant and wildlife species.

 

B.     Prior to coastal dependent industrial facilities being approved, the approving authority shall make the following findings with statement of facts:

1.     Alternative locations are infeasible or more environmentally damaging.

2.     To locate the construction or expansion elsewhere would adversely affect the public welfare.

3.     Adverse environmental effects are mitigated to the maximum extent feasible consistent with Section 216.18.

4.     Siting is consistent with the study titled Designation of Coastal Zone Areas Where Construction of an Electric Power Plant Would Prevent Achievement of the Objectives of the California Coastal Act of 1976 (readopted by the California Coastal Commission December 1985).

5.     For expansion of the Southern California Edison Plant within the area designated industrial energy production/conservation only:

a.     Not less than two and one-half acres of wetlands southeasterly of Magnolia Street are permanently protected by conservation easements, dedications or other similar mechanisms for each acre of wetlands filled, and a program acceptable to the Department of Fish and Game is implemented to ensure long-term habitat enhancement or restoration of these protected wetlands. Vehicular access shall be prohibited in the wetland mitigation area protected by conservation easement or similar mechanism; and

b.     The infeasibility of expanding inland to the area known as the Rotary Mud Dump site (also known as the Ascon Landfill/NESI site), or other inland location, unless the Energy Commission has determined such expansion infeasible during or before the Notice of Intention proceedings.

C.     For any other project the applicant shall establish and the approving authority shall find that the functional capacity of the environmentally sensitive habitat area is being maintained. (3326-5/96)

 

Chapter 218 M MIXED USE-TRANSIT CENTER DISTRICT
218.02 Mixed Use-Transit Center District Established
The purpose of the Mixed Use-Transit Center District is to implement the General Plan Land Use Plan mixed-use land use designation. This district provides areas for high density residential and commercial uses within one-quarter mile of established transit centers as determined by the Community Development Director. Transit centers, serving buses or other modes of transportation, are facilities where passengers transfer from one route to another. This district provides for pedestrian-friendly, transit oriented development in areas adjacent to existing transit infrastructure. (3819-12/08, 4094-10/16)

 

218.04 MU-TC District—Land Use Controls
In the following schedules, letter designations are used as follows:

“P” designates use classifications permitted in MU-TC district.

“PC” designates use classifications permitted on approval of a conditional use permit by the Planning Commission.

“ZA” designates use classifications permitted on approval of a conditional use permit by the Zoning Administrator.

Use classifications that are not listed are prohibited. Letters in parentheses in the “Additional Provisions” column refer to provisions following the schedule or located elsewhere in the Zoning Ordinance. Where letters in parentheses are opposite a use classification heading, referenced provisions shall apply to all use classifications under the heading.

MU-TC District: Land Use Controls

 

         P = Permitted

         PC = Conditional use permit approved by Planning Commission

         ZA = Conditional use permit approved by Zoning Administrator

 

 

 

Land Use Controls

Additional Provisions

Residential Uses

 

(A)(I)

Multifamily Residential

PC

 

 

 

 

Public and Semipublic Uses

 

(A)

Clubs and Lodges

ZA

 

Day Care, General

ZA

 

Day Care, Large Family

P

(C)

Government Offices

P

 

Public Safety Facilities

P

 

Religious Assembly

ZA

 

Schools, Public or Private

PC

 

 

 

 

Commercial Uses

 

(A)(H)(I)

Artists’ Studios

P

 

Banks and Savings & Loans

P

 

Catering Services

P

 

Drug Stores/Pharmacy

P

 

Eating and Drinking Establishments

P

 

w/ Alcohol

ZA

(B)(C)

w/ Live Entertainment

ZA

 

w/ Dancing

PC

(D)

w/ Outdoor Dining

ZA

(C)(E)

Food and Beverage Sales

P

 

w/ Alcohol Beverage Sales

ZA

(B)

Office, Business and Professional

P

 

Park and Recreational Facilities

P

 

Parking

PC

(F)

Personal Enrichment Services

P

(C)

Personal Services

P

 

Retail Sales

P

(G)

Visitor Accommodations

PC

 

 

MU-TC District: Additional Provisions

(A)   All projects in this district shall have both residential and nonresidential components. At least 50% of the building fronting public streets at the ground level shall be nonresidential uses. At least 50% of the project shall be residential uses.

(B)   The following businesses proposing to sell alcoholic beverages for on-site or off-site consumption are exempt from the conditional use permit process: (1) Retail markets with no more than 10% of the floor area devoted to sales, display and storage of alcoholic beverages provided the sale of alcoholic beverages is not in conjunction with the sale of gasoline or other motor vehicle fuel; (2) Florist shops offering the sale of a bottle of an alcoholic beverage together with a floral arrangement.

(C)   Neighborhood notification requirements pursuant to Chapter 241.

(D)   See also Chapter 5.28, Dancing Halls, and Chapter 5.44, Restaurants—Amusement and Entertainment Premises.

(E)   Outdoor dining with alcohol sales shall be permitted with a conditional use permit to the Zoning Administrator. Outdoor dining without alcohol sales that is 400 square feet or less shall be permitted with an administrative permit. If over 400 square feet with no alcohol sales, neighborhood notification shall be required pursuant to Chapter 241.

(F)    Stand-alone or other permanent parking structures not ancillary to the permitted uses listed above. Must demonstrate necessity of use and comply with the requirements in Section 231.18(G) (Parking Structures).

(G)   See Section 230.94, Carts and Kiosks.

(H)   Development of vacant land or additions of 10,000 square feet or more in building floor area; or additions equal to or greater than 50% of the existing building’s floor area requires approval of a conditional use permit from the Zoning Administrator. The Community Development Director may refer any proposed project to the Zoning Administrator if the proposed project has the potential to impact residents or tenants in the vicinity (e.g., increased noise, traffic).

(I)    Projects within 500 feet of a PS District; see Chapter 244. (3819-12/08, 4094-10/16)

 

218.06 MU-TC District—Property Development Standards
A.    The following schedule prescribes development standards for MU-TC zoning district designated on the zoning map. The first column establishes the basic requirements for permitted and conditional uses. Letters in parentheses in the “Additional Requirements” column refer to additional development standards following the schedule.

B.     The floor area ratio is calculated on the basis of net site area. All required setbacks shall be measured from ultimate right-of-way and in accordance with the definitions set forth in Chapter 203, Definitions.

Property Development Standards for MU-TC District

 

 

 

MU-TCD

Additional Requirements

Minimum Lot Area (sq. ft.)

43,560

 

Minimum Lot Width (ft.)

100

 

Minimum Setbacks

 

 

Front (ft)

5

(A)(B)

Side (ft.)

10

(B)

Rear (ft.)

10

(B)

Maximum Height of Structures (ft.)

75

(C)

Maximum Wall Dimensions

 

(D)

Maximum Floor Area Ratio (FAR)

2.35

 

Minimum Site Landscaping (%)

8

(E)(F)

Minimum Lot Area per Dwelling Unit (sq. ft.)

-

 

Minimum Residential Floor Area

 

(I)

Maximum Lot Coverage (%)

75

 

Minimum Open Space

 

(J)

Accessibility within Dwellings

 

(K)

Lighting

 

(L)

Fences and Walls

 

(G)

Off-Street Parking and Loading

See Ch. 231

(H)

Outdoor Facilities

See Section 230.74

 

Screening of Mechanical Equipment

See Section 230.76

 

Antenna

See Section 230.80

(M)

Accessory Structures

See Ch. 230.08

 

Refuse Storage Areas

See Section 230.78

 

Underground Utilities

See Ch. 17.64

 

Performance Standards

See Section 230.82

 

Nonconforming Structures

See Ch. 236

 

Signs

See Ch. 233

(N)

Building Separations

 

(O)

Building Design Standards

 

(P)

Private Storage Space

 

(Q)

Reciprocal Access

 

(R)

 

MU-TC District: Additional Development Standards

(A)   Multiple street frontage lots shall provide front yards on each frontage.

(B)   Projections Into Setbacks.

(1)    See Section 230.68, Building Projections into Yards.

(2)    Balconies and bay windows may project into required setbacks and usable open space areas subject to Section 230.68, provided that balconies have open railings, glass, or architectural details with openings to reduce visible bulk. Balconies composed solely of solid enclosures are not allowed to project into required setbacks.

(3)    Awnings, canopies, covered walkways, covered patios, and uncovered arcades with no programmed indoor space may project into required setbacks and usable open space areas provided that a minimum five-foot setback is maintained to the property line.

(C)   Height Requirements. See Section 230.70, Measurement of Height, and Section 230.72, Exceptions to Height Limits. A minimum of two stories and a maximum of six stories shall be allowed.

(D)   Maximum Wall Dimensions. All building wall surfaces shall be no longer than 250 feet without either:

(1)    A break, a recess or offset measuring at least 10 feet that vary the depth of the building wall by a minimum of four feet, or

(2)    A series of offsets, projections or recesses, including balconies, at intervals of not more than 40 feet that vary the depth of the building wall by a minimum of four feet.

The director may grant exceptions or allow these standards to be modified for exceptional or unique structures subject to Design Review, Chapter 244.

(E)   Planting Areas. With the exception of sidewalks, driveways, pathways and paved outdoor seating areas, required front and street side yards shall be planting areas.

(F)    Landscape Improvements.

(1)    All landscape improvements shall comply with Chapter 232 unless otherwise provided herein.

(2)    General Tree Requirements. One 36-inch box tree shall be provided for every 45 lineal feet of street frontage planted within the setback areas adjacent to a street. In addition, there shall be one 36-inch box tree planted within the common open space areas for each ground or first level unit. Specimen palms may be substituted at a ratio of one-half foot brown trunk height for one inch of box tree inch required.

(G)   See Section 230.88, Fencing and Yards.

(H)   Off-Street Parking and Loading Provisions.

(1)    All off-street parking and loading provisions shall comply with Chapter 231 unless otherwise provided herein. Off-street parking spaces shall be provided in accordance with the following Schedule A:

 

Off-Street Parking Spaces Required in MU-TCD Zone—Schedule A

 

Use Classification

Spaces

Residential

 

Studio

1 space per unit

One bedroom

1 space per unit

Two bedrooms

2 spaces per unit

Three or more bedrooms

2.5 spaces per unit

Guests

1 space per 5 units

Commercial

Per Chapter 231

Public and Semipublic

Per Chapter 231

 

(2)    Compact parking spaces may be allowed but not to satisfy the minimum parking requirements.

(3)    Up to 20% of required parking may be provided by tandem spaces subject to conditional use permit approval. Each tandem space shall be counted as one-half space for purposes of determining the number of parking spaces that are provided.

(I)    Minimum Floor Area. Each dwelling unit in a mixed-use building shall have the minimum floor area of 500 square feet.

(J)    Open Space Requirements.

(1)    The minimum open space area (private and common) for mixed-use projects in the MU-TC District shall be 150 square feet per residential unit. For purposes of this subsection, open space shall mean an area which is designed and intended to be used for active or passive recreation. Open space may consist of private and/or common areas. Parking areas, access aisles, and driveways shall not qualify as usable open space.

(2)    Private Open Space.

(a)    Private open space shall be provided in courts or balconies within which a horizontal rectangle has no dimension less than six feet.

(b)    Minimum of 75% of the dwelling units shall be provided a minimum of 60 square feet of private open space.

(c)    Private open space shall be contiguous to the unit and for the exclusive use of the occupants. Private open space shall not be accessible to any dwelling unit except the unit it serves and shall be physically separated from common areas by a wall or hedge at least 42 inches in height.

(3)    Common Open Space.

(a)    Common open space, provided by interior side yards, patios, courts, and terraces, shall be designed so that no dimension is less than 10 feet, shall be open to the sky, and shall not include driveways or parking areas.

(b)    Projects with more than 20 units shall include at least one amenity, such as a clubhouse, swimming pool, tennis court, volleyball court, outdoor cooking facility, or other recreation facility. Such common amenity spaces shall count toward the common open space requirement.

(K)   All habitable rooms in a dwelling unit shall be accessible from within the dwelling.

 

(L)   Lighting. Lighting shall be provided in all projects along all vehicular accessways and major walkways. Lighting shall be directed onto the driveways and walkways within the development and away from adjacent properties. A lighting plan shall be submitted for approval by the director.

(M)  See Section 230.80, Antennas.

(N)   See Chapter 233, Signs—Commercial Districts, for applicable provisions related to signs in the commercial component of the MU-TC District.

(O)   Building Separations. Building separations shall be provided in all mixed-use projects in the MU-TC District subject to the following requirements:

(1)    The minimum building separation shall be not less than 20 feet opposite a window in a living room and 14 feet opposite a window for any other habitable room.

(2)    The building separation shall be open to the sky. Eaves may project a maximum two feet into this area on each side.

(P)    Building Design Standards. Buildings in the MU-TC District shall be built in accordance with the following requirements:

(1)    The maximum building length shall be 300 feet except as provided below. Building length is defined as the total length of a primary building mass lining a street.

A 20-foot inset of the building plane with pedestrian access may count as a break in the building length. If the inset varies by floor, then the average inset shall exceed 20 feet.

(2)    The maximum block size shall be 2,400 feet. Block size is a measure of the total length of the street-fronting property lines along all block faces enclosed within the nearest surrounding publicly accessible streets.

(Q)   Private Storage Space. An average of 50 cubic feet of private storage space shall be provided for each residential dwelling unit outside such unit. Such private storage space shall be fully enclosed and lockable.

(R)   Reciprocal Access. Reciprocal ingress/egress access with adjacent properties shall be provided for all projects. (3819-12/08)

 

218.08 Modifications for Affordable Housing
The Planning Commission may approve a conditional use permit modifying the minimum property development standards in this chapter for affordable housing, as provided in Section 230.14. The proposed modifications shall be requested in writing by the applicant, accompanied by a detailed pro-forma, rental guidelines, deed restrictions, financial subsidies, and other types of documentation which will serve to demonstrate the need for a reduction of development standards. Modifications to the standards may include, but are not limited to, the parking requirements and open space. The specific standard(s) from which the applicant is requesting relief shall be identified and alternative development standard(s) proposed. (3819-12/08)

 

218.10 Sustainable Development
Sustainable or “green” building practices shall be incorporated into the design of the proposed structures and associated site improvements. Sustainable building practices shall include (but are not limited to) those recommended by the U.S. Green Building Council’s Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design (LEED) Program certification or Build It Green’s Green Building Guidelines and Rating Systems. (3819-12/08)

 

218.12 Review of Plans
All applications for new construction, initial establishment of use, exterior alterations and additions shall be submitted to the Community Development Department for review. Discretionary review shall be required as follows:

A.    Zoning Administrator Review. Projects requiring a conditional use permit from the Zoning Administrator; projects on substandard lots; see Chapter 241.

B.     Design Review Board. See Chapter 244.

C.     Planning Commission. Projects requiring a conditional use permit from the Planning Commission; see Chapter 241.

D.    Projects in the Coastal Zone. A Coastal Development Permit is required unless the project is exempt; see Chapter 245. (3819-12/08, 4094-10/16)

Title 22 ZONING CODE—OVERLAY DISTRICTS
Chapter 220 O OIL PRODUCTION OVERLAY DISTRICT
220.02 Oil Production Overlay Districts Established
The Oil Production Overlay District and a subdistrict are established by this chapter as follows:

A.    The O District provides areas to accommodate only oil operations with no drilling.

B.     An O1 subdistrict designation provides areas where oil drilling is allowed, subject to a conditional use permit.

 

220.04 Zoning Map Designator and Applicability
The zoning map shall show all property affected by adding an “-O” or “-O1” to the base district designator. The provisions in this chapter shall apply in addition to the requirements of any district with which the O or O1 District is combined. Where conflicts arise, the provisions of this chapter shall govern.

 

220.06 Area Requirements
A.    O District. The minimum area required to establish an O District is 1,500 square feet, with a minimum width of 25 feet and a minimum length of 60 feet.

B.     O1 District. The minimum area required to establish an O1 District is 15,000 square feet, with a minimum width of 100 feet and a minimum length of 150 feet.

 

220.08 Reuse Plan Required
No land division or development shall occur on land subject to an O or O1 Overlay District unless it is in accord with a plan for the disposition or treatment of any existing or proposed oil wells or oil operations within the district that has been approved in writing by the oil operator or lessee and approved by the director, Zoning Administrator or Planning Commission in accord with Section 220.10.

The subdivider or developer shall send the plan by certified mail to the oil operator or lessee for review, comment and approval. Upon receipt of the oil operator’s or lessee’s approval and/or comments, the subdivider or developer shall submit the plan and the approval and/or comments to the director and Fire Chief.

A.    If the oil operator or lessee has approved the plan, the Fire Chief may recommend the director approve the plan upon finding it conforms to all applicable provisions of the Municipal Code.

B.     If the oil operator or lessee does not approve the plan, and if the director and Fire Chief find the plan in compliance with the Municipal Code, then the plan and any comments of the oil operator or lessee shall be transmitted to the director. The director shall forward the plan and comments to the Zoning Administrator or Planning Commission for review in conjunction with the entitlement proceedings, if required. The oil operator or lessee shall be notified by certified mail at least seven days prior to the review.

Failure to submit and obtain approval of a reuse plan shall be grounds for disapproval of the proposed subdivision, division of land or development.

 

220.10 Criteria for Approval of a Reuse Plan
The director, Zoning Administrator or Planning Commission may approve the plan only upon finding that:

A.    Open space has been reserved around the oil operation site to allow for all existing and future equipment which could reasonably be expected to be used on the site, including any setbacks from new development required by the Fire Chief;

B.     Access from a public street or alley to all operation sites is provided for portable equipment and emergency vehicles;

C.     Expansion of the existing facilities, if permitted in the O District, can be accomplished;

D.    Any proposed development includes all provisions for soundproofing and fire protection required by the Fire Chief;

E.     Screening of oil facilities from any new development are included in the reuse plan;

F.     If located in the coastal zone, the reuse plan is consistent with the certified Local Coastal Program. (3334-6/97)

 

220.12 Site Compliance
No subdivision or development shall occur on property designated O or O1 unless said property is in compliance with Title 15, the Uniform Fire Code, and any other applicable federal, state, county or local rules or regulations, and approved by the Fire Chief. Site compliance includes, but is not limited to oil well abandonment and contaminated soil remediation.

 

220.14 Land Use Controls and Development Standards
The land use controls and development standards applicable in an O or O1 District shall be as prescribed by the base zoning district within which it is combined, unless modified by another overlay district and by the following restrictions:

A.    O District. Any oil operation except drilling is allowed, subject to approval by the Fire Chief.

B.     O1 District. Drilling and any oil operation are allowed, subject to approval of a conditional use permit by the Planning Commission.

 

220.16 Portable Equipment Required
No person or persons shall use or cause to be used any equipment in an O District for drilling, redrilling, rework, well servicing or repair except portable equipment or such other equipment as may be approved by the Fire Department. No person or persons using such equipment or causing such equipment to be so used, shall maintain or store said equipment in an O District upon completion of the work for which such equipment was used.

 

220.18 Application for Designation
Any person requesting that an O District be established on a property shall submit the following information to the director:

A.    Complete legal description of the property.

B.     Plot plan showing the location of all existing and proposed oil facilities including, but not limited to, wells, tanks, dikes, pipelines, heaters, and storage sheds. The plan shall also show the location of accessways from any well to a public street or alley.

C.     The location of the nearest public road, street, or alley, and occupied residence or commercial structure and places of public assembly within 500 feet of each well.

 

220.20 O1 District Dedication Requirements
Prior to issuance of a drilling permit for a new well located on any O1 parcel abutting a public street, alley or highway, all real property shall be dedicated or an irrevocable offer of dedication made of such real property which the City requires for streets and alleys, including access rights and abutters’ rights, drainage, public utility easements, and other public easements. In addition, all streets and alleys shall be improved, or an agreement entered into for such improvements, including curbs, gutters, sidewalks, paving, street trees, street lights, and street drainage in full compliance with the City’s standards.

 

220.22 Waiver or Reduction of Dedication Requirements
An oil operator may apply for a waiver or reduction of dedication and improvement requirements when applying for a conditional use permit for drilling, and any such waiver or reduction, when granted, shall apply only to the well or wells specified in the application.

 

220.24 Criteria for Modification or Reduction of Dedication Requirements
The director shall approve, conditionally approve, or deny upon consent of Fire Chief and Director of Public Works the request for a waiver or reduction of dedication requirements after considering the following factors:

A.    Estimated period of time that the proposed new well(s) and related facilities will be in operation;

B.     Degree of intensity of development of surrounding area;

C.     Effect of the proposed well on vehicular traffic in the vicinity of the site; and

D.    Extent of the proposed oil well operation. (3709-6/05)

 

Chapter 221 CZ COASTAL ZONE OVERLAY DISTRICT
221.02 Coastal Zone Overlay District Established
The purpose of the CZ Coastal Zone Overlay District is to provide supplementary provisions and specify permitted uses within the City’s coastal zone, consistent with the California Coastal Act of 1976 (Division 20 of the Public Resources Code), the General Plan, and the Local Coastal Program Land Use Plan. (3334-6/97)

 

221.04 Zoning Map Designator
The Zoning Map shall show all property subject to the provisions of this chapter by adding a “-CZ” designator to the base district designator.

 

221.06 Requirements for Coastal Development Permit
Any development in a CZ Overlay District shall require a Coastal Development Permit issued pursuant to Chapter 245 unless the development is exempt.

 

221.07 Impermissible Alteration
Any area that constitutes wetlands or ESHA that has been removed, altered, filled or degraded as a result of activities carried out without compliance with the California Coastal Act requirements shall be protected as required by the City’s Local Coastal Program Land Use Plan. (3834-7/09)

 

221.08 Land Use Controls
The land use controls for the CZ Overlay District shall be those of the base district with which the CZ Overlay District is combined. Where conflicts arise, the provisions of this chapter shall govern.

 

221.10 Requirements for New Development Adjacent to Resource Protection Area
As a condition of new development adjacent to a resource protection area, which includes any wetland, environmentally sensitive habitat area (ESHA), associated buffers, land zoned coastal conservation, as the same are defined in the City’s Local Coastal Program, an applicant shall comply with the requirements listed below. These requirements shall be applicable to all lots within new subdivisions as well as development proposed on existing lots within and/or adjacent to resource protection areas.

A.    Landscape Plan shall be prepared that prohibits the planting, naturalization or persistence of invasive plants, and encourages low-water-use plants, and plants primarily native to coastal Orange County of local stock.

B.     Domestic Animal Control Plan shall be prepared that details methods to be used to prevent pets from entering any resource protection areas, including, but not limited to appropriate fencing and barrier plantings.

C.     Pest Management Plan shall be prepared that, at a minimum, prohibits the use of rodenticides, and restricts the use of pesticides, and herbicides in outdoor areas, except necessary vector control conducted by the City or county.

D.    Street lighting, exterior residential lighting and recreational lighting adjacent to resource protection areas shall not significantly disrupt habitat values within the resource protection areas.

E.     Covenants, conditions and restriction (CC&Rs) in a form approved by the Office of the City Attorney shall be recorded specifying that the requirements and restrictions of this section apply. The CC&Rs shall be binding on each of the lots, shall run with the land affected by the subdivision and shall be included or incorporated by reference in every deed transferring one or more of the lots in the subdivision.

F.     The project applicant shall provide any buyer of a housing unit within the CZ Overlay District an information packet that explains the sensitivity of the natural habitats within or adjacent to the project site and the need to minimize impacts on the designated resource protection area(s), and the prohibition on landscaping that includes exotic invasive plant species. The information packet shall include a copy of the domestic animal control plan and pest management plan and be required for all sales of housing units pursuant to the CC&Rs.

G.    Protective fencing or barriers shall be installed and maintained between the resource protection areas and areas developed for homes or recreational use for the purpose of minimizing human and domestic animal presence in resource protection areas, including restored and preserved wetland and ESHA buffer areas; however, public access to designated passive recreational use areas shall be provided. Visual impacts created from any walls or barriers adjacent to open space conservation and passive recreational use areas shall be minimized through measures such as open fencing/wall design, landscape screening, use of undulating or off-set wall features, etc.

H.    Walls, fences, gates and boundary treatments shall use wood, wrought iron, frosted or partially-frosted glass or other visually permeable barriers that are designed to prevent creation of a bird strike hazard. Clear glass or plexiglass shall not be installed unless appliqués (e.g. stickers/decals) designed to reduce bird-strikes by reducing reflectivity and transparency are also used.

I.      Uses allowed adjacent to designated wetlands and environmentally sensitive habitat areas shall ensure the continuance of the habitat value and function of preserved and restored wetlands and ESHA. (3834-7/09, 3903-12/10 (certified by California Coastal Commission 12/10))

 

221.12 Coastal Access and Public Use Areas—Signs Required
As a condition of new development on lots on or adjacent to recreation areas, public accessways, public use areas, trails, bikeways or the shoreline, or in conjunction with dedications of lateral or vertical access, the applicant shall provide signs identifying the public access and public use areas.

 

221.14 Preservation of Visual Resources
A.    An applicant proposing new development shall provide the director with an evaluation of the project’s visual impact, and incorporate in its design, to the satisfaction of the director, the following elements:

1.     Preservation of public views to and from the bluffs, to the shoreline and ocean, and to the wetlands;

2.     Preservation of existing mature trees to the maximum extent feasible.

B.     Any alteration of the natural landform of the bluffs seaward of Pacific Coast Highway including grading and the development of parking lots shall be prohibited.

C.     Alterations necessary for development of public trails and stabilization of bluffs may be permitted subject to approval of a Coastal Development Permit. (3334-6/97)

 

221.16 Community Facilities
Prior to the issuance of a Coastal Development Permit, the director shall determine that adequate public services and facilities will be available to serve the proposed development, consistent with the General Plan.

 

221.17 Phasing
The provision of public access and recreation benefits associated with private development (such as but not limited to public accessways, public bike paths, habitat restoration and enhancement, etc.) shall be phased such that the public benefit(s) are in place prior to or concurrent with the private development but not later than occupation of any of the private development. (3834-7/09)

 

221.18 Diking, Dredging, and Filling
Diking, dredging or filling shall be permitted only where there is no feasible, less environmentally-damaging alternative and where feasible mitigation measures have been provided, consistent with the Coastal Conservation District in Chapter 216. (3334-6/97)

 

221.20 Hazards
As a condition of new development, the applicant shall be required to submit a report evaluating geologic, seismic, flood and fire hazards, and shall be designed to:

A.    Comply with all recommendations and provisions contained in the Alquist-Priolo Special Studies Zones Act (California Public Resources Code Chapter 7.5) for identified seismic hazards.

B.     Comply with all provisions relating to the FP Floodplain Overlay District, if applicable.

C.     Comply with all provisions relating to methane districts as defined in Chapter 17.04.

D.    Development in Subarea 4K as depicted in Figures C-6a, and C-10 of the Coastal Element Land Use Plan, shall comply with the approved Hazard Mitigation and Flood Protection Plan required in Table C-2 of the Coastal Element Land Use Plan. (3834-7/09)

 

221.22 Buffer Requirements
As a condition of development adjacent to environmentally sensitive habitats delineated in the General Plan and, for development in the coastal zone, environmentally sensitive habitats identified in the Local Coastal Program, a minimum 100-foot buffer from the edge of the habitat as determined by a site specific biological assessment area shall be provided. In the case of substantial development or significantly increased human impacts, a wider buffer may be required in accordance with an analysis of the factors identified in subsections A through C of this section. If the existing development or site configuration cannot accommodate a 100-foot buffer, then the buffer shall be reviewed by the California Department of Fish and Game and designed to:

A.    Protect the functional relationship between wetland and adjacent upland;

B.     Ensure that the most sensitive species will not be disturbed significantly by permitted development, based on habitat requirements of both resident and migratory species, and the short- and long-term adaptability of various species to the presence of human beings; and

C.     Allow for interception of any additional material eroded as a result of the proposed development, based on soil, vegetation, slope and runoff characteristics, and impervious surface coverage.

 

221.24 Energy Facilities
New, modified or expanded energy facilities shall comply with the following requirements:

A.    Oil extraction operations shall be located where there are no other feasible, less environmentally-damaging locations based on the following priority, with the first location being the most preferable.

1.     Existing consolidated islands;

2.     New consolidated islands;

3.     Existing oil extraction sites;

4.     New sites outside the coastal zone; and

5.     New sites within the coastal zone.

B.     New pipelines shall be underground and:

1.     Be consolidated in existing pipeline corridors and shall avoid recreation areas and environmentally sensitive habitat areas unless there is no feasible, less environmentally damaging, alternative location;

2.     Incorporate automatic shutoff valves to isolate any segments carrying hazardous liquids;

3.     Be constructed with erosion control measures and without the use of any chemical herbicides;

4.     Shall mitigate to the maximum extent feasible adverse environmental impacts; and

5.     Shall not jeopardize public health, safety or welfare.

C.     New oil separation and treatment facilities shall be permitted only if:

1.     It is infeasible to utilize excess capacity of existing facilities; and

2.     The location and design of the site is consistent with other provisions of the CZ Overlay District and other applicable requirements. (3334-6/97)

 

221.26 Residential Density Limitations
The density limitations of the base district shall apply to property subject to a CZ Overlay District.

 

221.28 Maximum Height
A.    The maximum height limits within the CZ Overlay District are 35 feet for a residential structure and 50 feet for a commercial structure, or the base district height limit, whichever is lower.

B.     All rooftop mechanical devices, except for solar panels, which may be permitted to exceed the height limit under Section 230.72, shall be set back and screened so that they are not visible.

 

221.30 Off-Street Parking Requirements
All development shall comply with the off-street parking requirements of Chapter 231. (3334-6/97)

 

221.32 Landscaping
All projects within the CZ Overlay District shall comply with the landscape improvement requirements of Chapter 232 unless exempt, and the requirements of Section 221.10. (3834-7/09)

 

221.34 Signs
All signs shall comply with Chapter 233.

 

221.36 Public Access Implementation
A.    Purpose. The purpose of this section includes the following:

1.     To achieve the basic state goals of maximizing public access to the coast and public recreational opportunities, as set forth in the California Coastal Act codified at Section 30000 through 30900 of the California Public Resources Code. Section 30001.5(c) states that public access both to and along the shoreline shall be maximized consistent with sound resource conservation principles and constitutionally protected rights of private property owners;

2.     To implement the public access and recreation policies of Chapter 3 of the Coastal Act (Sections 30210 through 30255); and

3.     To implement the certified land use plan of the Local Coastal Program which is required by Section 30500(a) of the Coastal Act to include a specific public access component to ensure that maximum public access to the coast and public recreation areas is provided.

4.     In achieving these purposes, this chapter shall be given the most liberal construction possible so that public access to the navigable waters shall always be provided and protected consistent with the goals, objectives and policies of the California Coastal Act and Article X, Section 4, of the California Constitution.

B.     Definitions. The following definitions shall govern the implementation of the public access requirements of the Coastal Act and this public access ordinance.

1.     Development. The placement or erection of any solid material or structure on land, in or under water; discharge or disposal of any materials; grading, removing, dredging, mining, or extraction of any materials; change in the density or intensity of use of land, including, but not limited to, subdivision pursuant to Section 66410 of the Government Code, and any other division of land, including lot splits, except where the land division is brought about in connection with the purchase of such land by a public agency for public recreational use; and change in the intensity of use of water, or access thereto; construction, reconstruction, demolition, or alteration of the size of any structure, including any facility of any private, public, or municipal utility; and the removal or harvesting of major vegetation.

As used in this section “structure” includes but is not limited to, any building, road, pipe, flume, conduit, siphon, aqueduct, telephone line, and electrical power transmission and distribution line.

2.     New Development. For purposes of implementing the public access requirements of Public Resources Code Section 30212 and of this section, “new development” includes “development” as defined in paragraph 1 of this subsection except the following:

a.     Structures Destroyed by Natural Disaster. The replacement of any structure, other than a public works facility, destroyed by a disaster; provided that the replacement structure conforms to applicable existing zoning requirements, is for the same use as the destroyed structure, does not exceed either the floor area, height, or bulk of the destroyed structure by more than 10%, and is sited in the same location on the affected property as the destroyed structure. As used in this section, “disaster” means any situation in which the force or forces which destroyed the structure to be replaced were beyond the control of the owners.

b.     Demolition and Reconstruction. The demolition and reconstruction of a single-family residence; provided that the reconstructed residence shall not exceed either the floor area, height or bulk of the former structure by more than 10%, and that the reconstructed residence shall be sited in the same location on the affected property as the former structure.

c.     Improvements. Improvements to any structure which do not change the intensity of its use, which do not increase either the floor area, height or bulk of the structure by more than 10%, which do not block or impede access, and which do not result in a seaward encroachment by the structure.

d.     Repair and Maintenance. Repair and maintenance activity which, pursuant to Public Resources Code Section 30610, requires no permit unless the activity will have an adverse impact on lateral public access along the beach.

e.     Reconstruction and Repair. The reconstruction or repair of any seawall; provided that the reconstructed or repaired seawall is not seaward of the location of the former structure. As used in this section, “reconstruction or repair” of a seawall shall not include replacement by a different type of structure or other modification in design or construction which results in different or greater impacts to shoreline resources than those of the existing structure.

3.     Sea. The Pacific Ocean and all harbors, bays, channels, estuaries, salt marshes, sloughs, and other areas subject to tidal action through any connection with the Pacific Ocean, excluding nonestuarine rivers, streams, tributaries, creeks and flood control and drainage channels.

4.     Types of Public Access and Recreation.

a.     Lateral public access provides public access and use along or parallel to the sea.

b.     Blufftop access provides public access and coastal viewing along a coastal blufftop area.

c.     Vertical access provides a public access connection between the first public road, trail, or public use area nearest the sea and the publicly owned tidelands or established access.

d.     Trail access provides public access along a coastal recreational path, including to and along lakes, rivers, streams, freshwater marshes, flood control channels/features, significant habitat and open space areas or similar resource areas, and which also may link inland recreational facilities to the shoreline.

e.     Recreational access provides public access to coastal recreational resources through means other than those listed above, including but not limited to parking facilities, viewing platforms and blufftop parks.

5.     Character of Accessway Use.

a.     Pass and repass refers to the right of the public to walk and run along an accessway. Because this use limitation can substantially restrict the public’s ability to enjoy adjacent publicly owned tidelands by restricting the potential use of lateral accessways, it will be applied only in connection with vertical access or other types of access where the findings required by subsections O and R of this section establish that the limitation is necessary to protect natural habitat values, topographic features (such as eroding bluffs), or privacy of the landowner.

b.     Passive recreational use refers to the right of the public to conduct activities normally associated with beach use, such as walking, swimming, jogging, sunbathing, fishing, surfing, picnicking, but not including organized sports, campfires, or vehicular access other than for emergencies or maintenance.

c.     Active recreational use refers to the right of the public to conduct the full range of beach-oriented activities, not including horseback riding and use of motorized vehicles unless specifically authorized.

C.     Access Required. As a condition of approval and prior to issuance of a permit or other authorization for any new development identified in paragraphs 1 through 4 of this subsection, except as provided in subsection D of this section, an offer to dedicate an easement or other legal mechanism pursuant to paragraph (M)(2) of this section for one or more of the types of access identified in subsections E through H of this section shall be required and shall be supported by findings required by subsections O through Q of this section; provided that no such condition of approval for coastal access shall be imposed if the analysis required by paragraphs (O)(1) and (2) establishes that the development will not adversely affect, either individually or cumulatively, the ability of the public to reach and use public tidelands and coastal resources or that the access dedication requirement will not alleviate the access burdens identified or is not reasonably related to those burdens in both nature and extent.

1.     New development on any parcel or location where public access is identified in the land use plan as desirable.

2.     New development between the nearest public roadway and the sea.

3.     New development on any site where there is substantial evidence of a public right of access to the sea acquired through use or a public right of access through legislative authorization.

4.     New development on any site where a trail, blufftop access or other recreational access is necessary to mitigate impacts of the development on public access.

D.    Exceptions. Subsection C of this section shall apply except in the following instances:

1.     Projects excepted from the definition of “new development” in paragraphs (B)(2)(a) through (e).

2.     Where findings required by subsections O and P establish any of the following:

a.     Public access is inconsistent with the public safety, military security needs, or protection of fragile coastal resources;

b.     Adequate access exists nearby; or

c.     Agriculture would be adversely affected.

3.     Exceptions identified in paragraph (D)(2) shall be supported by written findings required by subsection O of this section.

E.     Lateral Public Access—Minimum Requirements.

1.     A condition to require lateral access as a condition of approval of a Coastal Development Permit (or other authorization to proceed with development) pursuant to subsection C of this section shall provide the public with the permanent right of lateral public access and passive recreational use along the shoreline (or public recreational area, bikeway, or blufftop area, as applicable); provided that in some cases controls on the time, place and manner of uses may be justified by site characteristics including sensitive habitat values or fragile topographic features, or by the need to protect the privacy of residential development.

2.     Active recreational use may be appropriate in many cases where the development is determined to be especially burdensome on public access. Examples include cases where the burdens of the proposed project would severely impact public recreational use of the shoreline, where the proposed development is not one of the priority uses specified in Public Resources Code Section 30222, where active recreational uses reflect the historic public use of the site, where active recreational uses would be consistent with the use of the proposed project, and where such uses would not significantly interfere with the privacy of the landowner. In determining the appropriate character of public use, findings shall be made on the specific factors enumerated in subsection P of this section. Lateral access shall be legally described as required in subsection J of this section.

F.     Vertical Public Access—Minimum Requirements.

1.     A condition to require vertical public access as a condition of approval of a Coastal Development Permit (or other authorization to proceed with development) pursuant to subsection C of this section shall provide the public with the permanent right of access: (a) located in specific locations identified in the certified Local Coastal Program for future vertical access, or (b) located in a site for which the local government has reviewed an application for a development permit and has determined a vertical accessway is required pursuant to the access and recreation policies of the Coastal Act or the applicable provisions of the Local Coastal Program.

2.     A condition to require vertical access as a condition of approval of a Coastal Development Permit (or other authorization to proceed with development) shall provide the public with the permanent right of vertical access and be limited to the public right of passive recreational use unless another character of use is specified as a condition of the development. In determining whether another character of use is appropriate, findings shall be made on the specific factors identified in subsection P of this section.

3.     Each vertical accessway shall extend from the road to the shoreline (or bluff edge) and shall be legally described as required in subsection J of this section. The access easement shall be a minimum of 10 feet wide. If a residential structure is proposed, the accessway should not be sited closer than 10 feet to the structure.

G.    Blufftop Access—Minimum Requirements.

1.     A condition to require public access along a blufftop as a condition of approval of a Coastal Development Permit (or other authorization to proceed with development) pursuant to subsection C of this section shall provide the public with the permanent right of scenic and visual access from the blufftop to the public tidelands.

2.     The blufftop access shall be limited to passive recreational use and coastal viewing purposes unless another character of use is specified as a condition of development. In determining the appropriate character of use findings shall be made on the specific factors identified in subsection P of this section.

3.     Each blufftop accessway shall be described in the conditions of approval of the Coastal Development Permit as an area beginning at the current bluff edge extending 25 feet inland. However, the accessway shall not extend any closer than 10 feet from an occupied residential structure. Due to the potential for erosion of the bluff edge, the condition shall include a mechanism that will cause the accessway to be adjusted inland as the edge recedes. Any permanent improvements should be set back from the accessway by a distance derived by multiplying the annual rate of blufftop retreat by the life expectancy in years of the improvements.

4.     The accessway shall be legally described as required in subsection J of this section, with the furthest inland extent of the area possible referenced as a distance from a fixed monument in the following manner:

“Such easement shall be _____ feet wide located along the blufftop as measured inland from the daily bluff edge. As the daily blufftop edge may vary and move inland, the location of this right-of-way will change over time with the then current bluff edge, but in no case shall it extend any closer than _____ feet from ______ (a fixed inland point, such as the centerline of a public road or other easement monument).”

H.    Trail Access—Minimum Requirements. A condition to require public access as a condition of approval of a Coastal Development Permit (or other authorization to proceed with development) pursuant to subsection C of this section shall provide the public with the permanent right of access and active recreational use (1) along a designated alignment of a coastal recreational path or trail in specific locations identified in the Local Coastal Program (LCP) for implementation of trail access; or (2) in locations where it has been determined that a trail access is required to link recreational areas to the shoreline or provide alternative recreation and access opportunities pursuant to the access and recreation policies of the LCP and Coastal Act, consistent with other provisions of this chapter. In determining if another character of use is appropriate, findings shall be made on the specific factors enumerated in subsection P of this section. The trail access shall be legally described as required by subsection J of this section.

I.      Protection of Historic Public Use.

1.     Siting and Design Requirements. Development shall be sited and designed in a manner which does not interfere with or diminish any public right of access which may have been established based on historic public use. Only when site constraints are so severe that siting of the accessway or recreational use area in its historic location would significantly impair the proposed development and alternative development siting is not feasible, development may be sited in the area of public right of access based on historic use provided that the applicant provides an equivalent area of public access or recreation to and along the same destination and including the same type and intensity of public use as previously existed on the site. Mechanisms for guaranteeing the continued public use of the area or equivalent area shall be required in accordance with subsections E through H of this section.

2.     Minimum Requirements. An access condition shall not serve to extinguish or waive public prescriptive rights. In permits where evidence shows the possibility of such prescriptive rights, the following language shall be added to the access condition: “Nothing in this condition shall be construed to constitute a waiver of any prescriptive rights which may exist on the parcel itself or on the designated easement.”

J.      Legal Description of an Accessway—Recordation.

1.     An access dedication required pursuant to subsection C of this section shall be described in the condition of approval of the permit or other authorization for development in a manner that provides the public, the property owner, and the accepting agency with the maximum amount of certainty as to the location of the accessway. As part of the condition of approval, easements shall be described as follows:

a.     For lateral access: along the entire width of the property from the mean high tide line to (as applicable) the toe of the bluff, the toe of the seawall, or other appropriate boundary such as stringline or dripline;

b.     For blufftop access or trail access: extending inland from the bluff edge or along the alignment of a recreational trail;

c.     For vertical access: extending from the road to the shoreline (or bluff edge). A privacy buffer provided pursuant to subsection L of this section shall be described, as applicable.

2.     Prior to the issuance of the Coastal Development Permit or other authorization for development, the landowner shall execute and record a document in a form and content acceptable to the Coastal Commission [or local agency authorized pursuant to 14 California Administrative Code Section 13574(b)], consistent with provisions of the Coastal Development Permit ordinance, irrevocably offering to dedicate to a public agency or private association approved by the Coastal Commission [or local agency authorized by the Commission pursuant to 14 California Administrative Code Section 13574(b)] an easement for a specific type of access and a specific character of use as applicable to the particular condition.

3.     The recorded document shall provide that the offer to dedicate shall not be used or construed to allow anyone, prior to acceptance of the dedication, to interfere with any rights of public access acquired through use which may exist on the property.

4.     The recorded document shall include legal descriptions of both the applicant’s entire parcel and the easement area and a map to scale. The offer shall be recorded free of prior liens and any other encumbrances which the Coastal Commission (or local agency authorized by the Commission) determines may affect the interest being conveyed. The offer to dedicate shall run with the land in favor of the People of the State of California, binding all successors and assignees, and shall be irrevocable for a period of 21 years, such period running from the date of recording.

K.    Management Plan—Minimum Requirements. A management plan may be required in conjunction with a dedication of public access in any case where there is substantial evidence of potential conflicts between public access use and other uses on or immediately adjacent to the site. Examples include access in areas of sensitive habitats, agricultural resources, or significant hazards, or adjoining residential neighborhoods or military security areas. The plan shall be prepared by the accepting agency and approved by the City prior to the opening of the access to public use. Where applicable, the plan should specify management controls on time and intensity of use, standards for privacy buffers, and requirements for maintenance of aesthetic values through such measures as litter control.

L.     Privacy Buffers—Minimum Requirements. Separation between a public accessway and adjacent residential use may be provided when necessary to protect the landowner’s privacy or security as well as the public’s right to use of the accessway. Any such buffer shall be provided within the development area. Access should not be sited closer to any residential structure than 10 feet. The buffer can be reduced where separation is achieved through landscaping, fences or grade separation.

M.    Implementation.

1.     A dedicated accessway shall not be required to be opened to public use until a public agency or private association approved in accordance with subsection J agrees to accept responsibility for maintenance and liability of the access, except in cases where immediate public access is implemented through a deed restriction.

2.     In any case where the size and character of a development would impose very substantial burdens on public access, such as a large resort development on the shoreline, and where the applicant has the capacity to operate and maintain the accessway or recreation area, a deed restriction may be required instead of an offer to dedicate in order to ensure immediate public use of the area and maintenance of the area by the applicant and successors in interest. In any such case, all other applicable provisions of this section shall apply.

3.     Access facilities constructed on access easements (e.g., walkways, paved paths, boardwalks, etc.) should be no wider than necessary to accommodate the numbers and types of users that can reasonably be expected. Width of facilities can vary for ramps or paved walkways, depending on site factors.

N.    Title Information. As a requirement for any public access condition, prior to the issuance of the permit or other authorization for development, the applicant shall be required to furnish a title report and all necessary subordination agreements. Title insurance may also be required where easements are being granted. The amount of insurance shall reflect the estimated cost to acquire an equivalent accessway or recreational use elsewhere in the vicinity. All offers shall be made free of all encumbrances which the approving authority pursuant to subsection J determines may affect the interest being conveyed. If any such interest exists which could erase the access easement, it must be subordinated through a written and recorded agreement.

O.    Required Overall Findings. Written findings of fact, analysis and conclusions addressing public access must be included in support of all approvals, denials or conditional approvals of projects between the first public road and the sea (whether development or new development) and of all approvals or conditional approvals of projects (whether development or new development) where an access dedication is included in the project proposal or required as a condition of approval. Such findings shall address the applicable factors identified by subsection P and shall reflect the specific level of detail specified, as applicable. Findings supporting all such decisions shall include:

1.     A statement of the individual and cumulative burdens imposed on public access and recreation opportunities based on applicable factors identified pursuant to subsection P of this section. The type of affected public access and recreation opportunities shall be clearly described.

2.     An analysis based on applicable factors identified in subsection P of this section of the necessity for requiring public access conditions to find the project consistent with the public access provisions of the Coastal Act.

3.     A description of the legitimate governmental interest furthered by any access condition required.

4.     An explanation of how imposition of an access dedication requirement alleviates the access burdens identified.

P.     Required Project—Specific Findings. In determining any requirement for public access, including the type of access and character of use, the City shall evaluate and document in written findings the factors identified in paragraphs 1 through 5 of this subsection, to the extent applicable. The findings shall explain the basis for the conclusions and decisions of the City and shall be supported by substantial evidence in the record. If an access dedication is required as a condition of approval, the findings shall explain how the adverse effects which have been identified will be alleviated or mitigated by the dedication. As used in this subsection, “cumulative effect” means the effect of the individual project in combination with the effects of past projects, other current projects, and probable future projects, including development allowed under applicable planning and zoning.

1.     Project Effects on Demand for Access and Recreation. Identification of existing and open public access and coastal recreation areas and facilities in the regional and local vicinity of the development. Analysis of the project’s effects upon existing public access and recreation opportunities. Analysis of the project’s cumulative effects upon the use and capacity of the identified access and recreation opportunities, including public tidelands and beach resources, and upon the capacity of major coastal roads from subdivision, intensification or cumulative buildout. Projection of the anticipated demand and need for increased coastal access and recreation opportunities for the public. Analysis of the contribution of the project’s cumulative effects to any such projected increase. Description of the physical characteristics of the site and its proximity to the sea, tideland viewing points, upland recreation areas, and trail linkages to tidelands or recreation areas. Analysis of the importance and potential of the site, because of its location or other characteristics, for creating, preserving or enhancing public access to tidelands or public recreation opportunities.

2.     Shoreline Processes. Description of the existing shoreline conditions, including beach profile, accessibility and usability of the beach, history of erosion or accretion, character and sources of sand, wave and sand movement, presence of shoreline protective structures, location of the line of mean high tide during the season when the beach is at its narrowest (generally during the late winter) and the proximity of that line to existing structures, and any other factors which substantially characterize or affect the shoreline processes at the site. Identification of anticipated changes to shoreline processes and beach profile unrelated to the proposed development. Description and analysis of any reasonably likely changes, attributable to the primary and cumulative effects of the project, to wave and sand movement affecting beaches in the vicinity of the project; the profile of the beach; the character, extent, accessibility and usability of the beach; and any other factors which characterize or affect beaches in the vicinity. Analysis of the effect of any identified changes of the project—alone or in combination with other anticipated changes—will have upon the ability of the public to use public tidelands and shoreline recreation areas.

3.     Historic Public Use. Evidence of use of the site by members of the general public for a continuous five-year period (such use may be seasonal). Evidence of the type and character of use made by the public (vertical, lateral, blufftop, etc. and for passive and/or active recreational use, etc.). Identification of any agency (or person) who has maintained and/or improved the area subject to historic public use and the nature of the maintenance performed and improvements made. Identification of the record owner of the area historically used by the public and any attempts by the owner to prohibit public use of the area, including the success or failure of those attempts. Description of the potential for adverse impact on public use of the area from the proposed development (including but not limited to, creation of physical or psychological impediments to public use).

4.     Physical Obstructions. Description of any physical aspects of the development which block or impede the ability of the public to get to or along the tidelands, public recreation areas, or other public coastal resources or to see the shoreline.

5.     Other Adverse Impacts on Access and Recreation. Description of the development’s physical proximity and relationship to the shoreline and any public recreation area. Analysis of the extent to which buildings, walls, signs, streets or other aspects of the development, individually or cumulatively, are likely to diminish the public’s use of tidelands or lands committed to public recreation. Description of any alteration of the aesthetic, visual or recreational value of public use areas, and of any diminution of the quality or amount of recreational use of public lands which may be attributable to the individual or cumulative effects of the development.

Q.    Required Findings for Public Access Exceptions. Any determination that one of the exceptions of subsection D of this section applies to a development shall be supported by written findings of fact, analysis and conclusions which address all of the following:

1.     The type of access potentially applicable to the site involved (vertical, lateral, blufftop, etc.) and its location in relation to the fragile coastal resource to be protected, the agricultural use, the public safety concern, or the military facility which is the basis for the exception, as applicable.

2.     Unavailability of any mitigating measures to manage the type, character, intensity, hours, season or location of such use so that agricultural resources, fragile coastal resources, public safety, or military security, as applicable, are protected.

3.     Ability of the public, through another reasonable means, to reach the same area of public tidelands as would be made accessible by an accessway on the subject land.

 

R.     Findings for Management Plan Conditions. Written findings in support of a condition requiring a management plan for regulating the time and manner or character of public access use must address the following factors, as applicable:

1.     Identification and protection of specific habitat values including the reasons supporting the conclusion that such values must be protected by limiting the hours, seasons, or character of public use.

2.     Topographic constraints of the development site.

3.     Recreational needs of the public.

4.     Rights of privacy of the landowner which could not be mitigated by setting the project back from the accessway or otherwise conditioning the development.

5.     The requirements of the possible accepting agency, if an offer of dedication is the mechanism for securing public access.

6.     Feasibility of adequate setbacks, fencing, landscaping, and other methods as part of a management plan to regulate public use. (3334-6/97, 3834-7/09)

 

Chapter 222 FP FLOODPLAIN OVERLAY DISTRICT (FP1, FP2, FP3)
222.01 Statutory Authorization
The Constitution of the State of California has conferred upon local governments the authority to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Consistent with this authority, the City of Huntington Beach does hereby adopt this chapter to implement the City’s floodplain management regulations. (3845-12/09, 4145-5/18)

 

222.02 Floodplain Overlay District Established
The FP Floodplain Overlay District is established and applies to all areas of special flood hazard within the City. If not controlled, periodic inundation results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and government services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in areas of special flood hazard which increase flood heights and velocities, and when inadequately anchored, damage uses in other areas. Uses that are inadequately floodproofed, elevated or otherwise protected from flood damage also contribute to the flood loss.

 

222.04 Zoning Map Designators—Establishment of Hazard Areas
A.    The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) in the Flood Insurance Study for the City of Huntington Beach dated August 16, 1982 and delineated on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) dated February 16, 1983 (revised September 16, 1989) and the Orange County, county-wide FIRM dated November 3, 1993 and all subsequent revisions and/or amendments are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. FEMA’s most recent FIRM and flood insurance study (on file with the director) may be supplemented by studies for other areas which allow implementation of this chapter and which are recommended to the City Council by the director.

B.     Three subdistricts of the FP Overlay District are designated for purposes of flood hazard provisions.

1.     -FP1 Subdistrict shall apply to that area designated as a floodway or right-of-way necessary for implementation of the Santa Ana River Channel Plan by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers.

 

2.     -FP2 Subdistrict shall apply to FIRM areas A, AE, AO, and AH and any other area determined by the director to be subject to similar flood hazards.

3.     -FP3 Subdistrict shall apply to FIRM areas V or VE and any other area determined by the director to be subject to similar flood hazard.

C.     The FP District boundaries shall be delineated on the Zoning Map by adding a “-FP” designator to the base district designator for the area affected, followed by the appropriate subdistrict designation (1, 2, or 3).

 

222.06 Definitions
Except where the context clearly indicates otherwise, the definitions given in this section shall govern the provisions of this chapter.

Appeal. A request for review of the director’s interpretation of any provision of this chapter, or a request for a variance.

Area of Shallow Flooding. A designated AO or AH zone on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). The base flood depths range from one to three feet; a clearly defined channel does not exist; the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate; and velocity flow may be evident.

Area of Special Flood Hazard. The land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. This area is designated as Zone A, AO, AH, AE, V, and VE on the FIRM.

Base Flood. A flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year (also called the 100-year flood).

Basement. Any area of a building having its floor subgrade on all sides.

Breakaway Wall. Any type of wall, whether solid or lattice, and whether constructed of concrete, masonry, wood, metal, plastic, or any other suitable building material which is not part of the structural support of the building and which is designed to break away under abnormally high tides or wave action without damage to the structural integrity of the building on which it is used or any building to which it might be carried by flood waters. A breakaway wall shall have a safe design loading resistance of not less than 10 and no more than 20 pounds per square foot. Use of breakaway walls must be certified by a California registered engineer or architect and shall meet the following conditions:

1.     Breakaway wall collapse shall result from a water load less than that which would occur during the base flood; and

2.     The elevated portion of the building shall not incur any structural damage due to the effects of wind and water loads acting simultaneously in the event of a base flood.

Coastal High Hazard Area. The area subject to high velocity waters including, but not limited to, coastal and tidal inundation or tsunamis. The area is designated on a FIRM as Zone V and VE and as -FP3 in this chapter.

Development. Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating, or drilling operations or storage of equipment and materials.

Existing Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision. A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities including utilities, final grading or paving of pads and the construction of streets was completed before the effective date of the City’s floodplain management regulation.

Expansion to an Existing Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision. The preparation of additional manufactured home sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision by the construction of facilities servicing the lots on which the additional manufactured homes are to be affixed including, but not limited to, installation of utilities, construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads.

Flood or Flooding. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of inland or tidal waters; the unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff of surface waters from any source; mudslides; and condition resulting from flood-related erosion.

Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM). The official maps on which areas of special flood hazard, the risk premium zones and the floodway applicable to the community are delineated.

Flood Insurance Study. The “Flood Insurance Study for Orange County, CA and Incorporated Areas,” prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), providing flood profiles, the flood insurance rate maps, and the water surface elevations of the base flood.

Floodplain. Any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source.

Floodplain Management. The operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, and floodplain management control.

Floodplain Management Regulations. Zoning and subdivision ordinances, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as floodplain, grading and erosion control) and other applications of police power. This term describes federal, state or local regulations in any combination thereof which provide standards for the purpose of preventing and reducing flood damage and loss.

Floodproofing. Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes or adjustments to nonresidential structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water, and sanitary facilities, structures, and their contents. Floodproofing techniques are further described in FEMA Technical bulletins 1-93, 3-93, and 7-93.

Floodway. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot.

Functionally Dependent Use. A use which cannot perform its intended purposes unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities.

Highest Adjacent Grade. The highest natural elevation of the ground surface next to the proposed walls of a structure prior to construction.

Historic Structure. Any structure that is:

1.     Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register;

2.     Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;

3.     Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or

4.     Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either by an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior or directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.

Lowest Floor. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for the parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area, is not considered a building’s lowest floor provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements of this chapter.

Manufactured Home. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term “manufactured home” does not include a “recreation vehicle.”

Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision. A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.

Mean Sea Level. The National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on the FIRM are referenced.

New Construction. Structures for which the “start of construction” commenced on or after the effective date of the City’s floodplain management control (February 16, 1983).

New Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision. A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after February 16, 1983.

Recreational Vehicle. A vehicle which is:

1.     Built on a single chassis;

2.     400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection;

3.     Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck; and

4.     Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.

Sand Dunes. Naturally occurring accumulations of sand in ridges or mounds landward of the beach.

Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA). An area in the floodplain subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. It is shown on FIRM as Zone A, AO, A1-A30, AE, A99, AH, V130, VE or V.

Start of Construction. Includes substantial improvement and other new development and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start is either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include the following: land preparation such as clearing, grading, and filling; the installation of streets and/or walkways; excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; the installation of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds that are not occupied as dwelling units or connected to the main structure. In the case of substantial improvements, the actual start of construction is the first alteration to any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.

Structure. A walled and roofed building, including a gas/liquid storage tank and a manufactured home, that is principally aboveground. It does not include open pavilions, bleachers, carports and similar structures that do not have at least two rigid walls and a roof.

Substantial Damage. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to the condition existing before damage would equal or exceed 50% of the market value before the damage occurred.

Substantial Improvement. Any repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before such repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred “substantial damage,” regardless of the actual repair work performed. This term does not, however, include:

1.     Any improvement to a structure to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to ensure safe living conditions; or

2.     Any alteration of a “historic structure” provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a “historic structure.”

Cost for a Repair, Reconstruction, Rehabilitation, Addition, or Improvement Project. As used herein, shall be determined by valuation figures in use by the director or itemized estimates for both materials and labor made by licensed contractors or other professional estimators in the construction industry.

Market Value of a Structure. As used herein, shall be the depreciated value of the structure prior to such repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or improvement as shown in a report by a qualified real estate appraiser. In the alternative, the director may use other methods or sources to determine market value as deemed acceptable by FEMA including use of replacement cost depreciated based on accepted industry standards.

Variance. A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter which permits construction in a manner which would otherwise be prohibited.

Violation. The failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with this chapter. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in this chapter is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. (3285-7/95, 3334-6/97, 3845-12/09)

 

222.08 Methods of Reducing Flood Hazards
Methods and provisions for reducing flood hazards include:

 

A.    Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety, and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in erosion or flood heights or velocities;

B.     Requiring that uses and structures vulnerable to floods be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction;

C.     Controlling the alteration of natural floodplain, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel flood waters;

D.    Controlling filling, grading, dredging, and other development which may increase flood damage;

E.     Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards in other areas; and

F.     Any methods and provisions for reducing flood hazards within the coastal zone shall be consistent with the Coastal Conservation District. (3334-6/97)

 

222.10 General Provisions
A.    Compliance. No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable provisions. This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions; however, where this chapter or another chapter, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.

B.     Warning and Disclaimer of Liability. The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. As a consequence, floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damage. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the incidental parcels which do not front a sandy beach, which have bulkheads and are not adjacent to recreation or public use areas and other existing or proposed lateral or vertical easements, or when development is proposed on an existing subdivided single family residential lot between developed residential parcels.

C.     Severability. This chapter and the various parts thereof are hereby declared to be severable. Should any section of this chapter be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the chapter as a whole, or any portion thereof other than the section so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid.

D.    Designation of Floodplain Administrator. The Director of Community Development is designated to administer, implement, and enforce this chapter by granting or denying development permits in accord with its provisions.

E.     Director Responsibilities. The duties and responsibilities of the director in enforcing the provisions of this chapter shall include, but not be limited to:

1.     Reviewing development permits to determine that the permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied, that all other required state and federal permits have been obtained, and that the site is reasonably safe from flooding.

2.     Reviewing development permits within Zones A1-30 and AE without a designated regulatory floodway to determine that the proposed new construction, substantial improvement, or development, when considered with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the City.

3.     Making interpretations where needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of areas of special flood hazard.

4.     Obtaining and maintaining for public inspection, flood insurance policy information concerning the certified elevation for residential developments and subdivisions, and the certification required for floor elevations, for developments located in areas where shallow flooding is likely to occur; for floodproofing of nonresidential developments; for coastal high hazard areas; for anchoring of manufactured homes; and for floodway encroachments.

5.     Notifying adjacent communities and responsible staff and federal agencies prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse. The director shall further ensure that the flood carrying capacity is maintained for any watercourse, or portion thereof, which has been altered or relocated.

6.     Within six months of information becoming available or project completion, whichever comes first, the Floodplain Administrator, whenever feasible, shall submit or ensure that the permit applicant submits technical or scientific data to FEMA for a Letter of Map Revision (LOMR) if applicable. Such submissions are necessary so that upon confirmation of those physical changes affecting flooding conditions, risk premium rates and floodplain management requirements are based on current data.

7.     Taking action to remedy violations of this chapter as provided in Chapter 249.

F.     Development Permit Review. An application for development or building permit shall include:

1.     Proposed elevations in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor of all structures; in FP2, elevation of highest adjacent grade and proposed elevation of lowest floor of all structures;

2.     Proposed elevations in relation to mean sea level and the FIRM design flood to which any structure will be floodproofed;

3.     A description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development;

4.     All appropriate certifications required in Section 222.14. (3845-12/09, 4095-10/16)

 

222.12 Land Use Controls
A.    -FP1 Subdistrict.

1.     Permitted Uses.

a.     Flood control channels, levees, spreading grounds and basins, roads, bridges and storm drains.

b.     Agricultural uses which require no permanent structures, landfill, storage of materials or equipment, or stream alteration that would result in any increase in flood levels within the regulatory floodway.

2.     Uses Requiring a Conditional Use Permit from the Zoning Administrator.

a.     Minor utilities.

b.     Temporary structures which can be readily removed in the time available after flood warning.

 

c.     Recreation areas, parks, campgrounds, playgrounds, riding and hiking trails, parking lots, wildlife and natural preserves, and similar open space uses that do not have substantial permanent structures.

3.     Uses Requiring a Conditional Use Permit from the Planning Commission.

Major utilities.

4.     Prohibited Uses.

a.     Landfills, excavations, improvements, developments, or encroachments that will obstruct waterflow, cause any cumulative increase in the elevation of the design flood water profile by more than one foot at any point, tend to broaden direct flood flows out of the floodway, impair the design flood conveyance capability of the floodway, or otherwise create a potential hazard to life or property resulting from flood flows.

b.     All encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, and other development unless a California registered civil engineer demonstrates to the satisfaction of the director that such encroachments will not result in any increase in flood levels within the floodway.

c.     Permanent structures.

d.     Storage of substances or materials capable of floating which could add to the debris load of a flood.

e.     Storage of chemicals, explosives, flammable liquids, toxic materials, or anything of a nature which could create a potential danger to the public health and welfare.

B.     -FP2 Subdistrict.

1.     Permitted Uses.

a.     Excavation and removal of rock, sand, gravel, and other materials, providing that the flood carrying capacity of the watercourse is preserved and the excavation area is designed to receive and release floodwaters, and such excavations will not create a potential hazard to adjacent properties resulting from flood or erosion conditions.

b.     Landfills that do not cause floodwaters to be diverted onto adjacent properties, are protected against erosion from floodwaters, and do not increase the elevation of the design flood by more than one foot at any point, or that can fully provide for the design flood by means of watercourse improvements.

c.     New structures and improvements permitted by the base district or allowed with a conditional use permit including manufactured homes, which comply with the applicable standards of construction of this chapter.

2.     Prohibited Uses.

Landfills, excavations, improvements, developments, or encroachments that will obstruct waterflow, cause a cumulative increase in the elevation of the design floodwater profile by more than one foot at any point, tend to broaden or direct flood flows out of the natural floodplain, or otherwise cause a potential hazard to life or property resulting from flood flows.

C.     -FP3 Subdistrict. All uses permitted or conditionally permitted in the base district with which the FP3 district is combined are permitted subject to approval of a building permit and compliance with the standards of construction of this chapter, except for the following uses which are prohibited:

1.     The placement of manufactured homes except in existing parks or subdivisions.

2.     Man-made alteration of sand dunes which would increase potential flood damage.

3.     Fill used for structural support of buildings. (3285-7/95, 3334-6/97, 3675-12/04)

 

222.14 Development Standards and Standards of Construction
Development standards for the FP Overlay District shall be specified by a conditional use permit or shall be those of the base district with which the FP district is combined, provided that the following standards of construction shall apply in the -FP2 and -FP3 subdistricts.

A.    -FP2 and -FP3 Standards of Construction.

1.     Anchoring. All new construction and substantial improvements of structures, including manufactured homes, shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy. All manufactured homes shall comply with the anchoring standards of Section 222.14(A)(5).

2.     Construction Materials and Methods. All new construction and substantial improvements of structures, including manufactured homes, shall use construction methods and practices that minimize flood damage, and shall utilize materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage for areas below the base flood elevation plus one foot freeboard. Adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes shall be provided to guide flood waters around and away from proposed structures.

3.     Standards for Utilities and Mechanical Equipment.

a.     All new and replacement water supply and sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharge from systems into floodwaters.

b.     On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.

c.     All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding.

4.     Standards for Subdivisions and Other Proposed Development.

a.     All new subdivision proposals and other proposed development, including proposals for manufactured home parks and subdivisions, greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is the lesser, shall:

i.      Identify the Special Flood Hazard Areas (SFHA) and Base Flood Elevations (BFE).

ii.     Identify the elevations of lowest floors of all proposed structures and pads on the final plans.

iii.    If the site is filled above the base flood elevation, the following as-built information for each structure shall be certified by a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor and provided as part of an application for a Letter of Map Revision based on Fill (LOMR-F) to the Floodplain Administrator:

(A)   Lowest floor elevation.

(B)   Pad elevation.

(C)   Lowest adjacent grade.

b.     All subdivision proposals and other proposed development shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.

c.     All subdivision proposals and other proposed development shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage.

d.     All subdivisions and other proposed development shall provide adequate drainage to reduce exposure to flood hazards.

5.     Standards for Manufactured Homes.

a.     All new and replacement manufactured homes and substantial improvements to manufactured homes on sites located:

i.      Outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision;

ii.     In a new manufactured home park or subdivision;

iii.    In an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision; or

iv.    In an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on a site upon which a manufactured home has incurred substantial damage as a result of a flood shall be elevated on a permanent foundation so that the lowest floor is elevated one foot above the base flood elevation.

b.     All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision shall be elevated to have the lowest floor one foot above the base flood elevation or the manufactured home chassis supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of equivalent strength that are a minimum of three feet above grade. Where a site upon which a manufactured home has incurred substantial damage as the result of a flood, subparagraph (5)(a) of this subsection shall apply.

c.     All manufactured homes shall be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.

6.     Standards for Recreational Vehicles. All recreational vehicles placed on a site within a flood hazard zone shall be fully licensed and ready for highway use, restricted to a maximum stay on site of 180 days unless the elevation and anchoring of the recreational vehicle complies with the Standards for Manufactured Homes. All recreational vehicles placed in coastal high hazard areas (V and VE zones) shall also comply with -FP3 standards for construction.

B.     -FP2 Standards of Construction.

1.     Elevation and Floodproofing.

a.     Residential Construction. New residential construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor including basement elevated one foot above the base flood elevation except:

i.      In an AO zone, the lowest floor including basement shall be elevated one foot above the highest adjacent natural grade to a height exceeding the depth number on the FIRM by one foot or at least three feet if no depth number is specified; and

ii.     In an A zone, the lowest floor including basement shall be elevated one foot above the base flood elevation as determined by the City.

Prior to issuance of a building permit and prior to building permit final inspection, the elevation of the lowest floor including basement shall be certified by a California registered engineer, or surveyor. The completed FEMA elevation certificates shall be submitted to the director.

b.     Nonresidential Construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any nonresidential structure shall be either elevated to comply with subsection (B)(1)(a) or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities be floodproofed below the level stated in subsection (B)(1)(a) so that the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and be capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A floodproofing certificate shall be completed and certified by a California registered engineer or architect and submitted to the director prior to issuance of a building permit.

c.     Flood Openings. All new construction and substantial improvement of any structure with fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor (excluding basements) that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, and which are subject to flooding, shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwater. All proposals for using space below the lowest floor shall exceed the following requirements:

i.      Be certified by a California registered engineer or architect; or

ii.     Be certified to comply with a local floodproofing standard approved by the Federal Insurance Administration, Federal Emergency Management Agency; or

iii.    Have a minimum of two openings on different sides having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.

C.     -FP3 Standards of Construction.

1.     Location of Buildings. All new construction shall be located on the landward side of the reach of the mean high tide.

2.     Free of Obstruction. All new construction and substantial improvement shall have the lowest floor free of obstructions or constructed with breakaway walls as defined in Section 222.06. Such enclosed space shall not be used for human habitation but may be used for parking, building access or storage.

3.     Elevation and Structural Support. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be elevated on adequately anchored pilings or columns so that the bottom of the lowest horizontal portion of the structural member of the lowest floor (excluding the pilings or columns) is elevated at or above the base flood level. The pile or column foundation and structure attached thereto is anchored to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement due to the effects of wind and water loads acting simultaneously on all building components. Water loading values used shall be those associated with the base flood. Wind loading values used shall comply with standards adopted by the City. Fill shall not be used for structural support of buildings.

4.     Certification. A California registered engineer or architect shall certify to the satisfaction of the director that the proposed structure complies with the requirements of this section. The director shall obtain and maintain records of the elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the bottom of the lowest structural member of the lowest floor (excluding pilings or columns) of all new and substantially improved structures, and whether such structures contain a basement. (3285-7/95, 3334-6/97, 3845-12/09)

 

222.16 Variances/Appeals
A.    General Provisions. The Planning Commission shall hear and decide requests for variances from the standards of this chapter as well as requests for appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the director in the enforcement or administration of this chapter in accord with the procedures established in Chapters 241 and 248.

1.     Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below base flood level, providing the standards listed in this chapter are considered. As the lot size increases beyond one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variances increases.

2.     Variances may be granted for new construction and substantial improvement and for other development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that the provisions of Chapter 222 are satisfied and that the structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damage during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety or public nuisance.

3.     Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures provided the proposed repair or rehabilitation is necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure and allow the continued designation as an historic structure.

4.     Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be provided written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest floor elevation below the regulatory flood elevation and that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk. A copy of the notice shall be recorded by the director in the office of the Orange County Recorder and shall be recorded in a manner so that it appears in the chain of title of the affected parcel of land.

B.     Factors to Be Considered. In reviewing applications, the Planning Commission shall consider all relevant factors, including technical evaluations, this section, and other standards specified in this chapter. In reaching a decision on an appeal or variance, the Planning Commission shall consider the:

1.     Danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others;

2.     Danger of life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;

3.     Importance of the services provided to the community by the proposed facility;

4.     Necessity of waterfront location for the facility, if applicable;

5.     Availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;

6.     Compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated developments;

7.     Relationship of the proposed use to the General Plan, Local Coastal Program, and the floodplain management program for that area;

8.     Safety of access to the property in time of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles;

9.     Expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the flood waters expected at the site; and

10.   Cost of providing government services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electric and water services, and streets and bridges. (3285-7/95, 3845-12/09)

C.     Findings. When granting a variance, the Planning Commission shall make the following findings in addition to the findings contained in Chapter 241:

1.     The project provides the minimum deviation to afford relief from the provisions of Chapter 222.

2.     The proposed project will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety or extraordinary public expense, create a nuisance, cause fraud or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.

D.    Authority to Impose Additional Conditions. In addition to the authority to impose conditions under Section 241.12, the Planning Commission may attach conditions to the granting of variances as deemed necessary.

E.     Records. The director shall maintain a record of all variance actions and findings to justify their issuance, and report such variances to FEMA and FIA upon request. (3285-7/95, 3334-6/97, 3845-12/09)

 

Chapter 223 IS INTERIM STUDY OVERLAY DISTRICT
223.02 Interim Study Overlay District Established
The IS Interim Study Overlay District is established to allow discretionary review of development proposals in areas where changes in zoning provisions are contemplated or under study.

 

223.04 Zoning Map Designator
The IS District may be initiated as prescribed by Chapter 247. Prior to approving an amendment reclassifying land to an IS District, the Planning Commission and City Council shall approve a study plan that identifies regulatory problems and states land use and development issues to be resolved for the area proposed for reclassification. An amendment reclassifying land to an IS District shall not be effective unless certified as a Local Coastal Program amendment by the Coastal Commission. The IS District may be combined with any base district. Each IS District shall be shown on the zoning map with an “-IS” designator, numbered and identified sequentially by order of enactment and reference to the enacting ordinance. (3334-6/97)

 

223.06 Land Use Controls
A.    Conditional Use Permit Required. Approval of a conditional use permit by the Planning Commission shall be required for establishment of a new or expanded use in an IS District, and may be approved for any use classification permitted or conditionally allowed with a conditional use permit in the base district with which the IS District is combined.

B.     Coastal Development Permit Required. Within the coastal zone approval of a Coastal Development Permit shall be required for establishment of a new or expanded use in an IS District if the new or expanded use meets the definition of development in Section 245.04 unless it is exempt pursuant to Section 245.08.

C.     Required Findings. In addition to the findings required for conditional use permits by Chapter 241 and findings that may be required for specific use classifications, approval of a conditional use permit in the IS District shall require a finding that the proposed use will not conflict with the land use and development policies established for the area at the time the IS District was adopted. (3334-6/97)

 

223.08 Development Standards
Development standards for the IS District shall be specified by a conditional use permit or shall be those of the base district with which the IS District is combined.

 

223.10 Expiration of IS District Ordinance—Renewal
An ordinance establishing an IS District shall contain a provision terminating the IS designation up to two years from its effective date. An ordinance establishing an IS District may be amended, reenacted, or superseded by a zoning map amendment adopted as prescribed by Chapter 247 and certification of a Local Coastal Program amendment. (3334-6/97)

 

223.12 Resubmittal of Development Proposals
Notwithstanding the provisions of Chapter 241, a conditional use permit application that has been denied, or approved subject to conditions unacceptable to the applicant, may be resubmitted on or after the effective date of a zoning map and/or text amendment superseding an IS District designation.

 

Chapter 224 NC NEIGHBORHOOD CONSERVATION OVERLAY DISTRICT
224.02 Neighborhood Conservation Overlay District Established
The NC Neighborhood Conservation Overlay District is established to allow property owners to initiate and implement programs for the revitalization or conservation of older areas or districts possessing distinctive features, identity, or character worthy of retention and enhancement. The NC District takes effect through adoption of a Conservation Plan and a set of provisions that will facilitate maintenance and upgrading of the neighborhood and development of vacant or underused lots, while reducing or eliminating incompatible mixes of uses.

 

224.04 Area Requirements
Each NC Overlay District shall include a minimum contiguous area of two acres, including intervening streets and alleys, and shall contain at least three separate parcels.

 

224.06 Status of NC Overlay District and Approved Plan
A.    Adoption of an NC Overlay District proposal shall be by amendment to the zoning map, in accord with the provisions of Chapter 247, but the map amendment shall not alter the use provisions or development standards of the underlying district. A Neighborhood Conservation Plan shall be approved by the City Council at the same time as the map amendment is adopted; this plan shall establish standards and conditions for development consistent with the purposes of the plan.

B.     Adoption of an NC Overlay District within the coastal zone shall not become effective unless a Local Coastal Program amendment has been approved and effectively certified by the Coastal Commission.

C.     All development shall be in accordance with the Conservation Plan, which may be amended as provided in the conditions of approval. The Planning Commission may recommend and the City Council may approve amendments to the Conservation Plan to allow development in accordance with the underlying zoning provisions rather than as specified by the Conservation Plan. (3334-6/97)

 

224.08 Allowable Modifications to Land Use Controls and Development Standards
After a duly noticed public hearing, the following changes in land use controls and development standards may be approved as part of a Neighborhood Conservation Plan:

A.    Provisions for specific use classifications may be modified by the Neighborhood Conservation Plan to accommodate unique or mixed uses serving the neighborhood, consistent with the General Plan and within the coastal zone consistent with the Local Coastal Program.

B.     Development standards may be modified by the Neighborhood Conservation Plan, consistent with the General Plan and within the coastal zone consistent with the Local Coastal Program. (3334-6/97)

 

224.10 Application for Designation
A.    Owners of 51% or more of the land in an area meeting the area requirements of Section 224.04 and one or more of the criteria of subsection 224.12(C) may file an application with the City for the designation of the area as an NC Neighborhood Conservation Overlay District. The application may include lots within one or more base zoning districts. The City Council or Planning Commission may initiate a Neighborhood Conservation Overlay District as prescribed in Chapter 247.

B.     The application includes the following:

1.     A statement of purpose and explanation of how criteria of subsection 224.12(C) are met.

2.     A map indicating the boundaries of all lots in the proposed NC Neighborhood Conservation Overlay District and the base district(s) contained within the proposed NC District.

3.     A Neighborhood Conservation Plan consisting of a map and such other textual and graphic material as may be necessary, indication land uses, building types and designs, site development requirements, signing, circulation, off-street parking, and modifications in base district.

 

224.12 Adoption Procedures
A.    The Planning Commission shall hold a duly noticed public hearing on the application in accord with the provisions of Chapter 247. Following the hearing, the Commission may recommend approval or conditional approval of the Neighborhood Conservation Plan if it implements the purposes for which designation of the NC District is proposed and is consistent with the General Plan, and shall transmit the application and the plan with its recommendation to the Council.

B.     The City Council shall hold a hearing as provided by Chapter 247 on any application and plan transmitted to it by the Planning Commission.

C.     Following the hearing, the City Council may approve or conditionally approve a Neighborhood Conservation Plan and adopt an NC Neighborhood Conservation Overlay District for the area described in the application subject to one or more of the following criteria:

1.     Distinctive building features, such as period of construction, style, size, scale, rhythm, mass, color, and material;

2.     Distinctive features or articles associated with the streetscape, such as light fixtures and devices, signs, benches, curb markers, kiosks, and bollards;

3.     Distinctive site planning and natural features, such as lot platting, street layout, setbacks, alleyways, sidewalks, creekbeds, parks, and gardens;

4.     Distinctive land uses or land-use patterns, such as mixed or unique uses or activities, not permitted by the base district without modification.

D.    The City Council shall adopt each Neighborhood Conservation Overlay District by ordinance pursuant to Chapter 247. The adopting ordinance shall include a reference to the approved Neighborhood Conservation Plan for the district, a statement of purposes, and a list of the modifications to the base district standards. Adoption of a Neighborhood Conservation Overlay District shall not become effective until a Local Coastal Program amendment has been approved and effectively certified by the Coastal Commission. (3334-6/97)

 

224.14 Zoning Map Designator
Each NC Neighborhood Conservation Overlay District shall be shown on the zoning map by an “-NC” designator applied to the base district designations, numbered and identified sequentially by order of enactment and referenced to the enacting ordinance.

 

224.16 Building Permits to Conform to Adopted Plan and Other Applicable Requirements
Applications for building permits for projects located in an NC Neighborhood Conservation Overlay District shall be accepted only if project plans are consistent with the adopted NC District ordinance and the approved Neighborhood Conservation Plan and all other applicable requirements of the Municipal Code and in the coastal zone, with the Local Coastal Program. (3334-6/97)

 

Chapter 225 PAD PLANNED AREA DEVELOPMENT OVERLAY DISTRICT
225.02 Planned Area Development Overlay District Established
The PAD Planned Area Development Overlay District is established to permit flexibility in land use controls and development standards where flexibility or coordinated planning for a large site or a site under multiple ownership which will enhance the potential for superior urban design.

 

225.04 Area Requirements
Each PAD Overlay District shall include a minimum contiguous area of two acres.

 

225.06 Status of PAD Planned Area Development Overlay District and Approved Plan
A.    Adoption of a PAD district proposal shall be by amendment to the zoning map, but the ordinance amendment shall not alter the land use controls or development standards of the underlying district. An Area Plan shall be approved by the City Council at the same time as the ordinance amendment. Adoption of a PAD District shall not become effective until certified as a Local Coastal Program amendment by the Coastal Commission.

B.     All development shall be in accord with the Area Plan, which may be amended as provided in the conditions of approval. The Planning Commission shall recommend, and the City Council shall approve, amendments to the Area Plan to allow development in accord with the underlying zoning provisions. (3334-6/97)

 

225.08 Allowable Modifications to Land Use Controls and Development Standards
After a duly noticed public hearing, the following changes in land use controls and development standards may be approved as part of a Planned Area Development Plan:

A.    Allowable floor area ratio (FAR) may be transferred between lots within the same zoning district.

B.     Standards for specific use classifications may be modified to accommodate appropriately sized accessory uses.

C.     Site development standards, excluding maximum FAR, residential unit type standards, and parking spaces required, may be modified.

 

225.10 Application for Designation
A.    A proposed amendment to create a PAD Overlay District may be initiated by the Planning Commission, the City Council, or by 100% of the owners of the land area within the boundaries of the proposed Planned Area Development as prescribed by Chapter 247.

B.     An application shall include:

1.     A map indicating the proposed boundaries for the PAD Overlay District; the property of participating owners; and the zoning district designations.

2.     An Area Plan consisting of a map and textual material to delineate land uses and locations, existing and projected building types and schematic designs, height and FAR including any proposals for transfer of FAR, site development requirements, existing and proposed open space, circulation, on-site and off-site parking, and any other pertinent information.

3.     A comparison between underlying district provisions and standards and any proposed modifications to these provisions and standards.

4.     A traffic impact analysis to evaluate the impact of the proposed PAD on surrounding properties.

5.     A statement of the reasons for any requested modifications to provisions or standards and a description of proposed means of mitigating any adverse effects.

 

225.12 Adoption of PAD Overlay District and Area Plan
A.    The Planning Commission shall hold a duly noticed public hearing on the application in accord with the provisions of Chapter 247. Following the hearing, the Commission may recommend approval of the Area Plan if it implements the purposes of which designation of the PAD Overlay District is proposed, and shall transmit the application and the approved plan to the Council.

B.     The City Council shall hold a public hearing as provided by Chapter 247 on any application and plan transmitted to it by the Planning Commission.

C.     Following the hearing, the City Council may adopt a PAD Planned Area Development Overlay District for the area described in the application and approve an Area Plan permit only after finding that:

1.     The proposed development will enhance the potential for superior urban design;

2.     The Area Plan is consistent with the General Plan, and for areas located within the coastal zone, with the Local Coastal Program, and is compatible with development in the surrounding area;

3.     The Area Plan includes adequate provisions for utilities, services, and emergency vehicle access, and public service demands will not exceed the capacity of existing systems;

4.     The traffic generated by development in accord with the Area Plan will not exceed the capacity of affected streets; and

5.     The Area Plan will not significantly increase shading of adjacent land in comparison with shading from development under the standards that would exist if the Planned Area Development were not approved.

D.    The City Council shall adopt each Planned Area Development Overlay District by ordinance pursuant to Chapter 247. The adopting ordinance shall include a reference to the approved Area Plan for the district, a statement of purposes, and a list of the modifications to the base district provisions.

E.     Within the coastal zone, adoption of Planned Area Development Overlay shall not become effective until a Local Coastal Program amendment has been approved and effectively certified by the Coastal Commission. (3334-6/97)

 

225.14 Zoning Map Designator
Each PAD Planned Area Development Overlay District shall be shown on the zoning map by a “-PAD” designator applied to the base district designations, numbered and identified sequentially by order of enactment and referenced to the enacting ordinance.

 

225.16 Building Permits to Conform to Adopted Plan and Other Applicable Requirements
Applications for building permits for projects located in a PAD Planned Area Development Overlay District shall be accepted only if project plans are consistent with the adopted PAD District ordinance and the approved Area Plan and all other applicable requirements of the Municipal Code and in the coastal zone, with the Local Coastal Program. (3334-6/97)

 

Chapter 226 H HIGH-RISE OVERLAY DISTRICT
226.02 High-Rise Overlay District Established
The H High-Rise Overlay District is established to allow taller, high-rise buildings at appropriate locations.

 

226.04 Applicability and Zoning Map Designator
A.    The H High-Rise Overlay District may be combined only with the RH High-Density Residential, CO Office Commercial, CG General Commercial, CV Visitor Commercial, IL Limited Industrial, and IG General Industrial districts. The H District boundaries shall be shown on the zoning map by adding the “-H,” high-rise overlay designator followed by a number indicating the maximum allowable height in feet, a slash, and then a number indicating the maximum number of building stories allowed, such as “CO-H-60/6.”

B.     Where no numbers are indicated on the zoning map, the height in both feet and stories shall be determined and specified during site plan review, consistent with the General Plan.

 

226.06 Land Use Controls
Any use permitted in the base zoning district shall be permitted in the H High-Rise Overlay District. The H High-Rise Overlay District shall not apply seaward of Pacific Coast Highway. (3334-6/97)

 

226.08 Development Standards
Development standards shall be those of the base district with which the H District is combined, and the following supplemental requirements shall apply which shall govern in case of conflict.

A.    Building Height. Development shall not exceed the building height restrictions indicated on the zoning map.

B.     Lot Size. A minimum lot size of 20,000 square feet and a minimum lot dimension of 135 feet in any direction are required for any proposed building height greater than the base district maximum height.

C.     Yards. The yard areas indicated below shall be required for all buildings exceeding the base district maximum. The yards shall be clear of all structures from the ground to the sky, except as otherwise permitted by provisions of this ordinance controlling building projections.

Required Setback

1.     Yards abutting a street: 20 feet plus one foot for each foot above base district maximum height.

2.     Yards abutting an R district: 50 feet plus one foot for every two feet of building height above base district maximum height plus one foot for every 10 feet of building length facing the common property line.

3.     Yards abutting nonresidential district: Same as base district, minimum 10 feet.

D.    Landscaped Buffer. A minimum 10-foot landscaped buffer shall be provided around all buildings over base district maximum height.

E.     Upper-Story Setback Adjacent to an R District. No structure shall intercept a 1:1 or 45-degree daylight plane inclined inward from a height 15 feet above existing grade at the R District boundary.

F.     Within the coastal zone, public visual resources shall be preserved and enhanced.



Upper Story Setback

(3334-6/97)

 

Chapter 227 MHP MOBILEHOME OVERLAY DISTRICT
227.02 Mobile Home Overlay District Established
The MHP Mobile Home Overlay District is established to permit parcels of land developed with mobile home parks and zoned with a base zoning district designation and provide a transition from the present mobile home park use to the uses permitted in the base zoning district.

 

227.04 Zoning Map Designator
The Zoning Map shall show all property subject to the provisions of this chapter by adding a “-MHP” designator to the base zone.

 

227.06 Criteria for Application of Zone
The City Council, in making its determination whether to apply the MHP zone to any particular property pursuant to Chapter 247, shall consider the following factors as to whether such zone is appropriate:

A.    Existing zoning and General Plan designations.

B.     The age and condition of the mobile home park.

C.     The relationship of the mobile home park to surrounding land uses.

D.    Vehicle access to the area under consideration.

E.     Site area.

F.     Site configuration.

 

227.08 Uses Permitted
The following uses shall be permitted in an MHP overlay district:

A.    Mobile home parks as regulated by the State of California.

B.     Accessory uses and structures incidental to the operation of mobile home parks such as recreation facilities and/or community centers of a noncommercial nature, either public or private storage facilities for the use of the mobile home park residents and any other uses or structures that are incidental to the operation of a mobile home park.

C.     Whenever property is designated with the MHP overlay, any use permitted by the base zone of such property shall not be permitted.

 

227.10 Removal of the Mobile Home Overlay District or Change of Use
A zoning map amendment to remove the MHP overlay designation or approve a change of use shall be subject to the provisions of Chapters 234 and 247. Removal of the MHP overlay designation or approval of a change of use within the coastal zone shall require an amendment to the Local Coastal Program approved and effectively certified by the Coastal Commission. (3334-6/97)

 

Chapter 228 SR SENIOR RESIDENTIAL OVERLAY DISTRICT
228.02 Senior Residential Overlay District Established
The Senior Residential Overlay District is intended to promote the maintenance and viability of existing mobile home parks through appropriate zoning. It is an overlay district where mobile home parks are established as the primary land use in order to limit conversion of existing affordable housing to other land uses. The Senior Residential Overlay District may overlay any property which provides for mobile home park developments.

The Senior Residential Overlay District is established and shall be designated by the symbol (SR). The (SR) designation applies to all of the 10 senior residential mobile home parks that existed in the City of Huntington Beach as of the approval on August 5, 2013 of the City’s moratorium ordinance regarding senior mobile home park conversions. (4019-4/14)

 

228.04 Zoning Map Designator
The Zoning Map shall show all property subject to the provisions of this chapter and overlay district by adding a “SR” designator to the underlying base zone. (4019-4/14)

 

228.06 Definition
Except where the context clearly indicates otherwise, the definition given in this section shall govern the provisions of this chapter.

Senior residential park. A “senior residential park” means a mobile home park in which at least 80% of the spaces are occupied by, or intended for occupancy by, at least one person who is 55 years of age or older, or where 100% of the spaces are occupied or intended for occupancy by persons 62 years of age or older. (4019-4/14)

 

228.08 Land Use Regulations
At least 80% of the spaces in mobile home parks in the Senior Residential Overlay Districts shall be occupied by at least one person 55 years of age or older. If an existing mobile home park met this qualification on August 5, 2013, and fell below the 80% requirement between that date and the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section, the Senior Residential Overlay District shall be applied to that mobile home park and the park shall be required to operate as a senior residential park by renting spaces and mobile homes only when at least one occupant of the mobile home is 55 years of age or older. The signage, advertising, park rules, regulations, rental agreements and leases for spaces in a senior residential park in the SR Overlay District shall state that the park is a senior residential park. Pursuant to Section 228.06, Definition, and as of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section, the senior residential parks in the SR Zoning District are Rancho Del Rey Mobile Home Park, Skandia Mobile Home Park, Huntington Harbor Mobile Home Park, Sea Breeze Mobile Home Park, Beachview Mobile Home Park, Los Amigos Mobile Home Park, Brookfield Manor, Del Mar Mobile Home Park, Mariners Pointe, Rancho Huntington Mobile Home Park.

Spaces and mobile homes in senior residential parks shall be rented only to occupants who meet the age requirement set forth in Section 228.08 above; provided, however, that if the occupants of a space or mobile home who do not meet this requirement rented the space or mobile home before the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section, they shall be allowed to remain, and provided further that when such occupants cease to occupy a space or mobile home, the mobile home and space cannot thereafter be rented except to occupants who meet the age requirements set forth in this section. (4019-4/14)

 

228.10 Minimum Design and Performance Standards
The signage, advertising, leases, and park rules and regulations for spaces in senior residential parks shall state that the park is a senior residential park. Each senior residential park shall have procedures for verifying that it qualifies as a senior facility under applicable federal and/or state law, including documentation establishing that at least 80% of the mobile homes or spaces in the mobile home park are occupied by at least one resident who is 55 years of age or older. These procedures shall provide for regular updates, through surveys or other means of initial information supplied by the occupants of the mobile home park. Such updates must take place at least once every two years. A summary of this occupancy verification documentation shall be available for inspection upon reasonable notice and request by City officials. (4019-4/14)

 

228.12 Removal of the Senior Residential Overlay District
A zoning map amendment to remove the SR overlay designation shall be subject to the provisions of Chapter 247. (4019-4/14)

Title 23 ZONING CODE—PROVISIONS APPLYING IN ALL OR SEVERAL DISTRICTS
Chapter 230 SITE STANDARDS
Note
*       Note: § 230.06 deleted by Ord. 3724-02/06; § 230.20 repealed by Ord. 3961-11/12.

         [Ordinance. No. 3827 (expired 4/15/10) and Ordinance No. 3879, effective from 5/3/10 to 5/3/11, temporarily deferred the payment of certain Development Impact Fees.]

 

230.02 Applicability
This chapter contains supplemental land use and development standards, other than parking and loading, landscaping and sign provisions, that are applicable to sites in all or several districts. These standards shall be applied as specified in Title 21, Base Districts; Title 22, Overlay Districts; and as presented in this chapter. (4040-12/14)

 

Article I. Residential Districts
230.04 Front and Street Side Yards in Developed Areas
Where lots comprising 60% of the frontage on a blockface in an R district are improved with buildings that do not conform to the front yard requirements, the Planning Commission may adopt by resolution a formula or procedure to modify the front and street side yard setback requirements. The Planning Commission also may modify the required yard depths where lot dimensions and topography justify deviations. Blocks with such special setback requirements shall be delineated on the zoning map. Within the coastal zone any such setback modifications adopted by the Planning Commission shall be consistent with the Local Coastal Program. (3334-6/97, 4040-12/14)

 

230.06 Reserved
 

230.08 Accessory Structures
For purposes of applying these provisions, accessory structures are inclusive of minor accessory structures, except where separate provisions are provided in this section.

A.    Timing. Accessory structures shall not be established or constructed prior to the start of construction of a principal structure on a site, except that construction trailers may be placed on a site at the time site clearance and grading begins and may remain on the site only for the duration of construction.

B.     Location. Except as provided in this section, accessory structures shall not occupy a required front, side or street side yard or court. An accessory structure shall be set back five feet from the rear property line except no setback is required for accessory structures, excluding garages and carports, which abut an alley.

Minor accessory structures may be located in required side and rear yard setbacks provided that the structure is located in the rear two-thirds of the lot and a minimum five-foot clearance is maintained between said structure and dwelling if it is located in the required side yard. Minor accessory structures that are decorative such as landscape garden walls, fire pits, freestanding barbecues/fireplaces, sculptures, and fountains may be located anywhere on the property provided:

1.     They do not exceed six feet in height or exceed 42 inches in height when located within the front yard setback; and

2.     A minimum five-foot clearance is maintained between said structure and the dwelling if it is located in a required side yard; and

3.     Rock formations shall be set back one foot from the side and/or rear property lines for each foot of rock formation height, maximum five-foot setback required.

 



 

C.     Maximum Height. Fifteen feet, except a detached garage for a single-family or multifamily dwelling may exceed the maximum height when it is designed to be architecturally compatible with the main dwelling and does not include habitable floor area.

D.    Maximum Size in RL District. In an RL District, the total gross floor area of accessory structures, including garages, more than four feet in height that are not attached to a dwelling shall not exceed 600 square feet or 10% of lot area, whichever is more.

E.     Patio Covers. A patio cover open on at least two sides and complying with all other provisions of this subsection may be attached to a principal structure provided a five-foot clearance to all property lines is maintained.

F.     Decks. A deck 30 inches or less in height may be located in a required yard.

G.    Separation. The distance between buildings on the same lot shall not be less than 10 feet. (3710-6/05, 4040-12/14)

 

230.10 Accessory Dwelling Units
A.    Permit Required. Accessory dwellings may be permitted in all R districts on lots with a single-family dwelling subject to director approval. Requests shall be submitted to the director accompanied by the required Neighborhood Notification, plans and elevations showing the proposed accessory dwelling and its relation to the principal dwelling, descriptions of building materials, landscaping and exterior finishes to be used and parking to be provided, and any other information required by the director to determine whether the proposed unit conforms to all requirements of this Code. The director shall approve an accessory dwelling unit upon finding that the following conditions have been met:

1.     The dwelling conforms to the design and development standards for accessory dwelling units established in subsection B of this section and subsection 230.22(A);

2.     The accessory unit maintains the scale of adjoining residences and is compatible with the design of existing dwellings in the vicinity in terms of building materials, colors and exterior finishes;

3.     The main dwelling or the accessory dwelling will be owner occupied; and

4.     Public and utility services including emergency access are adequate to serve both dwellings.

B.     Design and Development Standards.

1.     Minimum Lot Size. 6,000 square feet.

2.     Maximum Unit Size. The maximum square footage of the accessory dwelling unit shall not exceed 650 square feet and shall not contain more than one bedroom.

3.     Required Setbacks. Accessory dwelling units shall comply with minimum setbacks of Chapter 210.

4.     Height and Building Coverage. The basic requirements of Chapter 210 shall apply unless modified by an overlay district.

5.     Parking. All parking spaces shall comply with Section 231.18(D).

6.     Design. The accessory unit shall be attached to the main dwelling unit in such a manner as to create an architecturally unified whole, not resulting in any change to the visible character of the street. The entrance to the accessory unit shall not be visible from the street in front of the main dwelling unit. Building materials, colors and exterior finishes should be substantially the same as those on the existing dwelling.

C.     Ownership. The second unit shall not be sold separately from the main dwelling unit.

 

D.    Covenant. A covenant with the ownership requirements shall be filed for recordation with the County Recorder within 30 days of Community Development Department plan check approval and issuance of building permits. Evidence of such filing shall be submitted to the director within 30 days of approval.

E.     Parkland Dedication In-Lieu Fee. A parkland dedication in-lieu fee shall be assessed as set by resolution of the City Council pursuant to Section 230.20 and paid prior to issuance of the building permit. (3334-6/97, 3710-6/05, 4040-12/14, 4096-10/16)

 

230.12 Home Occupation in R Districts
A.    Permit Required. A home occupation in an R district shall require a home occupation permit, obtained by filing a completed application form with the director. If the home occupation involves instruction and/or service, e.g., music lessons, beauty shop, swimming lessons, then an administrative permit is required subject to Neighborhood Notification in compliance with Chapter 241. The director shall approve the permit upon determining that the proposed home occupation complies with the requirements of this section.

B.     Contents of Application. An application for a home occupation permit shall contain:

1.     The name, street address, and telephone number of the applicant;

2.     A complete description of the proposed home occupation, including number and occupation of persons employed or persons retained as independent contractors, amount of floor space occupied, provisions for storage of materials, and number and type of vehicles used.

3.     For home occupations involving instruction and/or service, Neighborhood Notification shall be required in compliance with Chapter 241.

C.     Required Conditions. Home occupations shall comply with the following conditions:

1.     A home occupation shall be conducted entirely within one room in a dwelling, with the exception of swimming lessons. No outdoor storage shall be permitted. Garages shall not be used in connection with such business except to park business vehicles.

2.     No one other than a resident of the dwelling shall be employed on-site or report to work at the site in the conduct of a home occupation. This prohibition also applies to independent contractors.

3.     There shall be no display of merchandise, projects, operations, signs or name plates of any kind visible from outside the dwelling. The appearance of the dwelling shall not be altered, nor shall the business be conducted in a manner to indicate that the dwelling or its premises is used for a nonresidential purpose, whether by colors, materials, construction, lighting, windows, signs, sounds or any other means whatsoever.

4.     A home occupation shall not increase pedestrian or vehicle traffic in the neighborhood.

5.     No commercial vehicle or equipment used in conjunction with the home occupation shall be parked overnight on an adjacent street or in any yard visible from the street.

6.     No motor vehicle repair for commercial purposes shall be permitted.

7.     A home occupation shall not include an office or salesroom open to visitors, and there shall be no advertising of the address of the home occupation.

8.     Where a home occupation involves swimming instruction in an outdoor swimming pool, each swimming class shall be limited to four students, and no more than two vehicles shall be used to transport students to such classes.

9.     Any authorized City employee may inspect the premises of a home occupation upon 48 hours notice to ascertain compliance with these conditions and any requirements of this Code. The permit for a home occupation that is not operated in compliance with these provisions, and/or all conditions of an administrative permit, shall be revoked by the director after 30 days written notice unless the home occupation is altered to comply. (3710-6/05, 4040-12/14)

 

230.14 Affordable Housing Density Bonus
A.    When a developer of a residential property which is zoned and general planned to allow five or more dwelling units proposes to provide affordable housing, he or she may request a density bonus and incentives or concessions through a Conditional Use Permit subject to the provisions contained in this section. A density bonus request pursuant to the provisions contained within this section shall not be denied unless the project is denied in its entirety.

B.     Affordability Requirements.

1.     Percentage of Affordable Units Required. To qualify for a density bonus and incentives or concessions, the developer of a residential project shall elect at least one of the following:

a.     Provide at least 10% of the total units of the housing development for lower income households, as defined in Health and Safety Code Section 50079.5; or

b.     Provide at least 5% of the total units of the housing development for very-low-income households, as defined in Health and Safety Code Section 50105; or

c.     Provide a senior citizen housing development as defined in Civil Code Sections 51.3 and 51.12, or mobile home park that limits residency based on age requirements for housing for older persons pursuant to Civil Code Sections 798.76 or 799.5; or

d.     Provide at least 10% of the total dwelling units in a common interest development as defined in Civil Code Section 1351 for persons and families of moderate income, as defined in Section 50093 of the Health and Safety Code, provided that all units in the development are offered to the public for purchase.

The density bonus shall not be included in the total number of the housing units when determining the number of housing units required to be affordable. Remaining units may be rented, sold or leased at “market” rates.

2.     Duration of Affordability.

a.     An applicant shall agree to, and City shall ensure, continued affordability of all low- and very-low-income units that qualified the applicant for the award of the density bonus for 30 years or a longer period of time if required by a construction or mortgage financing assistance program, mortgage insurance program, or rental subsidy program.

b.     Where there is a direct financial contribution to a housing development pursuant to Government Code Section 65915 through participation in cost of infrastructure, write-down of land costs, or subsidizing the cost of construction, the City will ensure continued availability for low- and moderate-income units for 30 years. The affordability agreement required by

Section 230.14(B)(4) shall specify the mechanisms and procedures necessary to carry out this section.

c.     An applicant shall agree to, and the City shall ensure that, the initial occupant of the moderate-income units that are directly related to the receipt of the density bonus in the common interest development, as defined in Section 1351 of the Civil Code, are persons and families of moderate income, as defined in Section 50093 of the Health and Safety Code. The City shall enforce an equity-sharing agreement, unless it is in conflict with the requirements of another public funding source of law. The following shall apply to the equity-sharing agreement:

i.      Upon resale, the seller of the unit shall retain the value of any improvements, the down payment, and the seller’s proportionate share of appreciation. The City shall recapture any initial subsidy and its proportionate share of appreciation, which shall then be used within three years for any of the purposes described in subdivision (e) of Section 33334.2 of the Health and Safety Code that promote home ownership.

ii.     The City’s initial subsidy shall be equal to the fair market value of the home at the time of initial sale minus the initial sale price to the moderate-income household, plus the amount of any down payment assistance or mortgage assistance. If upon resale the market value is lower than the initial market value, then the value at the time of the resale shall be used as the initial market value.

iii.    The City’s proportionate share of appreciation shall be equal to the ratio of the initial subsidy to the fair market value of the home at the time of initial sale.

3.     Affordable Unit Distribution and Product Mix. Affordable units shall be located throughout the project and shall include a mixture of unit types in the same ratio as provided throughout the project.

4.     Affordability Agreement. Affordability shall be guaranteed through an Affordability Agreement executed through the developer and the City. Said agreement shall be recorded on the subject property with the Orange County Recorder’s Office prior to the issuance of building permits and shall become effective prior to final inspection of the first unit. The subject agreement shall be legally binding and enforceable on the property owner(s) and any subsequent property owner(s) for the duration of the agreement. The agreement shall include, but not be limited to, the following items:

a.     The duration of the affordability and the number of the affordable units;

b.     The method in which the developer and the City are to monitor the affordability of the subject affordable units and the eligibility of the tenants or owners of those units over the period of the agreement;

c.     The method in which vacancies will be marketed and filled;

d.     A description of the location and unit type (bedrooms, floor area, etc.) of the affordable units within the project; and

e.     Standards for maximum qualifying household incomes and standards for maximum rents or sales prices.

5.     City Action. Pursuant to this section the City shall grant a density bonus and at least one of the concessions or incentives identified in subsection D of this section unless the City makes a written finding pursuant to subsection J of this section.

C.     Calculation of Density Bonus.

1.     The amount of density bonus to which the applicant is entitled shall vary according to the amount by which the project’s percentage of affordable housing exceeds the percentage established in subsection B of this section.

a.     For housing developments meeting the low-income criteria of subparagraph 230.14(B)(1)(a), the base density bonus of 20% shall be increased by 1.5% for every 1% increase in the percentage of low-income units above 10%. The maximum allowable density bonus shall be 35%.

b.     For housing developments meeting the very low-income criteria of subparagraph 230.14(B)(1)(b), the base density bonus of 20% shall be increased by 2.5% for every 1% increase in the percentage of very low-income units above 5%. The maximum density bonus shall be 35%.

c.     For housing developments meeting the senior citizen housing criteria of subparagraph 230.14(B)(1)(c), the density bonus shall be 20%.

d.     For housing developments meeting the moderate-income criteria of subparagraph 230.14(B)(1)(d), the base density bonus of 5% shall be increased by 1% for every 1% increase in the percentage of moderate-income units over 10%. The maximum density bonus shall be 35%.

2.     All density calculations resulting in fractional units shall be rounded up to the next whole number. The granting of a density bonus shall not be interpreted, in and of itself, to require a General Plan amendment, Local Coastal Plan amendment, zoning change, or other discretionary approval. As used in subsection B of this section, “total units” does not include units permitted by a density bonus awarded pursuant to this section.

3.     The developer may request a lesser density bonus than the project is entitled to, but no reduction will be permitted in the number of required affordable units pursuant to paragraph 230.14(B)(1).

4.     Reductions in Density Within the Coastal Zone. In reviewing residential development application for low- and moderate-income housing, as defined in Government Code Section 65589.5(h)(3), the City may not require measures that reduce residential densities below the density sought by an applicant if the density sought is within the permitted density or range of density established by local zoning plus the additional density permitted under Government Code Section 65915, unless the City makes a finding, based on substantial evidence in the record, that the density sought by the applicant cannot feasibly be accommodated on the site in a manner that is in conformity with the certified Local Coastal Program.

D.    Incentives and Concessions.

1.     Types of Incentives or Concessions. The City shall grant an incentive or concession to the developer. An incentive or concession includes, but is not limited to, the following:

a.     A reduction in site development standards or modification of zoning code requirements or architectural design requirements that exceed the minimum building standards approved by the California Building Standards Commission as provided in Part 2.5 (commencing with Section 18901) of Division 13 of the Health and Safety Code, including, but not limited to, a reduction in setback and square footage requirements and in the ratio of vehicular parking spaces that would otherwise be required that results in identifiable, financially sufficient, and actual cost reductions.

i.      At the request of the developer, the City will permit a vehicular parking ratio, inclusive of handicapped and guest parking, for a development meeting the criteria of subsection B of this section at ratios that shall not exceed:

(A)   Zero to one bedroom: one onsite parking space.

(B)   Two to three bedrooms: two onsite parking spaces.

(C)   Four or more bedrooms: two and one-half onsite parking spaces.

ii.     If the total number of parking spaces required for a housing development is other than a whole number, the number shall be rounded up to the next whole number. For purposes of this section only, a housing development may provide on-site parking through tandem parking or uncovered parking but not through on-street parking.

b.     Approval of mixed use zoning in conjunction with the housing project if commercial, office, industrial, or other land uses will reduce the cost of the housing development and if the commercial, office, industrial, or other land uses are compatible with the housing project and the existing or planned development in the area where the proposed housing project will be located.

c.     Other regulatory incentives or concessions proposed by the developer or the City that result in identifiable, financially sufficient, and actual cost reductions.

2.     Number of Incentives and Concessions. An applicant for a density bonus shall receive the following number of incentives or concessions:

a.     One incentive or concession for projects that included at least 10% of the total units for lower income households, at least 5% for very-low-income households, or at least 10% for persons and families of moderate income in a common interest development.

b.     Two incentives or concessions for projects that include at least 20% of the total units for lower income households, at least 10% for very-low-income households, or at least 20% for persons and families of moderate income in a common interest development.

c.     Three incentives or concessions for projects that include at least 30% of the total units for lower income households, at least 15% for very-low-income households, or at least 30% for persons and families of moderate income in a common interest development.

3.     Requirements for Incentives and Concessions Within the Coastal Zone. Within the coastal zone, any incentive or concession or combination of incentives and concessions must be consistent with the requirements of the certified Land Use Plan.

E.     Waiver or Reduction of Development Standards. An applicant may submit to the City a proposal for the waiver or reduction of development standards. The applicant shall show that the waiver or modification is necessary to make the housing units economically feasible.

F.     Donation or Transfer of Land. A developer may donate or transfer land in lieu of constructing the affordable units within the project pursuant to Government Code Section 65915(h).

G.    Child Care Facilities.

1.     When a developer proposes to construct a housing development that includes affordable units that conform to subsection B of this section and includes a child care facility that will be located on the premises of, as part of, or adjacent to the housing development, the City shall grant either of the following:

a.     An additional density bonus that is an amount of square feet of residential space that is equal to or greater than the amount of square feet in the child care facility.

b.     An additional concession or incentive that contributes significantly to the economic feasibility of the construction of the child care facility.

2.     A housing development shall be eligible for the density bonus or concession described in this section if the City makes all of the following findings:

a.     The child care facility will remain in operation for a period of time that is as long as or longer than the period of time during which the density bonus units are required to remain affordable pursuant to paragraph (B)(2) of this section.

b.     Of the children who attend the child care facility, the percentage of children of very-low-income households, lower-income households, or moderate-income households shall be equal to or greater than the percentage of dwelling units that are required to be affordable to very-low-income households, low-income households, or moderate-income households.

3.     “Child care facility,” as used in this section, means a child day care facility other than a family day care home, including, but not limited to, infant centers, preschools, extended day care facilities, and school age child care centers.

H.    Procedure.

1.     In addition to submitting all documentation required to apply for a Conditional Use Permit, a developer requesting a density bonus pursuant to this section shall include the following in the written narrative supporting the application:

a.     A general description of the proposed project, General Plan designation, applicable zoning, maximum possible density permitted under the current zoning and General Plan designation and such other information as is necessary and sufficient. The property must be zoned and general planned to allow a minimum of five units to qualify for a density bonus.

b.     A statement detailing the number of density bonus units being proposed over and above the number of units normally permitted by the applicable zoning and General Plan designations.

c.     A description of the requested incentive or concessions that the developer requests.

d.     A calculation of the density bonus allowed.

2.     All subsequent City review of and action on the applicant’s proposal for a density bonus and/or consideration of any requested incentives or concessions shall occur in a manner concurrent with the processing of the Conditional Use Permit and any other required entitlements, if any. If the developer proposes that the project not be subject to impact fees or other fees regularly imposed on a development of the same type, final approval will be by the City Council.

3.     The Planning Commission/City Council shall review the subject Affordability Agreement concurrently with the development proposal. No project shall be deemed approved until the Affordability Agreement has been approved by the City Council.

4.     The Planning Commission/City Council may place reasonable conditions on the granting of the density bonus and any other incentives as proposed by the applicant; however, such conditions must not have the effect, individually or cumulatively, of violating applicable State law.

5.     A monitoring fee, as established by resolution of the City Council, shall be paid by the applicant to the City prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the first unit. This fee shall be in addition to any other fees required for the processing of the Conditional Use Permit, environmental analysis, and/or any other entitlements required.

I.      Required Findings for Approval.

1.     Density Bonus. In granting a Conditional Use Permit for a density bonus, the Planning Commission/City Council shall make all of the following findings:

a.     The proposed project, which includes a density bonus, can be adequately serviced by the City and county water, sewer, and storm drain systems without significantly impacting the overall service or system.

b.     The proposed project, which includes a density bonus, will not have a significant adverse impact on traffic volumes and road capacities, school enrollments, or recreational resources.

c.     The proposed project, which includes a density bonus, is compatible with the physical character of the surrounding area.

d.     The proposed project, which includes a density bonus, is consistent with the overall intent of the General Plan.

e.     If located within the coastal zone, the proposed project which includes a density bonus will be consistent with the requirements of the certified Land Use Plan and will not result in the fill, dredge, or diking of a wetlands.

J.      Required Finding for Denial.

1.     Concessions or Incentives. The City shall grant the concession or incentive requested by the applicant unless the City makes a written finding, based upon substantial evidence, of one or more of the following:

a.     The concession or incentive is not required in order to provide affordable housing costs, as defined in Section 50052.5 of the Health and Safety Code, or for rents for the targeted units to be set as specified in California Government Code Section 65915(c).

b.     The concession or incentive would have a specific adverse impact, as defined in paragraph (2) of subdivision (d) of California Government Code Section 65589.5, upon public health and safety or the physical environment or on any real property that is listed in the California Register of Historical Resources and for which there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific adverse impact without rendering the development unaffordable to low- and moderate-income households.

c.     The concession or incentive is inconsistent with the requirements of the certified Land Use Plan. (3710-6/05, 3764-3/07, Res. 2009-36-9/09, 4040-12/14, 4146-5/18)

 

230.16 Manufactured Homes
A.    General Requirements. Manufactured homes may be used for residential purposes if such manufactured home conforms to the requirements of this section and is located in an R district. Manufactured homes also may be used for temporary uses, subject to the requirements of a temporary use permit issued under Chapter 241.

B.     Location and Design Requirements. Manufactured homes may be located in any R district where a single-family detached dwelling is permitted, subject to the same restrictions on density and to the same property development standards, provided that such manufactured home meets the design and locational criteria of this subsection. These criteria are intended to protect neighborhood integrity, provide for harmonious relationship between manufactured homes and surrounding uses, and minimize problems that could occur as a result of locating manufactured homes on residential lots.

1.     Location Criteria. Manufactured homes shall not be allowed:

a.     On substandard lots that do not meet the dimensional standards of Chapter 210;

b.     As a second or additional unit on an already developed lot; or

c.     As an accessory building or use on an already developed lot.

2.     Design Criteria. Manufactured homes shall be compatible in design and appearance with residential structures in the vicinity and shall meet the following standards:

a.     Each manufactured house must be at least 16 feet wide;

b.     It must be built on a permanent foundation approved by the Building Official;

c.     It must have been constructed after June 1, 1979, and must be certified under the National Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Act of 1974;

d.     The unit’s skirting must extend to the finished grade;

e.     Exterior siding must be compatible with adjacent residential structures, and shiny or metallic finishes are prohibited;

f.      The roof must have a pitch of not fewer than two inches vertical rise per 12 inches horizontal distance, with eave overhangs a minimum of 12 inches;

g.     The roof must be of concrete or asphalt tile, shakes or shingles complying with the most recent editions of the Uniform Building Code fire rating approved in the City of Huntington Beach;

h.     The floor must be no higher than 20 inches above the exterior finished grade; and

i.      Required enclosed parking shall be compatible with the manufactured home design and with other buildings in the area.

C.     Cancellation of State Registration. Whenever a manufactured home is installed on a permanent foundation, any registration of said manufactured home with the State of California shall be canceled, pursuant to state laws and standards. Before occupancy, the owner shall provide to the director satisfactory evidence showing: that the state registration of the manufactured house has been or will, with certainty, be canceled; if the manufactured house is new and has never been registered with the state,

the owner shall provide the director with a statement to that effect from the dealer selling the home. (4040-12/14)

 

230.18 Subdivision Sales Offices and Model Homes
Subdivision sales offices and model homes in conjunction with an approved subdivision is permitted with the following requirements.

A.    The office shall be discontinued within 30 days following sale of the last on-site unit. A cash bond shall be posted with the City in the amount of $1,000.00 for the sales office and $1,000.00 for each model home to guarantee compliance with the provisions of this Code.

B.     The developer or contractor shall furnish a site plan showing the placement of the sales office and all model signs, parking signs, directional signs, temporary structures, parking and landscaping.

C.     No sales office shall be converted or expanded into a general business office for the contractor or developer. (3525-2/02, 4040-12/14)

 

230.20 Reserved
 

230.22 Reserved
 

230.24 Small Lot Development Standards
A.    Permitted Uses. The following small lot development standards are provided as an alternative to attached housing in multifamily districts. Small lot developments are permitted in RM, RMH, and RH Districts (excluding RL Districts and RMH-A Subdistricts) subject to approval of a Conditional Use Permit and tentative map by the Planning Commission. The Design Review Board shall review and forward recommendations on all small lot development proposals prior to Planning Commission action. These standards shall apply to all small lot subdivisions, whether the tentative map is designed with single units per lot, or multiple units per lot (condominium).

B.     Design Standards. The following standards shall be considered by the Planning Commission prior to development approval:

1.     Architectural features and general appearance of the proposed development shall enhance the orderly and harmonious development of the area or the community as a whole.

2.     Architectural features and complementary colors shall be incorporated into the design of all exterior surfaces of the building in order to create an aesthetically pleasing project.

3.     All vehicular accessways shall be designed with landscaping and building variation to eliminate an alley-like appearance.

 

C.     Development Standards. The following standards shall apply to all small lot developments:

 

 

 

Minimum building site or lot size

3,100 sq. ft. (3,400 sq. ft. avg.)

Minimum lot frontage

40 ft.

Cul-de-sac and knuckle

30 ft.

Maximum height

 

Dwellings

30 ft.; max. 2 stories except 3rd level permitted <500 sq. ft.; min. 5/12 roof pitch; no decks above the second story

Accessory structures

15 ft.

Minimum setbacks

 

Front

 

Dwelling

15 ft. + offsets in front façade

Covered porches (unenclosed)

10 ft.

Garage

18 ft.

Upper story

Upper story setback shall be varied

Side

8 ft. aggregate, min. 3 ft.; 0 ft. permitted with min. 8 ft. on other side

Street side

10 ft.; includes min. 4 ft. landscape lettered lot (6 ft. between bldg. and prop. line)

Rear

 

Dwelling

15 ft.; 50% of bldg. width may be at 13 ft.

Garage

3 ft.; 0 ft. if garage is designed to back to another garage

Maximum lot coverage

50% + 5% for covered porches, patio covers, balconies.

Maximum floor area ratio (FAR)

0.7

Minimum interior garage

Min. 400 sq. ft.

Dimension (width x depth)

Min. 18 ft. wide

Minimum building separation to accessory building

6 ft.

Open space

 

Common recreational area (project)

Projects of 20 units or more: 150 sq. ft./unit; min. 5,000 sq. ft.; min. 50 ft. dimension.

 

Projects less than 20 units: min. 600 sq. ft. private and/or common per unit. Private open space excludes side and front yard setback areas. Common open space requires min. 10 ft. dimension.

Required parking

Small lot developments shall provide parking consistent with single family residential developments specified in Chapter 231. In addition, minimum 1 on-street space per unit for guest/visitor parking shall be provided. A parking plan depicting the location of all parking spaces shall be submitted with the conditional use permit application.

Street sections

 

Streets

The City shall review proposed street sections upon submittal of the tentative map and conditional use permit applications. Min. 36 ft. curb to curb may be permitted provided all units in the development are equipped with automatic sprinkler systems. On-street parking shall be provided on both sides of the street.

Sidewalks/parkways

Sidewalks shall be provided on both sides of the street. Min. 6 ft. landscape parkways may be provided on both sides of the street. Sidewalk widths shall be designed to Public Works standards.

Walls and fences

Block walls required; may allow wrought iron element where appropriate.

Landscaping

Tree wells adjacent to landscape parkways on street side of curb is encouraged; however, shall not encroach into the min. 24-foot-wide drive aisle. See Ch. 232, Landscaping.

(3455-5/00, 4040-12/14)

 

230.26 Affordable Housing
A.    Purpose.

1.     The purpose and intent of this chapter is to implement the goals, objectives and policies of the City’s Housing Element. It is intended to encourage low- and moderate-income housing, which is integrated, compatible with and complements adjacent uses, and is located in close proximity to public and commercial services.

2.     The affordable housing program is one tool the City utilizes to meet its commitment to provide housing affordable to all economic sectors, and to meet its regional fair-share requirements for construction of affordable housing.

3.     As a result of being located within a redevelopment area and/or Specific Plan area, additional restrictions or requirements may apply.

B.     Applicability. This section shall apply to new residential projects three or more units in size.

1.     A minimum of 10% of all new residential construction shall be affordable housing units. The whole number established by dividing the total unit count proposed by 10 shall be affordable housing units unless paragraph (B)(4) of this section applies. Any fractional amount may be paid with an equivalent in-lieu fee.

2.     Rental units included in the project shall be made available to low-income households as defined by Health and Safety Code Section 50079.5, or a successor statute. Rental units included in the project may be made available to moderate-income households as defined by Health and Safety Code Section 50093, or a successor statute if the moderate-income units are located on-site within the project.

3.     For sale units included in the project shall be made available to moderate-income households, as defined by Health and Safety Code Section 50093, or a successor statute.

4.     Developers of residential projects consisting of 30 or fewer units may elect to pay a fee in lieu of providing the units on-site to fulfill the requirement of this section, unless the affordable housing requirement is outlined as part of a Specific Plan project.

5.     Developers of residential projects may elect to provide the affordable units at an off-site location pursuant to subsection B of this section unless otherwise outlined as part of a Specific Plan project. If affordable units are off-site, they must be under the full control of the applicant, or other approved party.

6.     New residential projects shall include construction of an entirely new project or new units added to an existing project. For purposes of determining the required number of affordable housing units, only new units shall be counted.

C.     Fees in Lieu of Construction.

1.     Fees paid to fulfill the requirements of this section shall be placed in the City’s Affordable Housing Trust Fund, the use of which is governed by subsection E of this section.

2.     The amount of the in-lieu fees shall be calculated using the fee schedule established by resolution of the City Council.

3.     One hundred percent of the fees required by this section shall be paid prior to issuance of a building permit.

 

             [Ordinance. No. 3827 (expired 4/15/10) and Ordinance No. 3879, effective from 5/3/10 to 5/3/11, temporarily deferred the payment of certain Development Impact Fees.]

4.     Fees paid as a result of new residential projects shall be based upon the total number of the new residential units which are to be constructed.

D.    Off-Site Construction of Affordable Units. Except as may be required by the California Coastal Act and/or the Government Code Section 65590 or a successor statute, developers may provide the required affordable housing off-site, at one or several sites, within the City of Huntington Beach.

1.     Off-site projects may be new construction or substantial rehabilitation, as defined by Government Code Section 33413 affordable housing production requirements, of existing non-restricted units conditioned upon being restricted to long-term affordability. “At risk” units identified in the Housing Element or mobile homes may be used to satisfy this requirement.

2.     All affordable off-site housing shall be constructed or rehabilitated prior to or concurrently with the primary project. Final approval (occupancy) of the first market rate residential unit shall be contingent upon the completion and public availability, or evidence of the applicant’s reasonable progress towards attainment of completion, of the affordable units.

E.     Miscellaneous Provisions.

1.     The conditions of approval for any project that requires affordable units shall specify the following items:

a.     The density bonus being provided pursuant to Section 230.14, if any;

b.     The number of affordable units;

c.     The number of units at each income level as defined by the Health and Safety Code; and

d.     A list of any other incentives offered by the City.

2.     An Affordable Housing Agreement outlining all aspects of the affordable housing provisions shall be executed between the applicant and the City and recorded with the Orange County Recorder’s Office, or the applicable in-lieu fee shall be paid in full, prior to issuance of the first building permit.

3.     The agreement shall specify an affordability term of not less than 55 years for rental housing or 45 years for ownership housing.

4.     All affordable on-site units in a project shall be constructed concurrently with or prior to the construction of the primary project units unless otherwise approved through a phasing plan. Final approval (occupancy) of the first market rate residential unit shall be contingent upon the completion and public availability, or evidence of the applicant’s reasonable progress towards attainment of completion, of the affordable units.

5.     All affordable units shall be reasonably located throughout the project unless otherwise designed through a master plan, shall contain on average the same number of bedrooms as the market rate units in the project, and shall be comparable with the market rate units in terms of exterior appearance, materials and finished quality.

6.     Affordable Housing Trust Funds shall be used for projects which have a minimum of 50% of the dwelling units affordable to very low- and low-income households, with at least 20% of the units available to very low-income households. Concurrent with establishing the annual fee schedule pursuant to subsection C of this section, the City Council shall by resolution set forth the permitted uses of Affordable Housing Trust Funds. All units that obtain Affordable Housing Trust Funds shall maintain the affordability of the units for a minimum of 55 years. The funds may, at the discretion of the City Council, be used for pre-development costs, land or air rights acquisition, rehabilitation, land write downs, administrative costs, gap financing, or to lower the interest rate of construction loans or permanent financing.

7.     New affordable units shall be occupied in the following manner:

a.     If residential rental units are being demolished and the existing tenant(s) meets the eligibility requirements, he/she shall be given the right of first refusal to occupy the affordable unit(s); or

b.     If there are no qualified tenants, or if the qualified tenant(s) chooses not to exercise the right of first refusal, or if no demolition of residential rental units occurs, then qualified households or buyers will be selected.

F.     Price of Affordable Units. Affordable housing cost shall be calculated in accordance with Health and Safety Code Section 50052.5 standards for ownership units and Health and Safety Code Section 50053 standards for rental units. This methodology is fully described in the City’s adopted housing policies.

G.    Reduced Fees for Affordable Housing. Projects that exceed inclusionary requirements on-site will be eligible for reduced City fees, pursuant to an Affordable Housing Fee Reduction Ordinance, upon adoption by the City Council.

H.    Annual Program Review and Periodic Adjustment of the Fee. Within 180 days after the last day of each fiscal year, the City Council shall review the status of the City’s Affordable Housing Trust Fund, including the amount of fees collected, expenditures from the Affordable Housing Trust Fund, and the degree to which the fees collected pursuant to this chapter are assisting the City to provide and encourage low- and moderate-income housing. The fee shall be updated annually using the Real Estate and Construction Report published by the Real Estate Research Council of Southern California. The fee change shall be based on the percentage difference in the new home prices in Orange County published in the fourth quarter report for the then current year versus the immediately preceding year. (3687-12/04, 3827-4/09, 3829-6/09, 3879-6/10, 4040-12/14)

 

230.28 Group Homes
A.    Purpose. This section is intended to preserve the residential character of single-family residential neighborhoods and to further the purposes of the FEHA, the FHAA and the Lanterman Act by, among other things: (1) ensuring that group homes are actually entitled to the special accommodation and/or additional accommodation provided under the Huntington Beach Municipal Code and not simply skirting the City’s boarding house regulations; (2) limiting the secondary impacts of group homes by reducing noise and traffic, preserving safety and providing adequate on street parking; (3) providing an accommodation for the disabled that is reasonable and actually bears some resemblance to the opportunities afforded non-disabled individuals to use and enjoy a dwelling unit in a single-family neighborhood; and (4) to provide comfortable living environments that will enhance the opportunity for the disabled and for recovering addicts to be successful in their programs.

B.     Special Use Permit Required.

 

1.     A group home that may otherwise be considered an unpermitted use may locate in the RL, RM, RMH, RH, RMP, a Specific Plan Residential, or a Specific Plan Mixed Use zone with a Special Use Permit provided:

a.     An application for a group home is submitted to the Director by the owner/operator of the group home. The application shall provide the following:

i.      The name, address, phone number and driver’s license number of the owner/operator;

ii.     If the applicant and/or operator is a partnership, corporation, firm or association, then the applicant/operator shall provide the additional names and addresses as follows and such persons shall also sign the application:

(1)    Every general partner of the partnership,

(2)    Every owner with a controlling interest in the corporation,

(3)    The person designated by the officers of a corporation as set forth in a resolution of the corporation that is to be designated as the permit holder;

iii.    The license and permit history of the applicant(s), including whether such applicant(s), in previously operating a similar use in this or another City, County or State under license and/or permit, has had such license and/or permit revoked or suspended, and the reason therefor;

iv.    The name, address, phone number and driver’s license number of the house manager;

v.     A copy of the group home rules and regulations;

vi.    Written intake procedures;

vii.   The relapse policy;

viii.  An affirmation by the owner/operator that only residents (other than the house manager) who are disabled as defined by State and Federal law shall reside at the group home;

ix.    Blank copies of all forms that all residents and potential residents are required to complete; and

x.     A fee for the cost of processing of the application as set by resolution of the City Council.

No person shall open a group home or begin employment with a group home until this information has been provided and such persons shall be responsible for updating any of this information to keep it current.

b.     The group home has six or fewer occupants, not counting a house manager, but in no event shall have more than seven occupants. If the dwelling unit has a secondary accessory unit, occupants of both units will be combined to determine whether or not the limit of six occupants has been exceeded.

c.     The group home shall not be located in an accessory secondary unit unless the primary dwelling unit is used for the same purpose.

d.     The group home has a house manager who resides at the group home or any multiple of persons acting as a house manager who are present at the group home on a 24-hour basis and who are responsible for the day-to-day operation of the group home.

e.     All garage and driveway spaces associated with the dwelling unit shall, at all times, be available for the parking of vehicles. Residents and the house manager may each only store or park a single vehicle at the dwelling unit or on any street within 500 feet of the dwelling unit. The vehicle must be operable and currently used as a primary form of transportation for a resident of the group home.

f.      Occupants must not require and operators must not provide “care and supervision” as those terms are defined by Health and Safety Code Section 1503.5 and Section 80001(c)(3) of Title 22, California Code of Regulations.

g.     Integral group home facilities are not permitted. Applicants shall declare, under penalty of perjury, that the group home does not operate as an integral use/facility.

h.     If the group home operator is not the property owner, written approval from the property owner to operate a group home at the property.

i.      The property must be fully in compliance with all building codes, municipal code and zoning.

j.      At least 48 hours prior to an occupant’s eviction from or involuntary termination of residency in a group home, the operator thereof shall:

i.      Notify the person designated as the occupant’s emergency contact or contact of record that the occupant will no longer be a resident at the home;

ii.     Contact the Orange County Health Care Agency OC Links Referral Line and/or another entity designated by the City to determine the services available to the occupant, including, but not limited to, alcohol and drug inpatient and outpatient treatment;

iii.    Notify the City’s Homeless Task Force or its successor panel that an occupant is no longer a resident at the home, and determine the services available therefrom;

iv.    Provide the information obtained from paragraphs ii and iii of this subsection B.1.j. and any other treatment provider or service to the occupant prior to his or her release on a form provided by the City and obtain the occupant’s signed acknowledgement thereon;

v.     Provided, however, that if the occupant’s behavior results in immediate termination of residency pursuant to rules approved by the City as part of the special use permit for that facility, the operator shall comply with paragraphs i. through iv. of this subsection B.1.j. as soon as possible.

k.     Prior to an occupant’s eviction from or involuntary termination of residency in a group home, the operator thereof shall also:

i.      Make available to the occupant transportation to the address listed on the occupant’s driver license, state-issued identification card, or the permanent address identified in the occupant’s application or referral to the group home;

ii.     Provided, however, that should the occupant decline transportation to his or her permanent address or otherwise has no permanent address, then the operator shall make available to the occupant transportation to another group home or residential care facility that has agreed to accept the occupant. If the operator cannot find accommodation, the occupant must continue to house on premises until such accommodation can be found for the occupant.

l.      The group home operator shall maintain records for a period of one year following eviction from or involuntary termination of residency of an occupant that document compliance with subsections B.1.j. and B.1.k. of this section; provided, however, that nothing herein shall require an operator of a group home to violate any provision of state or federal law regarding confidentiality of health care information. The group home operator may not satisfy the obligations set forth in subsection B.1.k. of this section by providing remuneration to the occupant for the cost of transportation.

m.    All drivers of vehicles picking up or dropping off persons at a group home shall comply with all applicable provisions of this Code and the Vehicle Code, including, but not limited to, those provisions regulating licensure and parking, standing and stopping.

n.     In addition to the regulations outlined above, the following shall also apply to sober living homes:

i.      The sober living home is not located within 1,000 feet, as measured from the closest property lines, of any other sober living home or a state licensed alcoholism or drug abuse recovery or treatment facility.

ii.     All occupants, other than the house manager, must be actively participating in legitimate recovery programs, including, but not limited to, Alcoholics Anonymous or Narcotics Anonymous and the sober living home must maintain current records of meeting attendance. Under the sober living home’s rules and regulations, refusal to actively participate in such a program shall be cause for eviction.

iii.    The sober living home’s rules and regulations must prohibit the use of any alcohol or any non-prescription drugs at the sober living home or by any recovering addict either on or off site. The sober living home must also have a written policy regarding the possession, use and storage of prescription medications. The facility cannot dispense medications but must make them available to the residents. The possession or use of prescription medications is prohibited except for the person to whom they are prescribed, and in the amounts/dosages prescribed. These rules and regulations shall be posted on site in a common area inside the dwelling unit. Any violation of this rule must be cause for eviction under the sober living home’s rules for residency and the violator cannot be re-admitted for at least 90 days. Any second violation of this rule shall result in permanent eviction. Alternatively, the sober living home must have provisions in place to remove the violator from contact with the other residents until the violation is resolved.

iv.    The number of occupants subject to the sex offender registration requirements of Penal Code Section 290 does not exceed the limit set forth in Penal Code Section 3003.5 and does not violate the distance provisions set forth in Penal Code Section 3003.

 

v.     The sober living home shall have a written visitation policy that shall preclude any visitors who are under the influence of any drug or alcohol.

vi.    The sober living home shall have a good neighbor policy that shall direct occupants to be considerate of neighbors, including refraining from engaging in excessively loud, profane or obnoxious behavior that would unduly interfere with a neighbor’s use and enjoyment of their dwelling unit. The good neighbor policy shall establish a written protocol for the house manager/operator to follow when a neighbor complaint is received.

vii.   The sober living home shall not provide any of the following services as they are defined by Section 10501(a)(6) of Title 9, California Code of Regulations: detoxification; educational counseling; individual or group counseling sessions; and treatment or recovery planning.

o.     An applicant may seek relief from the strict application of this section by submitting a reasonable accommodation application setting forth specific reasons as to why accommodation over and above this section is necessary under State and Federal laws, pursuant to HBMC Chapter 17.77.

2.     The special use permit shall be issued by the Director as a ministerial matter if the applicant is in compliance or has agreed to comply with subsections B.1.a. through B.1.n. of this section. The issuance of the special use permit shall be denied upon a determination, and if already issued shall be denied or revoked upon a hearing, by the Director that any of the following circumstances exist:

a.     Any owner/operator or staff person has provided materially false or misleading information on the application or omitted any pertinent information;

b.     Any owner/operator or staff person has an employment history in which he or she was terminated during the past two years because of physical assault, sexual harassment, embezzlement or theft; falsifying a drug test; and selling or furnishing illegal drugs or alcohol.

c.     Any owner/operator or staff person has been convicted of or pleaded nolo contendere, within the last seven to 10 years, to any of the following offenses:

i.      Any sex offense for which the person is required to register as a sex offender under California Penal Code Section 290 (last 10 years);

ii.     Arson offenses—Violations of Penal Code Sections 451—455 (last seven years);

iii.    Violent felonies, as defined in Penal Code Section 667.5, which involve doing bodily harm to another person (last 10 years); or

iv.    The unlawful sale or furnishing of any controlled substances (last seven years).

d.     Any owner/operator or staff person is on parole or formal probation supervision on the date of the submittal of the application or at any time thereafter.

e.     The owner/operator accepts residents, other than a house manager, who are not disabled as defined by the FHAA and FEHA.

f.      A Special Use Permit for a sober living home shall also be denied upon a determination, and if already issued, any transfer shall be denied or revoked, upon a hearing, by the Director that any of the following additional circumstances exist:

i.      Any owner/operator or staff person of a sober living home is a recovering drug or alcohol abuser and upon the date of application or employment has had less than one full year of sobriety.

ii.     The owner/operator of a sober living home fails to immediately take measures to remove any resident who uses alcohol or illegally uses prescription or non-prescription drugs, or who is not actively participating in a legitimate recovery program from contact with all other sober residents.

iii.    The sober living home, as measured by the closest property lines, is located within 1,000 feet of any other sober living home or State licensed alcoholism or drug abuse recovery or treatment facility. If a State-licensed alcoholism or drug abuse recovery or treatment facility moves within 1,000 feet of an existing sober living home this shall not cause the revocation of the sober living home’s permit or be grounds for denying a transfer of such permit.

g.     For any other significant and/or repeated violations of this section and/or any other applicable laws and/or regulations, including, but not limited to, failure to comply with the provisions of subsections B.1.j. through m.

h.     Revocation shall not apply to any group home, which otherwise would cause it to be in violation of this section, that has obtained a reasonable accommodation pursuant to HBMC Chapter 17.77.

C.     Compliance.

1.     Existing group homes must apply for a special use permit within 90 days of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section.

2.     Group homes that are in existence upon the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section shall have one year from the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section to comply with its provisions, provided that any existing group home, which is serving more than six residents, must first comply with the six-resident maximum.

3.     Existing group homes obligated by a written lease exceeding one year from the effective date of the ordinance, or whose activity involves investment of money in leasehold or improvements such that a longer period is necessary to prevent undue financial hardship, are eligible for up to one additional years grace period pursuant to Planning Division approval.

D.    Transfer of Special Use Permit. A Special Use Permit may not be transferred to any other person or entity. No Special Use Permit issued pursuant to this section shall be transferred or assigned or authorize any person other than the person or entity named in the permit to operate the group home named therein.

E.     A Conditional Use Permit shall be required for and may be granted to allow the operation of a group home, or a residential care facility with seven or more occupants in the RM, RMH, RH, RMP, Specific Plan Residential and Specific Plan Mixed Use Zones subject to the following conditions:

1.     As measured from the property line to property line, the group home or sober living home shall be at least 1,000 feet from any other property that contains a group home, sober living home, or State-licensed residential care facility.

2.     An application for an Operator’s Permit that complies with Chapter 5.110 of the Huntington Beach Municipal Code (HBMC) shall be required for and may be granted to permit the operation of a group home or sober living home. (4216-8/20)

 

230.30 Reserved
 

Article II. Nonresidential Districts
230.32 Service Stations
The following supplemental development standards shall apply to the service station use classification.

A.    Minimum parcel size: 22,500 square feet.

B.     Minimum frontage: 150 feet and located at the intersection of arterial highways.

C.     Site Layout. Conditions of approval of a Conditional Use Permit may impose restrictions on outdoor storage and display and location of pump islands, canopies and service bay openings and require buffering, screening, lighting, or planting areas necessary to avoid adverse impacts on properties in the surrounding area.

 

D.    Design Standards.

1.     In reviewing proposals, emphasis shall be placed on quality design of building materials and landscape features. Service stations shall be designed so that form and scale are harmonious and consistent with the character of the specific site, the adjacent uses and structures, and the general neighborhood.

2.     The location, number, and design of driveways as well as on- and off-site traffic circulation impacts shall be analyzed.

3.     Service bay openings shall be designed to minimize the visual intrusion on surrounding streets and properties. A maximum of three service bays shall be permitted per site, none of which shall face a public right-of-way.

4.     Lighting shall be of low profile design, indirect or diffused, and shall create no negative impact on surrounding uses.

5.     A minimum 10% of the site shall be landscaped. Landscaping plans shall conform to all applicable provisions of Chapter 232 as well as conform to the following requirements:

a.     A three-foot wide planter (inside dimension) along interior property lines shall be provided, except at vehicular circulation openings. Additional landscaping may be required to screen service bays from surrounding properties.

b.     A 600-square-foot planter with a minimum dimension of 20 feet shall be provided at the corner of intersecting streets.

c.     A total of 70 square feet of planting area shall be located adjacent to and on the street side of the main building.

6.     Buildings shall conform to the setback regulations stated for the district in which the site is located. Pump islands and canopy structures shall maintain the following minimum setbacks from street side property lines:

a.     Pump island: 20 feet.

b.     Canopy: 10 feet with ground clearance of 12 feet.

E.     Storage of Materials and Equipment. The provisions of Section 230.74, Outdoor Facilities, shall apply, except that a display rack for automobile products no more than four feet wide may be maintained at each pump island of a service station and a single tire storage display no more than eight feet high and 16 feet long may be located on the site of a service station. If display racks are not located on pump islands, they shall be placed within three feet of the principal building, and shall be limited to one per street frontage. Outside storage of motor vehicles for more than 24 hours (seven days if the vehicle is actively being serviced) is prohibited, except as provided for truck and utility trailer rentals. The location of display racks and vending machines shall be specified by the Conditional Use Permit.

F.     Accessory Uses. The accessory uses listed below shall be permitted as included on the approved site plan. Such uses shall be subordinate to the main operation and shall not impede safe vehicular and pedestrian circulation or be detrimental to surrounding properties or potential customers. Such uses shall be included as part of the original Conditional Use Permit request or shall be subject to a new Conditional Use Permit if proposed subsequent to the original Conditional Use Permit.

1.     Convenience markets are permitted provided no automotive repair or truck or trailer rental is permitted on the same site.

2.     Automatic washing, cleaning and waxing of vehicles. Such activity shall be of an integral design with the main structure.

3.     Truck and utility truck rental is permitted provided the trucks do not exceed 25 feet in length and are stored a minimum of 50 feet from the street property lines. (4040-12/14)

 

230.34 Housing of Goods
All goods, wares, merchandise, produce, and other commodities which are stored or offered for sale or exchange in the commercial and industrial districts shall be housed in permanent buildings except as otherwise provided by this Code. (4040-12/14)

 

230.36 Transportation Demand Management
A.    Purpose and Intent. It is the purpose and intent to implement the requirements of Government Code Section 65089.3(a)(2), to mitigate the impacts that development projects may have on transportation mobility, congestion and air quality, and to promote transportation demand management strategies.

B.     Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following definitions for the following terms shall apply:

Alternative Transportation Mode. Any mode of travel that serves as an alternative to the single occupant vehicle. This can include all forms of ridesharing, public transit, bicycling or walking.

Building Size. The total gross floor area measured in square feet of a building or group of buildings at a worksite. Includes the total floor area of both new development and existing facilities.

Carpool. Two to six persons traveling together in a single vehicle.

Employee. Any person employed by a firm, person(s), business, educational institution, non-profit agency or corporation, government agency, or other entity which employs 100 or more persons at a single worksite. “Employee” shall include persons employed on a full-time, part-time, or temporary basis.

Employer. Any person(s), firm, business, educational institution, government agency, non-profit agency or corporation, or other entity which employs or houses tenants that collectively employ 100 or more employees at a worksite on a full- and/or part-time/temporary basis.

Mixed Use Development. New development projects that integrate any one of these land uses with another: residential, office, commercial, industrial and business park.

Tenant. The lessee of facility space at a development project who may also serve as an employer.

Transportation Demand Management (TDM). The implementation of programs, plans or policies designed to encourage changes in individual travel behavior. TDM can include an emphasis on alternative travel modes to the single occupant vehicle (SOV) such as carpools, vanpools and transit; and reduction of vehicle miles traveled (VMT) and the number of vehicle trips.

Vanpool. A vehicle occupied by seven or more persons traveling together.

Worksite. A building or group of buildings which are under common ownership and the place of employment, base of operation, or predominate location of an employee or group of employees.

C.     Applicability.

1.     These provisions apply to commercial, industrial, institutional, or other uses which are determined to employ 100 or more persons, as determined by the employee generation factors specified under paragraph 4 of this subsection. This includes any permit for existing facilities that already have 100 or more employees or will have 100 or more employees.

2.     These provisions apply to all districts, planned communities and specific plan areas including those covered by development agreements. These provisions shall supersede other ordinances with which there is a conflict.

3.     Notwithstanding paragraph 1 of this subsection, the following uses and activities shall be specifically exempt from the provisions of this section:

a.     Temporary construction activities on any affected project, including activities performed by engineers, architects, contract subcontractors and construction workers.

b.     Other temporary use classifications or as authorized by the director when such temporary activities are for a period not to exceed 30 days and held no more than once a year.

4.     Employee generation factors shall be based on one of the following:

a.     Employment projections developed by the property owner, subject to approval by the director;

b.     Building sizes shall be considered equivalent to the 100 employee threshold as follows:

 

Type of Use

Building Size (in Sq. Ft.)

Equivalent to 100 Employees

Office/Professional

35,000

Hospital and Medical/Dental

40,000

Industrial (Excluding Warehouses)

50,000

Commercial/Retail

50,000

Hotel

0.8 Employees/Hotel Room

Motel

1.2

Resort Hotel

100,000

Mixed or Multiple Use

*

Warehouse

100,000

*       The employment projection for a development of mixed or multiple uses shall be calculated on a case-by-case basis based upon the proportion of development devoted to each type of use.

 

D.    Site Development Standards. Development projects subject to this section shall comply with the following site development standards:

1.     Parking for Carpool Vehicles.

a.     The following percentages of the total required parking spaces per Chapter 231 shall be reserved and designated for employee carpool vehicles by making such spaces “Carpool Only”:

 

Type of Use

Percent of Total Parking Devoted

to Employee Carpool Parking

Office Professional

13%

Hospital and Medical/Dental Office

9%

Industrial/Warehouse

14%

Commercial/Retail

5%

Hotel

Space for every 2 employees

 

b.     Carpool spaces shall be located near the building’s identified employee entrance(s) or at other preferential locations within the employee parking areas as approved by the director.

2.     Shower and Locker Facilities. Shower and locker facilities shall be provided for use by employees or tenants who commute to the site by bicycle or walking. The use of such facilities shall be provided at no cost to the user. The design of such facilities shall be shown on the plot plans in the permit application and conform to the following:

a.     Lockers shall be provided at a minimum ratio of one for every 20 employees.

b.     Separate shower facilities shall be provided at a minimum rate of two per 100 employees.

3.     Bicycle Parking.

a.     Bicycle parking facilities shall be provided at the minimum rate of one bicycle parking space for every 20 employees or fraction thereof, in a secure location, and in close proximity to employee entrances, for use by employees or tenants who commute to the site by bicycle.

b.     A bicycle parking facility shall be a stationary object to which the user can lock the bicycle frame and both wheels with a user provided six-foot cable and lock.

4.     Commuter Information Areas. A commuter information area shall be provided to offer employees appropriate information on alternative transportation modes. This area shall be centrally located and accessible to all employees or tenants and shall be sufficient size to accommodate such information on alternative transportation modes.

5.     Passenger Loading Areas. Unless determined unnecessary by the decision maker, per Title 24, passenger loading areas to embark and disembark passengers from rideshare vehicles and public transportation shall be provided as follows:

a.     Passenger loading area shall be large enough to accommodate the number of waiting vehicles equivalent to 1% of the required parking for the project.

b.     The passenger loading areas shall be located as close as possible to the identified employee entrance(s), and shall be designed in a manner that does not impede vehicular circulation in the parking area or in adjoining streets.

6.     Parking for Vanpool Vehicles. Unless determined unnecessary by the decision maker, per Title 24, parking for vanpool vehicles shall be provided as follows:

a.     The number of vanpool parking spaces shall be at least 1% of the employee carpool parking spaces and reserved for such by marking the spaces “Vanpool Only.”

b.     For parking structures, vanpool vehicle accessibility shall include minimum seven-foot-two-inch vertical clearance.

c.     Vanpool parking spaces shall be located near identified employee entrance(s) or other preferential locations.

7.     Bus Stops. Unless determined unnecessary by the decision maker, per Title 24, bus shelter, pullouts, and pads shall be provided as necessary in consultation with affected transit service providers. (4040-12/14)

 

230.38 Game Centers
The following supplemental requirements shall apply to the operation of game centers, including mechanical or electronic games or any other similar machine or device, in order to control the location and hours of operation of game centers so as not to allow school children to play the games during school hours or to encourage minors to congregate in areas close to commercial establishments that sell alcoholic beverages. The following conditions shall apply:

A.    Neighborhood Notification. Submit a request to the director with Neighborhood Notification pursuant to Chapter 241.

B.     Adult Manager. At least one adult manager shall be on the premises during the time a game center is open to the public.

C.     Hours of Operation for Minors Under 18 Years of Age. No game center owners, managers or employees shall allow a minor under 18 years of age to play a mechanical or electronic game machine during the hours the public schools of the district in which the center is located are in session, or after 9:00 p.m. on nights preceding school days, or after 10:00 p.m. on any night. It is the responsibility of the owner or manager of the game center to obtain a current schedule of school days and hours.

D.    Locational Criteria. A game center shall not be permitted within 2,500 feet of a school site, 300 feet of the boundary of a residential district, or within 500 feet of a liquor store, a nightclub, cocktail lounge or bar. The distance shall be measured as walking distance from the game center to the property line of the school site, the district boundary, or the property line of the liquor store, nightclubs, cocktail lounge, or bar, as the case may be.

E.     Restrictions. The director may impose reasonable restrictions on the physical design, location, and operation of a game center and require a special bicycle parking area in order to minimize the effects of noise, congregation, parking, and other nuisance factors that may be detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare of the surrounding community. (3710-6/05, 4040-12/14)

 

230.40 Helicopter Takeoff and Landing Areas
A.    Permit Required. A Conditional Use Permit may be issued for the construction and operation of a heliport, helipad, or helistop if the Planning Commission finds that:

1.     The helipad, heliport, or helistop conforms to the locational criteria and standards established in subsections B and C of this section, and the requirements of the California Department of Transportation, Division of Aeronautics;

2.     The heliport, helipad, or helistop is compatible with the surrounding environment; and

3.     The proposed operation of the helicopter facility does not pose a threat to public health, safety or welfare.

The commission may impose conditions of approval on the Conditional Use Permit to prevent adverse impacts on surrounding properties. If such impacts cannot be mitigated to an acceptable level, the Conditional Use Permit application shall be denied.

B.     Locational Criteria.

1.     Minimum Separation. Minimum separation between heliports, helipads, and helistops shall be 1.5 miles, except for facilities specifically intended for emergency use, such as medical evacuation or police functions, and temporary landing sites.

2.     Protected Areas. No heliport, helipad, or helistop shall be located within 1,000 feet of an R district or the site of a public or private school, except for heliports or helistops specifically intended only for emergency or police use. Temporary landing sites within 1,000 feet of a public or private school may be allowed with a temporary use permit subject to approval of the California Department of Transportation.

C.     Site Development Standards.

1.     Approach and departure paths 65 feet wide shall be free of obstruction for a minimum distance of 400 feet.

2.     Setbacks from property lines shall be as follows:

a.     Takeoff and landing area: 50 feet;

b.     Helicopter maintenance facilities: 25 feet;

c.     Administrative or operations building: 15 feet.

3.     Any lighting used for nighttime operations shall be directed away from adjacent properties and public rights-of-way.

4.     A telephone shall be provided on or adjacent to the heliport, helipad or helistop.

5.     Helipads or helistops intended for emergency use shall have a landing pad with a standard landing area designated and the words “Emergency Only.” The initial direction of the departure routes shall be indicated on the takeoff and landing area.

D.    Application Requirements. The following additional information shall be submitted with a Conditional Use Permit application:

1.     An area map, at a scale of 1″ = 800′ showing existing land use within a two-mile radius of the facility site and the proposed flight paths.

2.     A plot plan of the site and vicinity, including all land within a 400-foot radius of the takeoff and landing area, that shows clearly the height of the takeoff and landing area; the height of existing, approved and proposed structures and trees within 50 feet of the approach and takeoff flight paths; and the maximum allowable building height under existing zoning.

3.     A description of the proposed operations, including the type of use, names and descriptions of helicopters expected to use the facility, and anticipated number and timing of daily flights.

4.     A helicopter noise study including a map of the approach and departure flight paths at a scale of 1″ = 800′ showing existing day/night average noise levels in decibels (LDN noise contours), future day/night average noise levels with the proposed facility and anticipated flight operations, and single event maximum sound levels associated with the types of helicopters expected to use the facility. (3710-6/05, 4040-12/14)

 

230.42 Bed and Breakfast Inns
A.    Permit Required. The Zoning Administrator may approve a Conditional Use Permit for a bed and breakfast inn in any C District and RMH A District after a duly noticed public hearing upon finding that:

1.     The bed and breakfast inn will be operated by a property owner living on the premises;

 

2.     The bed and breakfast inn conforms to the design and development standards of subsection B of this section and is compatible with adjacent buildings in terms of building materials, colors and exterior finishes; and

3.     Public and utility services, including emergency access, are adequate to serve the bed and breakfast inn.

B.     Design and Development Standards.

1.     Minimum Size and Maximum Number of Guest Rooms. The inn shall contain at least 2,000 square feet, but no more than six rooms shall be rented for lodging.

2.     Parking. The requirements of Chapter 231 shall apply.

3.     Signs. The requirements of Chapter 233 apply. In addition, in the RMH A district, no identifying sign shall be displayed other than a sign no larger than two square feet identifying the name of the establishment. The face of the sign may be indirectly illuminated by an exterior light source entirely shielded from view, but no internal illumination from an interior light source shall be permitted. (3710-6/05, 4040-12/14)

 

230.44 Recycling Operations
Collection containers shall be permitted for charitable organizations such as Goodwill. Recycling and collection containers shall not be located within required parking or landscaped areas or obstruct pedestrian paths. Recycling as an accessory use shall not exceed 500 square feet including any required attendant parking space. A recycling operation as a primary use shall comply with the development standards contained in Chapter 212. (4040-12/14)

 

230.46 Single Room Occupancy
Single room occupancy (SRO) shall comply with the following requirements:

A.    General Provisions.

1.     All projects shall comply with the most recently adopted City building, plumbing, mechanical, electrical, fire, and housing codes.

2.     No more than one person shall be permitted to reside in any unit, excluding the manager’s unit and up to 25% of the total number of units which have double occupancy.

3.     A management plan shall be submitted for review and approval with the Conditional Use Permit application. The management plan shall contain management policies, operations, emergency procedures, overnight guest policy, security program including video cameras monitoring building access points at every floor, rental procedures and proposed rates, maintenance plans, staffing needs, and tenant mix, selection and regulations. Income levels shall be verified by a third party and submitted to the City of Huntington Beach as part of the annual review.

4.     An on-site 24-hour manager is required in every SRO project. In addition, a manager’s unit shall be provided which shall be designed as a complete residential unit, and be a minimum of 300 square feet in size.

5.     Rental procedures shall allow for monthly tenancies only; deposit requirements shall be specified.

6.     All units within SRO projects shall be restricted to very-low- and low-income individuals as defined by the City’s housing element, with the exception of the 24-hour manager. Rental rates shall be calculated using a maximum of 30% of income toward housing expenses based on County of Orange income figures.

7.     Each SRO project shall be subject to annual review by the City which includes the review of management services. The management services plan shall define third party verification criteria. The SRO project owner shall be responsible for filing an annual report to the Community Development Department and Office of Business Development, which includes the range of monthly rents, the monthly income of residents, occupancy rates, and the number of vehicles owned by residents.

8.     The Planning Commission or City Council may revoke the Conditional Use Permit if any violation of conditions or any of the adopted Huntington Beach codes occurs.

B.     Unit Requirements.

1.     Minimum unit size shall be 250 square feet except double occupancy units shall be a minimum of 400 square feet.

2.     Maximum unit size shall be 300 square feet excluding manager’s unit and double occupancy units.

3.     Each unit shall contain a kitchen and bathroom.

a.     Kitchens shall contain a sink with garbage disposal, counter top (minimum 16″ x 24″), refrigerator, and stove/oven unit and/or microwave.

b.     If stoves/oven units are not provided in each unit, then stoves/oven units shall be provided in a common kitchen area(s).

c.     Bathrooms shall contain a lavatory, toilet, and shower or bathtub.

d.     Each unit shall have a minimum 48 cubic feet of closet/storage space.

C.     Project Requirements.

1.     Common recreational space shall be provided in each project as follows:

a.     Minimum common recreational space shall be 400 square feet.

b.     For projects exceeding 30 units, an additional 10 square feet of recreational space per unit is required.

Units that are 400 square feet or greater shall have a minimum of 15 square feet of recreational space per unit.

c.     Common recreational space may be indoor or outdoor provided there is at least 40% allotted toward indoor space and 40% outdoor space; the balance may be either indoors or outdoors.

d.     Common recreational space may be in separate areas provided each space is not less than 200 square feet in size and has no less than a 10-foot dimension.

2.     A single controlled entryway for routine ingress and egress shall be situated adjacent to and in full view of the manager’s desk.

3.     A secured office area shall be incorporated in the facility for the storage of confidential resident records and security office personnel.

4.     Mailboxes shall be provided for each unit located near the lobby in plain view of the entry desk.

5.     Handicap access facilities shall be as required by applicable state or local law.

6.     At least one handicapped accessible unit shall be required for every 20 units.

7.     Laundry facilities shall be provided in a separate room in a location near the common indoor recreational space. Washers and dryers may be coin operated.

8.     A cleaning supply storeroom and/or utility closet with at least one laundry tub with hot and cold water on every floor shall be provided on every floor.

9.     Storage Lockers.

a.     Storage lockers shall be provided in a secured area.

b.     The cumulative total of locker space shall be no less than a ratio of 10 cubic feet per unit.

10.   All common indoor space areas shall have posted in a conspicuous location a notice from the Department of Community Development regarding contact procedures to investigate housing code violations.

11.   Bicycle stalls shall be provided at a minimum of one stall per five units in a secured and enclosed and covered area.

12.   Trash disposal chutes as well as a centralized trash area shall be provided on all multi-story projects.

13.   A minimum of two pay telephones shall be provided in the lobby area. The telephone service shall only allow outgoing calls.

14.   Phone jack(s) shall be provided in each unit.

15.   A shipping and receiving/maintenance garage shall be provided near a convenient vehicular access on the ground floor. (3494-5/01, 4040-12/14, 4096-10/16)

 

230.48 Equestrian Centers
A.    Permit Required. Equestrian centers shall be permitted in the OS-PR and PS Districts, subject to the approval of a Conditional Use Permit by the Planning Commission. Where all off-site improvements are not provided, initial approval shall be for a maximum period of five years subject to annual review. One-year extensions of time may be granted after public hearing by the Planning Commission. On requests to allow a facility on a permanent basis, the Planning Commission shall determine required improvements based on the existing and proposed land uses and the existing off-site improvements within the area.

B.     Design and Development Standards.

1.     Minimum Parcel Size/Frontage. The minimum lot size and lot frontage shall be:

 

 

Area

Frontage

Temporary facilities:

2 acres

100 feet

Permanent facilities:

5 acres

100 feet

 

2.     Density/Riding Areas. Maximum density for horse facilities shall be determined by the following criteria:

a.     Maximum density shall be 25 horses per acre.

b.     Minimum riding area shall be 5,000 square feet per 15 horses. For facilities with over 100 horses, two separate arenas shall be provided. In the alternative, off-site riding area shall be provided adjacent to the facility at the rate of one acre per 15 horses.

c.     Exercise rings shall have no dimension less than 30 feet.

d.     The minimum arena size shall be 10,000 square feet with no dimension less than 80 feet.

3.     Maximum Building Height. Maximum building height shall be 30 feet.

4.     Required Setbacks.

 

Front:

50 feet

 

(30 feet for caretaker’s residence)

Interior side:

25 feet

Exterior side:

50 feet

Rear:

25 feet

Minimum distance to any residential zone or use:

300 feet

 

5.     Corral Design. Corrals designed for one horse shall comply with the following requirements. Corrals designed for more than one horse shall provide a minimum area per horse as indicated below. All corrals, racks and stalls shall be of compatible design, materials to be approved by the Fire Department.

a.     Corral size: 288 square feet; minimum dimension: 12 feet.

Shelter size: 96 square feet; minimum dimension: 8 feet.

b.     Each corral shall have an approved water system with automatic drinking controls provided.

c.     Box stalls may be provided in lieu of horse corrals. Such stalls shall be a minimum of 144 square feet with no dimension less than 12 feet.

6.     Wash Rack. One wash rack per 35 horses or fraction thereof shall be provided subject to the following requirements. Wash racks designed for more than one horse shall provide a minimum area per 35 horses as indicated below:

a.     Individual wash racks shall be six by eight feet.

b.     Each wash rack shall have an approved watering system and be connected to a sewer facility with a back-siphon device at the water source.

c.     A concrete slab floor shall be provided.

C.     Insect and Rodent Control.

1.     Feed mangers or boxes shall not be placed near water sources.

2.     Nonleak valves shall be provided for all troughs, bowls, cups and other water sources.

3.     Automatic valves or sanitary drains shall be provided for large troughs or cups.

4.     Grading in paddocks and corrals shall be properly integrated into a master drainage plan to prevent ponding of water. Shelters shall be sloped away from the center of the corrals, or rain gutters shall be installed to the exterior of the corral.

5.     Method of disposal of solid wastes shall be approved by Planning Commission. Trash disposal areas and dumpsters shall be designated and conveniently located with an all-weather road access provided.

 

6.     All dry grains shall be stored in rodent-proof metal containers and hay storage shall be covered. Bulk or commercial amounts of grain or hay shall be located a minimum of 50 feet away from any horse enclosure.

D.    Miscellaneous Operating Requirements.

1.     The ground surface of horse enclosures shall be graded above their surroundings. A grading plan shall be submitted prior to issuance of a Conditional Use Permit.

2.     Storage and tack areas shall be designated on the site plan.

3.     Continuous dust control of the entire premises shall be maintained subject to the regulations contained in Huntington Beach Municipal Code Chapter 8.24. The method for water sprinkling arenas and exercise pens shall be indicated on the site plan.

4.     A permanent single-family residence shall be provided on the site with a watchman on duty 24 hours a day. Two fully enclosed parking spaces shall be provided. Where a mobile home is used to satisfy this requirement, one carport space and one open space shall be permitted.

5.     A back-siphoning device shall be installed to protect the public water supply. An approved pressure vacuum breaker is recommended on the waterline serving the corrals. The vacuum breaker shall be at least 12 inches above the highest point of water usage or an approved double check valve may be used.

6.     Security lighting shall be confined to the site and all utilities shall be installed underground.

7.     A log containing the name of every horse, its location in the facility, the owner’s name and address, and the names and addresses of persons to be notified in case of emergency shall be maintained in the watchman’s quarters for ready reference.

8.     All fire protection appliances, appurtenances, emergency access, and any other applicable requirements, pursuant to Huntington Beach Municipal Code Chapter 17.56, shall meet the specifications of the Fire Department.

9.     The entire site, exclusive of riding areas, shall be fenced in such a manner as to confine horses within the site in order to protect the perimeter landscaping from damage. Individual corrals shall be enclosed by a minimum five-foot high fence.

E.     Off-Street Parking and Landscaping.

1.     Parking and circulation design shall comply with the standards outlined in Chapter 231. In addition, the perimeter of the parking area shall be delineated by pilasters or wooden poles with chain, cable, or heavy rope connectors. The parking lot shall be surfaced in accord with the specifications of the Department of Public Works.

2.     Landscaping, as set out in Chapter 232, shall be provided except that the minimum landscaped area required shall be a 10-foot-wide (inside dimension) planter along all property lines. (4040-12/14)

 

230.50 Indoor Swap Meets/Flea Markets
Indoor swap meets/flea markets shall comply with the following requirements:

A.    Conditional Use Permit Required. Indoor swap meets/flea market uses may be permitted as temporary uses only upon approval of Conditional Use Permit by the Zoning Administrator for a period of time not to exceed 10 years. One-year extension of time may be granted after public hearing by the Zoning Administrator.

B.     Location Considerations. The Zoning Administrator shall consider the following issues when evaluating a proposed Conditional Use Permit:

1.     The site’s proximity to residences, schools, hospitals and other noise sensitive uses.

2.     The potential adverse impacts on traffic circulation and pedestrian safety.

3.     The site’s proximity to other indoor swap meets/flea markets to avoid overconcentration of facilities.

4.     The site’s proximity to businesses processing hazardous materials.

C.     Location Criteria. Indoor swap meet/flea market uses shall only be allowed on property located adjacent to arterial streets.

D.    Minimum Building Size. Minimum building gross floor area shall be 100,000 square feet.

E.     Miscellaneous Requirements.

1.     Ancillary Uses. Ancillary uses may be permitted as included on the approved site plan. Such uses shall be included as part of the initial Conditional Use Permit requirements or shall be subject to new entitlement if proposed after the initial application has been filed.

2.     Signs. Individual vendors shall not be permitted any outdoor signs, including temporary. Signs shall comply with the standards outlined in Chapter 233.

3.     Parking. Parking shall comply with the standards outlined in Chapter 231. (4040-12/14)

 

230.52 Emergency Shelters
Emergency shelters may be permitted subject to the following requirements:

A.    A single emergency shelter for 50 occupants, or a combination of multiple shelters with a combined capacity not to exceed 50 occupants, shall be permitted. Religious assembly uses within an industrial zone may establish emergency shelters for up to 30 occupants provided they meet the minimum development standards of the zone in which they are located.

B.     Stays at the emergency shelter facility shall be on a first-come first-serve basis with clients housed on-site. Clients must vacate the facility by 8:00 a.m. each day and have no guaranteed bed for the next night.

C.     Maximum stay at the facility shall not exceed 120 days in a 365-day period.

D.    A minimum distance of 300 feet shall be maintained from any other emergency shelter, as measured from the property line.

E.     An on-site client intake and waiting area shall be provided in a location not adjacent to the public right-of-way, be fully screened from public view, and provide consideration for weather events including shade and rain cover. The waiting area shall contain a minimum area of 10 square feet per bed.

F.     Any provision of on-site outside storage shall be fully screened from public view.

G.    Exterior lighting shall be provided for the entire outdoor area of the site consistent with the Huntington Beach Zoning and Subdivision Ordinance.

 

H.    A minimum of one staff person per 15 beds shall be awake and on duty during facility hours of operation.

I.      On-site parking shall be provided at the ratio of one space per staff member, plus one space for every five beds and an additional one-half space for each bedroom designated for families with children.

J.      A Safety and Security Plan shall be submitted to the Director of Community Development for review and approval. The site-specific Safety and Security Plan shall describe the following:

1.     Both on- and off-site needs, including, but not limited to, the separation of individual male and female sleeping areas, provisions of family sleeping areas, and associated provisions of management.

2.     Specific measures targeting the minimizing of client congregation in the vicinity of the facility during hours that clients are not allowed on-site. Goals and objectives are to be established to avoid disruption of adjacent and nearby uses.

3.     Provisions of a system of management for daily admittance and discharge procedures.

4.     Any counseling programs are to be provided with referrals to outside assistance agencies, and provide an annual report on a facility’s activity to the City.

5.     Clients are to be appropriately screened for admittance eligibility.

6.     Refuse collections schedule to provide the timely removal of associated client litter and debris on and within the vicinity of the facility.

K.    A proposed emergency shelter offering immediate and short-term housing may provide supplemental services to homeless individuals or families. These services may include, but are not limited to, the following:

1.     An indoor and/or outdoor recreation area.

2.     A counseling center for job placement, educational, health care, legal or mental services, or similar services geared toward homeless clients.

3.     Laundry facilities to serve the number of clients at the shelter.

4.     Kitchen for the preparation of meals.

5.     Dining hall.

6.     Client storage area (i.e., for the overnight storage of bicycles and personal items). (3861-2/10, 4040-12/14, 4096-10/16)

 

230.54 Reserved
 

230.56 Reserved
 

230.58 Reserved
 

230.60 Reserved
 

Article III. All Districts
230.62 Building Site Required
No building or structure shall be erected or moved onto any parcel of land in the City except on a lot certified in compliance with the Subdivision Map Act and local subdivision and zoning provisions at time of creation or on a parcel created as a result of a public taking. No building or structure shall be altered or enlarged to increase the gross floor area by more than 50% within any one-year period except on a legal building site. (4040-12/14)

 

230.64 Development on Substandard Lots
Development on substandard lots shall be subject to approval of a Conditional Use Permit by the Zoning Administrator. A legally created lot having a width or area less than required for the base district in which it is located may be occupied by a permitted or conditional use if it meets the following requirements or exceptions:

A.    The lot must have been in single ownership separate from any abutting lot on the effective date of the ordinance that made it substandard. Two or more contiguous lots held by the same owner shall be considered as merged if one of the lots does not conform to the minimum lot size or width for the base district in which it is located.

B.     A substandard lot shall be subject to the same yard and density requirements as a standard lot, provided that in an R district, one dwelling unit may be located on a substandard lot that meets the requirements of this section.

C.     An existing legal lot comprising a minimum size of 5,000 square feet or greater and a minimum width of 50 feet or greater shall not be considered substandard for purposes of this section. (4040-12/14)

 

230.66 Development on Lots Divided by District Boundaries
The standards applicable to each district shall be applied to the area within that district. No use shall be located in a district in which it is not a permitted or conditional use. Pedestrian or vehicular access from a street to a use shall not traverse a portion of the site in a district in which the use is not a permitted or conditional use. (4040-12/14)

 

230.68 Building Projections Into Yards and Courts
Projections into required yards and courts shall be permitted as follows:

 

Allowable Projections in Feeta

 

 

Front Yard

Side Yard

Street Side Yard

Rear Yard

Fireplace or chimney

2.5

2.5b

2.5

2.5

Cornice, eaves and ornamental features

3

2.5b

3

3

Mechanical equipment

2

2b

2b

2

Uncovered porches, terraces, platforms, subterranean garages, decks, and patios not more than 3 feet in height serving only the first floor

6

3

4

5

Stairs, canopies, awnings and uncovered porches more than 3 feet in height

4

2b

4

4b

Bay windows

2.5

2.5b

2.5

2.5

Balconies

3

2b

3

3

Covered patios

0

0

5c

5

Notes:

a        No individual projection shall exceed 1/3 of the building length, and the total of all projections shall not exceed 2/3 of the building length on which they are located.

b        A 30-inch clearance from the property line shall be maintained.

c        No projection shall extend more than 1/2 the width of the street side yard.

(4040-12/14)

 

230.70 Measurement of Height
This section establishes standards for determining compliance with the maximum building height limits prescribed for each zoning district or as modified by an overlay district.

A.    Datum (100) shall be set at the highest point of the curb along the front property line. If no curb exists, datum shall be set at the highest centerline of the street along the front property line.

B.     The differential between top of subfloor and datum shall be a maximum of two feet as determined by Public Works. In the event that any subfloor, stemwall or footing is proposed greater than two feet above datum, the height in excess shall be deducted from the maximum allowable ridgeline height.

C.     Lots with a grade differential of three feet or greater between the high point and the low point, determined before rough grading, shall be subject to Conditional Use Permit approval by the Zoning Administrator. Conditional Use Permit approval shall be based upon a building and grading plan which terraces the building with the grade and which is compatible with adjacent development. (4040-12/14)

 

230.72 Exceptions to Height Limits
Chimneys; vent pipes; cooling towers; flagpoles; towers; spires; domes; cupolas; parapet walls not more than four feet high; water tanks; fire towers; transmission antennas (including wireless communication facilities); radio and television antennas (except satellite dish antennas); and similar structures and necessary mechanical appurtenances (except wind driven generators) may exceed the maximum permitted height in the district in which the site is located by no more than 10 feet. The Zoning Administrator may approve greater height with a Conditional Use Permit. Within the coastal zone, exceptions to height limits may be granted only when public visual resources are preserved and enhanced where feasible. (3334-6/97, 3568-9/02, 4040-12/14)

 

230.74 Outdoor Facilities
A.    Permit Required. Outdoor storage and display of merchandise, materials, or equipment, including display of merchandise, materials, and equipment for customer pick up, shall be subject to approval of a Conditional Use Permit by the Zoning Administrator in the CG, IL, IG, CV and SP districts. Sidewalk cafés with alcoholic beverage service and/or outdoor food service accessory to an eating and drinking establishment shall be permitted subject to approval of a Conditional Use Permit by the Zoning Administrator in the CO, CG, CV, OS and SP districts, but no outdoor preparation of food or beverages shall be permitted.

B.     Permit Conditions—Grounds for Denial. The Zoning Administrator may require yards, screening, or planting areas necessary to prevent adverse impacts on surrounding properties. If such impacts cannot be prevented, the Zoning Administrator shall deny the Conditional Use Permit application.

C.     Exceptions. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections A and B of this section, outdoor storage and display shall be permitted in conjunction with the following use classifications in districts where they are permitted or conditionally permitted:

1.     Nurseries, provided outdoor storage and display is limited to plants, new garden equipment and containers only; and

2.     Vehicle/equipment sales and rentals, provided outdoor storage and display shall be limited to vehicles, boats, or equipment offered for sale or rent only; and

3.     Vehicle storage, off-site auto sales uses and vehicle storage, recreation vehicles uses pursuant to the provisions of Section 211.04 and Section 212.04.

D.    Screening. Outdoor storage and display areas for rental equipment and building and landscaping materials shall be screened from view of streets by a solid fence or wall. The height of merchandise, materials, and equipment stored or displayed shall not exceed the height of the screening fence or wall. (3525-2/02, 4040-12/14, 4197-3/20)

 

230.76 Screening of Mechanical Equipment
A.    General Requirement.

1.     Except as provided in subsection B of this section, all exterior mechanical equipment, except solar collectors and operating mechanical equipment in an I district located more than 100 feet from another zoning district boundary, shall be screened from view on all sides. Equipment to be screened includes, but is not limited to, heating, air conditioning, refrigeration equipment, plumbing lines, ductwork, and transformers.

2.     Screening of the top of equipment may be required by the director, if necessary to protect views from an R or OS district. Rooftop mechanical equipment shall be set back 15 feet from the exterior edges of the building.

B.     Utility Meters and Backflow Prevention Devices. Utility meters shall be screened from view from public rights-of-way. Electrical transformers in a required front or street side yard shall be enclosed in subsurface vaults or other location approved by the director. Backflow prevention devices shall not be located in the front yard setback and shall be screened from view.

C.     Screening Specifications. A mechanical equipment plan shall be submitted to the director to ensure that the mechanical equipment is not visible from a street or adjoining lot. (4040-12/14)

 

230.78 Refuse Storage Areas
Refuse storage area screened on three sides by a six-foot masonry wall and equipped with a gate, or located within a building, shall be provided prior to occupancy for all multifamily residential, commercial, industrial, and public/semipublic uses. Locations, horizontal dimensions, and general design parameter of refuse storage areas shall be as prescribed by the director. The trash area shall not face a street or be located in a required setback. The design and materials used in such trash enclosures shall harmonize with the main structure. (4040-12/14)

 

230.80 Antennas
A.    Purpose. The following provisions are established to regulate installation of antennas to protect the health, safety, and welfare of persons living and working in the City and to preserve the aesthetic value and scenic quality of the City without imposing unreasonable limitations on, prevent the reception of signals, or imposing excessive costs on the users of the antennas.

B.     Permit Required. Approval by the director shall be required for the installation of an antenna or satellite antenna to ensure compliance with the locational criteria. Construction shall be subject to the provisions of the Uniform Building Code and National Electrical Code, as adopted by the City. Within the coastal zone, approval of a Coastal Development Permit shall be required for installation of any antenna that meets the definition of development in Section 245.04 unless it is exempt pursuant to Section 245.08.

C.     Locational Criteria—Satellite Antennas. A satellite antenna may be installed on a lot in any zoning district if it complies with the following criteria:

1.     Number. Only one satellite antenna may be permitted on a residential lot.

2.     Setbacks. Interior side and rear property lines, 10 feet, except that no setback shall be required in interior side and rear setback areas if the antenna or satellite antenna does not exceed six feet in height. No antenna or satellite antenna shall be located in a required front yard. When roof mounted, the antenna or satellite antenna shall be located on the rear one-half of the roof.

3.     Maximum Height.

a.     The maximum height of a satellite antenna shall not exceed 10 feet if installed on the ground or the maximum building height for the district in which the satellite antenna is located, if roof mounted.

b.     The maximum height of an antenna shall not exceed the maximum building height for the district in which the antenna is located.

4.     Maximum Dimension. The maximum diameter of a satellite antenna shall not exceed 10 feet in all districts with the exception that the diameter may be increased in nonresidential districts if a Conditional Use Permit is approved by the Zoning Administrator.

5.     Screening. The structural base of an antenna or satellite antenna, including all bracing and appurtenances, but excluding the antenna or dish itself, shall be screened from public view and adjoining properties by walls, fences, buildings, landscape, or combinations thereof not less than seven feet high so that the base and support structure are not visible from beyond the boundaries of the site at a height-of-eye six feet or below.

6.     Undergrounding. All wires and/or cables necessary for operation of the antenna or satellite antenna or reception of the signal shall be placed underground, except for wires or cables attached flush with the surface of a building or the structure of the antenna or satellite antenna.

7.     Surface Materials and Finishes. No advertising or text or highly reflective surfaces shall be permitted.

8.     Exception. Requests for installation of an antenna or satellite antennas on sites that are incapable of receiving signals when installed pursuant to the locational criteria may be permitted subject to Conditional Use Permit approval by the Zoning Administrator. The applicant shall submit documentation that installation at a height greater than permitted, or in another yard area, is necessary for the reception of usable antenna or satellite signals. Applications shall be approved upon finding that the aesthetic value and scenic quality of the City is preserved, pedestrian or vehicular traffic vision is not obstructed, and upon the findings contained in Chapter 241. (3334-6/97, 3568-9/02, 4040-12/14)

 

230.82 Performance Standards for All Uses
A.    Applicability and Compliance. The development standards set forth in this section apply to every use classification in every zoning district unless otherwise specifically provided. The director may require evidence of ability to comply with development standards before issuing an entitlement.

B.     Air Contaminants. Every use must comply with rules, regulations and standards of the South Coast Air Quality Management District (SCAQMD). An applicant for a zoning permit or a use, activity, or process requiring SCAQMD approval of a permit to construct must file a copy of the SCAQMD permit with the director. An applicant for a use, activity, or process that requires SCAQMD approval of a permit to operate must file a copy of such permit with the director within 30 days of its approval.

C.     Water Quality. Every use must comply with rules, regulations and standards of the federal government; State and Regional Water Quality Control Boards; Orange County Municipal NPDES stormwater permit (Santa Ana Regional Water Quality Control Board Order No. R8-2009-0030, dated May 22, 2009, or any amendment to or re-issuance thereof); the City of Huntington Beach Municipal Codes, including Chapters 14.24, 14.25, and 17.05; and the California Coastal Act, where applicable. An applicant for a zoning permit, building permit, or a Coastal Development Permit must demonstrate compliance with aforementioned rules, regulations and standards prior to permit approval. General Plan and Local Coastal Program goals, objectives and policies shall be incorporated into water quality management programs prepared for development projects as applicable and to the maximum extent practicable. A Water Quality Management Plan, prepared by a registered California civil engineer, shall be required for all projects that may adversely impact water quality (including, but not limited to projects identified in the Orange County Municipal NPDES storm-water permit as priority development projects and projects creating more than 2,500 square feet of impervious surface that are within 200 feet of, or drain directly to, resource protection areas, and/or water bodies listed on the Clean Water Act Section 3030(d) list of impaired waters).

D.    Storage on Vacant Lot. A person may not store, park, place, or allow to remain in any part of a vacant lot any unsightly object. This does not apply to building materials or equipment for use on the site during the time a valid building permit is in effect for construction on the premises.

E.     Archaeological/Cultural Resources.

1.     Within the coastal zone, applications for grading or any other development that have the potential to impact significant archaeological/cultural resources shall be preceded by a Coastal Development Permit application for implementation of an Archaeological Research Design (ARD). This is required when the project site contains a mapped archaeological site, when the potential for the presence of archaeological/cultural resources is revealed through the CEQA process, and/or when archaeological/cultural resources are otherwise known or reasonably suspected to be present. A Coastal Development Permit is required to implement an ARD when such implementation involves development (e.g., trenching, test pits, etc.). No development, including grading, may proceed at the site until the ARD, as reflected in an approved Coastal Development Permit, is fully implemented. Subsequent development at the site shall be subject to approval of a Coastal Development Permit and shall be guided by the results of the approved ARD.

2.     Archaeological Research Design (ARD). The ARD shall be designed and carried out with the goal of determining the full extent of the on-site archaeological/cultural resources and shall include, but not be limited to, postulation of a site theory regarding the archaeological and cultural history and pre-history of the site, investigation methods to be implemented in order to locate and identify all archaeological/cultural resources on-site (including but not limited to trenching and test pits), and a recognition that alternative investigation methods and mitigation may become necessary should resources be revealed that indicate a deviation from the initially espoused site theory. The ARD shall include a Mitigation Plan based on comprehensive consideration of a full range of mitigation options based upon the archaeological/cultural resources discovered on-site as a result of the investigation. The approved ARD shall be fully implemented prior to submittal of any Coastal Development Permit application for subsequent grading or other development of the site. The ARD shall also include recommendations for subsequent construction phase monitoring and mitigation should additional archaeological/cultural resources be discovered.

3.     The ARD shall be prepared in accordance with current professional practice, in consultation with appropriate Native American groups as identified by the Native American Heritage Commission (NAHC) and the State Historic Preservation Officer, subject to peer review, approval by the City of Huntington Beach, and, if the application is appealed, approval by the Coastal Commission. The peer review committee shall be convened in accordance with current professional practice and shall be comprised of qualified archaeologists.

4.     Mitigation Plan. The ARD shall include appropriate mitigation measures to ensure that archaeological/cultural resources will not be adversely impacted. These mitigation measures shall be contained within a Mitigation Plan. The Mitigation Plan shall include an analysis of a full range of options from in-situ preservation, recovery, and/or relocation to an area that will be retained in permanent open space. The Mitigation Plan shall include a good faith effort to avoid impacts to archaeological/cultural resources through methods such as, but not limited to, project redesign, capping, and placing an open space designation over cultural resource areas.

5.     A Coastal Development Permit application for any subsequent development at the site shall include the submittal of evidence that the approved ARD, including mitigation, has been fully implemented. The Coastal Development Permit for subsequent development of the site shall include the requirement for a monitoring plan for archaeological and Native American monitoring during any site grading, utility trenching or any other development activity that has the potential to uncover or otherwise disturb archaeological/cultural resources as well as appropriate mitigation measures for any additional resources that are found. The monitoring plan shall specify that archaeological monitor(s) qualified by the California Office of Historic Preservation (OHP) standards, and Native American monitor(s) with documented ancestral ties to the area appointed consistent with the standards of the Native American Heritage Commission (NAHC) shall be utilized. The monitoring plan shall include, but not be limited to: (a) procedures for selecting archaeological and Native American Monitors; (b) monitoring methods; (c) procedures that will be followed if additional or unexpected archaeological/cultural resources are encountered during development of the site including, but not limited to, temporary cessation of development activities until appropriate mitigation is determined.

6.     Furthermore, the monitoring plan shall specify that sufficient archaeological and Native American monitors must be provided to ensure that all activity that has the potential to uncover or otherwise disturb cultural deposits will be monitored at all times while those activities are occurring. The monitoring plan shall be on-going until grading activities have reached sterile soil.

7.     The subsequent mitigation shall be prepared in consultation with Native American Heritage Commission (NAHC), Native American trial group(s) that have ancestral ties to the area as determined by the NAHC, and the State Historic Preservation Officer, subject to peer review.

8.     All required plans shall be consistent with the City of Huntington Beach General Plan and Local Coastal Program and in accordance with current professional practice, including but not limited to that of the California Office of Historic Preservation and the Native American Heritage Commission, and shall be subject to the review and approval of the City of Huntington Beach and, if appealed, the Coastal Commission. (3835-7/09, 3903-12/10, 4040-12/14)

 

230.84 Dedication and Improvements
A.    Dedication Required. Prior to issuance of a building permit, or prior to the use of land for any purpose, all real property shall be dedicated or irrevocably offered for dedication which the City requires for streets, alleys, including access rights and abutters’ rights, drainage, public utility easements, and other public easements. In addition, all streets and alleys shall be improved, or an agreement entered into for such improvements including access rights and abutters’ rights, drainage, public utility easements, and other easements.

B.     Exceptions. Dedication shall not be required prior to issuance of a building permit for:

1.     Interior building alterations which do not exceed a third of the value of a building, as defined in the Uniform Building Code, and which effect no change of occupancy.

2.     Exterior building alterations or additions for a residential use which do not exceed a third of the value of the building, as defined in the Uniform Building Code, and add no additional residential units.

3.     Fences and walls.

4.     Temporary uses, as specified in this Code.

5.     Horticultural Uses. The dedication herein required may be reviewed at the time of entitlement. Upon request by the applicant, a temporary postponement, not to exceed one year, may be granted upon consideration of the following criteria:

a.     Type of horticultural use proposed.

b.     Duration (temporary or permanent).

c.     Vehicular access and effect of the proposed use on traffic in the vicinity of the site.

d.     Relationship between the proposed requirements and an anticipated expanded use.

e.     Dedication shall not be required for any purpose not reasonably related to such horticultural use.

C.     Dedication Determinants. Right-of-way dedication width shall be determined by either of the following:

1.     Department of Public Works standard plans; or

2.     A precise plan of street, highway or alley alignment.

D.    Improvements.

1.     No building permit shall be issued by the Building Division until an application for permit has been filed, street improvement plans and specifications have been submitted for plan check, and all fees, established by resolution of the City Council, have been paid. The Building Division shall issue such building permit after determining that the work described in the application and the accompanying plans conforms to requirements of the Huntington Beach Building Code and other pertinent laws and ordinances.

2.     The Building Division shall make a frame inspection, as required by the Huntington Beach Building Code, at which time all off-site improvements, including curbs, gutters, and street paving, shall be completed.

3.     Improvements required by this Code may be deferred in the following instances and upon adherence to the following requirements and regulations:

a.     Where the grade of the abutting right-of-way has not been established prior to the time when on-site structures qualify for final release for occupancy.

b.     Where a drainage system would be delayed by the installation of improvements.

c.     Where an agreement is entered into with the City to install improvements by a date certain, said agreement shall be secured by a bond or deposit equal to 150% of the City’s estimate (including inflation estimates) of the required improvements. Such bond or cash shall be deposited with the City Treasurer.

d.     Where the developer has agreed with the City in writing that the deposit required by paragraph 3 of this subsection may be used by the City after an agreed upon time to complete the required improvements, the remainder of such deposit, if any, shall be returned to the developer upon completion of such improvements by the City.

e.     The Director of Public Works is authorized to receive applications from persons desiring waivers of street improvement requirements and to enter into the necessary written agreements with such applicants. A nonrefundable fee set by resolution of the City Council shall accompany such application.

4.     Where construction is limited to one lot and the erection of a detached single-family dwelling thereon, street improvements shall include curb, gutter, sidewalk, street trees, street lights, sewer and water main extensions, and 10 feet of street paving to meet Department of Public Works standards. Where necessary, temporary paving shall be installed to join existing street improvements. (4040-12/14)

 

230.86 Seasonal Sales
A temporary sales facility for the sale of seasonal products including Christmas trees, Halloween pumpkins, or a single-season agricultural product not grown on-site are permitted adjacent to any arterial highway in any district and on all church or school sites as a temporary use approved by the director and in compliance with the following:

A.    Time Limit.

1.     A Christmas tree sales facility shall not be open for business during any calendar year prior to Thanksgiving.

2.     A Halloween pumpkin sales facility shall not be open for business during any calendar year prior to October 1st.

3.     A single agricultural product sales facility shall be approved for a period of time not to exceed 90 days.

B.     Merchandise to Be Sold. A permitted Christmas tree or Halloween pumpkin sales facility may not sell items not directly associated with that season. Only one single-season agricultural product may be sold at any one time.

C.     Site Standards.

1.     Storage and display of products shall be set back not less than 10 feet from edge of street pavement, and shall not encroach into the public right-of-way.

2.     A minimum of 10 off-street parking spaces shall be provided.

3.     Ingress and egress to the site shall be reviewed by the Department of Public Works to ensure that no undue traffic safety hazard will be created.

4.     Temporary structures shall comply with Building Division standards.

5.     Electrical permit shall be obtained if the facility is to be energized.

6.     The facility shall comply with fire prevention standards as approved and enforced by the Fire Chief.

D.    Bond Required. Prior to issuance of a business license and approval by the director, a $500.00 cash bond shall be posted with the City to ensure removal of any structure, cleanup of the site upon termination of the temporary use, and to guarantee maintenance of the property. A bond shall not be required for a seasonal sales facility operated in conjunction with a use on the same site.

E.     Removal of Facility. The seasonal sales facility shall be removed and the premises cleared of all debris and restored to the condition prior to the establishment within 10 calendar days of Halloween, Christmas, or the expiration of the time limit for single-season agricultural product. (4040-12/14)

 

230.88 Fencing and Yards
No portion of a required yard area provided for a structure on a lot shall be considered as part of the yard area for any other structure on the same or an adjacent lot. In all districts, minimum setback lines shall be measured from the ultimate right-of-way line. Diagrams A, B, C and D are hereby adopted to illustrate the provisions of this chapter. Where any discrepancy occurs between the diagrams and the printed text, the text shall prevail. Yards and fencing shall comply with the following criteria in all districts or as specified.

A.    Permitted Fences and Walls.

1.     Fences or walls a maximum of 42 inches in height may be located in any portion of a lot, except screen walls on lots in the RMH-A subdistrict shall be set back a minimum of three feet from the front property line. Fences or walls exceeding 42 inches in height may not be located in the required front yard, except as permitted elsewhere in this section.

2.     Fences or walls a maximum of six feet in height may be located in required side and rear yards, except as excluded in this section. Fences or walls exceeding six feet in height may be located in conformance with the yard requirements applicable to the main structure except as provided for herein or in the regulations of the district in which they are located.

a.     Fences and walls located adjacent to arterials along the rear and/or street side yard property lines, and behind the front setback, may be constructed to a maximum total height of eight feet including retaining wall with the following:

i.      The proposed building materials and design shall be in conformance with the Urban Design Guidelines.

ii.     Extensions to existing wall(s) shall require submittal of engineering calculations to the Building and Safety Department.

iii.    The property owner shall be responsible for the care and maintenance of landscape area(s) and wall(s) and required landscape area(s).

iv.    Approval from Public Works Department.

b.     Exception. A maximum two-foot lattice extension (wood or plastic) that is substantially open may be added to the top of the six foot high wall or fence on the interior property line without building permits so long as notification to the adjacent property owners is provided.

3.     Fences or walls in the rear yard setback area of a through lot shall not exceed 42 inches in height. This subsection shall not apply to lots abutting arterial highways.

4.     In the RL District, garden or wing walls or fences equal in height to the first floor double plate, but not exceeding nine feet, which are perpendicular to and entirely within a side yard may be constructed to the interior side property line and to within five feet of the exterior side property line provided they are equipped with a three-foot gate or accessway.

5.     When residential property abuts open or public land or property zoned or used for office, commercial, or industrial purposes, an eight-foot high solid masonry or block wall may be constructed on the common side or rear property line.

6.     Only at the time of initial construction of the dwellings and in order to allow variations in the street scene in R districts, fences or walls exceeding 42 inches in height may be permitted at a reduced front setback of six feet subject to plan review approval by the director in conformance with the following criteria:

a.     The reduced setback shall be only permitted for five or more contiguous lots under the same ownership.

b.     Such walls shall not encroach into the visibility triangular area formed by measuring seven and one-half feet along the driveway and 10 feet along the front property line at their point of intersection.

c.     Such walls shall conform to all other applicable provisions of this section.

7.     Retaining walls shall comply with the following:

a.     Where a retaining wall is located on the property line separating lots or parcels and protects a cut below the natural grade, such retaining wall may be topped by a fence, wall or hedge of the same height that would otherwise be permitted at the location if no retaining wall existed.

b.     Where a retaining wall is on the property line of a rear yard abutting an arterial or exterior side yard and contains a fill of two feet or less or protects a cut below the existing grade, such retaining wall may be topped with a six-foot decorative masonry wall.

c.     Where a retaining wall is on the property line of a rear yard abutting a local street, the maximum retaining wall height shall be 24 inches as measured from the adjacent curb and may be topped with a maximum 18-inch decorative wall or fence for a total height of 42 inches.

d.     i.      The maximum height of a retaining wall on the front property line shall be 36 inches as measured from the top of the highest adjacent curb. Subject to the director’s approval, a maximum 42-inch high wall or fence may be erected above the retaining wall with a minimum three-foot setback from the front property line.

ii.     In the RMH-A subdistrict, the maximum height of a retaining wall on the front property line shall be 18 inches as measured from the top of the highest adjacent curb. Subject to the director’s approval, a second retaining wall up to 18 inches in height may be erected above the 18-inch high retaining wall with a minimum three-foot front setback. A wall or fence up to 42 inches in height may be erected on top of the retaining wall with the minimum three-foot front setback (see exhibit below).

 



 

*       See maximum building height in Chapter 210.

 

e.     All retaining walls abutting a street shall be waterproofed to the satisfaction of the director.

f.      Retaining wall and fence combinations over eight feet in height shall be constructed with a variation in design or materials to show the distinction. Retaining wall and fence combinations over six feet in height shall be designed without decorative block or cap block, except if equal in strength to the main portion of the fence.

8.     The height of any fence, wall or hedge located in the front yard setback shall be measured from top of the highest adjacent curb. All other fence heights shall be measured from existing grade.

9.     Any fence or wall located on the front property line shall be approved by the Department of Public Works.

10.   In the industrial districts, nine-foot-high fences may be permitted in the side and rear setbacks up to the front building line subject to plan review approval by the director.

11.   Deviations from the maximum height requirements for walls as prescribed by this section may be permitted subject to an approval of Conditional Use Permit by the Zoning Administrator.

12.   Within the coastal zone, no gate, fence or wall shall be permitted that restricts or obstructs public access to the shore.

B.     Required Walls.

1.     When office, commercial or industrial uses abut property zoned or used for residential, a six-foot-high solid six-inch concrete block or masonry wall shall be required. If a wall meeting these standards already exists on the abutting residential property, protection from vehicle damage shall be provided by a method approved by the director. The maximum fence height shall be eight feet at the common property line, subject to the same design standards and setback requirements as specified for six-foot-high fences.

2.     Industrial screening walls abutting arterial highways shall be architecturally compatible with surrounding properties, constructed of a minimum six-inch-wide decorative masonry block, and designed with landscape pockets at 35-foot intervals along the street side sufficient in size to accommodate at least one 15-gallon tree. Approval by the director shall be required prior to construction of such walls.

C.     Visibility.

1.     On reverse corner lots and corner lots abutting an alley, no fence, wall or hedge greater than 42 inches in height may be located within the triangular area formed by measuring 10 feet from the intersection of the rear and street side property lines (see Diagram C).

2.     On corner lots, no fence, wall, landscaping, berming, sign, or other visual obstruction between 42 inches and seven feet in height as measured from the adjacent curb elevation may be located within the triangular area formed by measuring 25 feet from the intersection of the front and street side property lines or their prolongation. Trees trimmed free of branches and foliage so as to maintain visual clearance below seven feet shall be permitted (see Diagram A).

3.     Visibility of a driveway crossing a street or alley property line or of intersecting driveways shall not be blocked between a height of 42 inches and seven feet within a triangular area formed by measuring 10 feet from intersecting driveways or street/alley and driveway except in situations where the garage is constructed with less than a 10-foot setback from the alley right-of-way. In those situations the measurement of the visibility triangle shall start at each corner or side of the garage door, measured perpendicular to the rear property line, then measured 10 feet away from the edge of the garage door and parallel to the rear property line (typically the alley right-of-way). The maximum height of any structures or landscaping within this triangular zone shall be 42 inches high (see Diagram D).

 



Diagram A

 



Street/Alley

Diagram B

 



 



Diagram D

(3334-6/97, 3410-3/99, 3525-2/02, 3710-6/05, 3730-3/06, 4040-12/14)

 

230.90 Contractor Storage Yards/Mulching Operation
Contractor storage yards in conjunction with public facility improvement contracts, and mulching operations on unimproved public or private property may be permitted subject to the following:

A.    Initial approval shall be for a maximum of two years. The use shall be eligible for a maximum of three one-year extensions by the Planning Commission.

B.     The development shall comply with parking, access and setback requirements contained in Chapter 231. (4040-12/14)

 

230.92 Landfill Disposal Sites
Excavation of landfills or land disposal sites shall be subject to the requirements of this section. These provisions are not intended to apply to grading and surcharging operations, permitted under Appendix Chapter 70 of the Uniform Building Code. Permits for grading on previously approved development projects shall be subject to approval of the director.

A.    Land Disposal Site/Definitions. The following words and phrases shall be construed as defined herein unless a different meaning is apparent from the context:

1.     Excavation. Any activity and/or movement of material which exposes waste to the atmosphere.

2.     Land Disposal Site. Any site where land disposal of Group I, II or III waste, as defined by the California Administrative Code, has been deposited either legally or illegally on or into the land, including but not limited to landfill, surface impoundment, waste piles, land spreading, dumps, and coburial with municipal refuse.

B.     Operations Plan.

1.     No person shall conduct any excavation activity at any land disposal site in the City of Huntington Beach without first submitting to the City an operations plan approved by the director. Such plan shall include complete information regarding the identity, quantity and characteristics of the material being excavated, including a chemical analysis performed by a laboratory acceptable to the City, together with the mitigation measures that will be used to ensure that health hazards, safety hazards, or nuisances do not result from such activity.

2.     Mitigation measures contained in the operations plan may include gas collection and disposal of waste, encapsulation, covering waste, chemical neutralization, or any other measures deemed necessary by the City.

3.     Ambient air quality monitoring, as well as other monitoring or testing deemed reasonably necessary, shall be included in the operations plan.

C.     Approval of Operations Plan.

1.     The City shall not approve an operations plan unless such plan includes provisions for the immediate cessation of excavation activity when the operator, or any agent thereof, of a land disposal site has been notified by the City that a nuisance, health, or safety hazard has or is about to occur as a result of such activity therein.

2.     Upon determination by any government agency that a nuisance, safety, or health problem exists on any land disposal site in the City, mitigation measures, contained in the operations plan, shall be implemented immediately.

 

D.    Hazardous Waste Sites. For any land disposal site determined to be a hazardous waste site by the State Department of Toxic Substances Control and/or the City of Huntington Beach, the following additional measures shall be taken prior to excavation of such site:

1.     All property owners within a half-mile radius of the site shall receive written notice of all public hearings to be held regarding proposed excavation on the site. The cost of preparing and mailing such notice shall be paid by the operator/applicant.

2.     A type of bond, acceptable to the City Attorney, shall be posted by the operator/applicant ensuring that necessary funds are available to restore the site to a safe condition if excavation is prematurely terminated.

3.     Excavation of the site shall be performed in accordance with the requirements of the State Department of Health Services, and any other public agency with jurisdiction over hazardous waste sites.

E.     Operations Plan Contents. The operations plan shall contain the following:

1.     A plan establishing lines of authority and responsibility between public agencies and the operator/applicant, or his/her agents, during excavation. The plan shall contain specific procedures to be followed by all responsible parties involved with the excavation.

2.     A plan containing specific measures to monitor air quality to be implemented during excavation to prevent the exposure of on-site workers or area residents to unhealthful vapors from the site. If deemed necessary by the State Department of Toxic Substances Control, the plan shall also include specific measures for evacuation of residents in the vicinity of the site.

3.     A plan showing specific routes for vehicles transporting hazardous wastes from the site.

4.     A plan containing specific steps for restoration of the site to a safe condition if excavation is terminated prematurely.

F.     Exemptions. The following activities shall be exempt from the requirements of this section unless otherwise determined by the director:

1.     The drilling of holes up to 24 inches in diameter for telephone or power transmission poles or their footings.

2.     The drilling of oil wells, gas wells or landfill gas collection wells or the maintenance of gas or leachate collection systems.

3.     Any excavation activity which has been determined by the director to pose an insignificant risk, or any activity which has been covered sufficiently in a plan prepared for any other agency having jurisdiction over the site.

G.    Excavation Activity Prohibited.

1.     No person shall excavate at any land disposal site in the City of Huntington Beach unless he or she first certifies that all applicable regulations of other public agencies with jurisdiction over hazardous waste sites have been met.

2.     Compliance with the provisions of this section shall not exempt any person from failing to comply with the requirements of the California Health and Safety Code, and any other applicable codes, rules or regulations. (3710-6/05, 4040-12/14)

 

230.94 Carts and Kiosks
Carts and kiosks may be permitted on private property zoned for commercial purposes, subject to approval by the Community Development Director and compliance with this section. Carts and kiosks may be permitted as a temporary use on public property subject to specific event approval pursuant to Chapter 5.68.

A.    Location and Design Criteria. Cart and kiosk uses shall conform to the following:

1.     No portion of a cart or kiosk shall overhang the property line.

2.     The cart or kiosk shall not obstruct access to or occupy a parking space; obstruct access to a parked vehicle, impede the delivery of materials to an adjoining property, interfere with access to public property or any adjoining property, or interfere with maintenance or use of street furniture. If any existing parking spaces will be displaced or partially or totally blocked by the proposed cart or kiosk, those spaces must be replaced on-site at a one-to-one (1:1) ratio.

3.     The cart or kiosk shall not exceed a maximum of four feet in width excluding any wheels, eight feet in length including any handle, and no more than six feet in height excluding canopies, umbrellas or transparent enclosures unless a larger size is approved.

4.     A limit of one cart or kiosk shall be allowed for each commercial business that meets the above locational and design criteria.

B.     Factors to Consider. The following factors shall be considered regarding the location and the design of cart or kiosk uses including:

1.     Appropriateness of the cart or kiosk design, color scheme, and character of its location;

2.     Appropriateness and location of signing and graphics;

3.     The width of the sidewalk or pedestrian accessway;

4.     The proximity and location of building entrances;

5.     Existing physical obstructions including, but not limited to signposts, light standards, parking meters, benches, phone booths, newsstands, utilities and landscaping;

6.     Motor vehicle activity in the adjacent roadway including but not limited to bus stops, truck loading zones, taxi stands, hotel zones, passenger loading or parking spaces;

7.     Pedestrian traffic volumes; and

8.     Handicapped accessibility.

C.     Operating Requirements—Provisions and Conditions.

1.     During hours of operation, the cart or kiosk must remain in the location specified on the approved site plan.

2.     A cart or kiosk operator shall not sell to or solicit from motorists or persons in vehicles.

3.     The cart or kiosk operator shall pay all fees and deposits required by the Huntington Beach Municipal Code prior to the establishment of the use.

4.     All provisions of the Huntington Beach Municipal Code which are not in conflict with this section shall apply.

5.     The prices of items sold from a cart or kiosk must appear in a prominent, visible location in legible characters. The price list size and location shall be reviewed and approved by the Community Development Director.

 

6.     The sale of alcoholic beverages shall be prohibited.

7.     The number of employees at a cart or kiosk shall be limited to a maximum of two persons at any one time.

8.     Fire extinguishers may be required at the discretion of the Fire Department.

9.     All cart and kiosk uses shall be self contained for water, waste, and power to operate.

10.   A cart or kiosk operator shall provide a method approved by the Community Development Director for disposal of business related wastes.

D.    Parking. Additional parking may be required for cart or kiosk uses by the Community Development Director.

E.     Review; Revocation. The Community Development Department shall conduct a review of the cart or kiosk operation at the end of the first six-month period of operation. At that time, if there has been a violation of the terms and conditions of this section or the approval, the approval shall be considered for revocation.

F.     Neighborhood Notification. Pursuant to Chapter 241. (3249-6/95, 3482-12/00, 3525-2/02, 4040-12/14, 4096-10/16)

 

230.96 Wireless Communication Facilities
A.    Purpose. This section of the Zoning Code is to protect public safety, general welfare, and quality of life by regulating the location, height and physical characteristics and provide for orderly and efficient placement of Wireless Communication Facilities in the City of Huntington Beach.

Because of the potential negative aesthetic impacts of Wireless Communication Facilities, including visual blight and diminution of property value, the City endeavors to locate antennas within commercial, industrial and other non-residential zones, screen them from view, and encourage co-location with other Wireless Communication Facilities. However, the Federal Telecommunications Act, specifically 47 U.S.C. Section 332(c)(7), preempts local zoning where a wireless Facility is necessary to remedy a significant gap in the wireless provider’s service. Consequently, where the City determines that the Facility does not satisfy City planning and zoning standards, the wireless provider may then choose to establish Federal preemption because (i) a significant gap in wireless coverage exists, and (ii) there is a lack of feasible alternative site locations. A myriad of factors are involved in determining if a gap is significant, such as: whether the gap affects a commuter highway; the nature and character of the area and the number of potential users affected by the alleged lack of service; whether the signal is weak or nonexistent and whether the gap affects a commercial district. Consequently, the City will require scientific evidence from an expert in the field demonstrating the existence of a significant gap in service, and a lack of feasible alternative sites. The applicant will be required to pay for the cost of said expert opinion.

B.     Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following definitions for the following terms shall apply:

1.     Accessory Structure. Any structure or equipment that is to be located ancillary to an antenna or antennas in the establishment and operation of a Wireless Communication Facility.

2.     City Property. Property owned by the City of Huntington Beach, excluding any public right-of-way.

3.     Co-Location or Co-Located. The location or placement of multiple Wireless Communication Facilities which are either owned or operated by more than one service provider at a single location and mounted to a common supporting structure, wall or building.

4.     Completely Stealth. Any Wireless Communication Facility that has been designed to completely screen all aspects of the Facility including appurtenances and equipment from public view. Examples of completely stealth facilities may include, but are not limited to, architecturally screened roof-mounted antennas, façade-mounted antennas treated as architectural elements to blend in with the existing building, church steeples, fire towers, and flag poles and light standards of a typical diameter.

5.     Data Collection Unit (“DCU”). A Wireless Communication Facility comprised of a collection unit, a solar panel and whip antennas used for receiving and/or transmitting wireless signals from distributed gas and water data collector meters, which is a stand-alone Facility not connected via fiber optic or other physical wiring to any other Facility. No Wireless Communication Facility operated by an electric corporation, a telephone corporation, a personal wireless service provider, a commercial mobile service provider or a mobile telephone service provider shall be considered a DCU.

Size: Solar panels not larger than seven square feet, whip antennas not longer than 40 inches, and collection units not larger than 1.5 cubic feet. DCUs shall be designed to blend into the surrounding environment and minimize the visual appearance by matching the color of the poles or buildings where the DCU is located.

6.     Ground-Mounted Facility. Any Wireless Antenna that is affixed to a pole, tower or other freestanding structure that is specifically constructed for the purpose of supporting an antenna.

7.     Microwave Communication. The transmission or reception of radio communication at frequencies of a microwave signal (generally, in the three GHz to 300 GHz frequency spectrum).

8.     Modified Facility. An existing Wireless Communication Facility where the antennas and/or supporting structure are proposed to be altered in any way from their existing condition, including like-for-like replacement but excluding co-location.

9.     Pre-existing Wireless. Any Wireless Communication Facility for which a building permit or conditional use permit has been properly issued prior to the effective date of this section, including permitted Wireless Antennas that have not yet been constructed so long as such approval is current and not expired.

10.   Public Right-of-Way. The area across, along, beneath, in, on, over, under, upon, and within the dedicated public alleys, boulevards, courts, lanes, places, roads, sidewalks, streets, ways, private streets with public access easements within the City’s boundaries, and City owned properties, as they now exist or hereafter will exist.

11.   Roof Mounted. Any Wireless Antenna directly attached or affixed to the roof of an existing building, water tank, tower or structure other than a telecommunications tower.

12.   Small Cell Site. Equipment at a node/location that transmits and/or provides connection to a mobile communication system. Visible equipment at a small cell site shall be no larger than four cubic feet per location/site (excluding antennae) with a maximum of two antennas per location/site and may be affixed to an existing pole including a light standard. In addition, to qualify as a Small Cell Site, it must comply with Public Works design standards.

13.   Stealth Techniques. Any Wireless Communication Facility, including any appurtenances and equipment, which is designed to blend into the surrounding environment. Examples of stealth technique include, but are not limited to, monopalms/monopines.

14.   Utility Mounted. Any Wireless Antenna mounted to an existing aboveground structure specifically designed and originally installed to support utilities, such as, but not limited to, electrical power lines, cable television lines, telephone lines, non-commercial wireless service antennas, radio antennas, street lighting but not traffic signals, recreational facility lighting, or any other utility which meets the purpose and intent of this definition.

15.   Wall Mounted. Any Wireless Antenna mounted on any vertical or nearly vertical surface of a building or other existing structure that is not specifically constructed for the purpose of supporting an antenna (including the exterior walls of a building, an existing parapet, the side of a water tank, the face of a church steeple, or the side of a freestanding sign) such that the highest point of the antenna structure is at an elevation equal to or lower than the highest point of the surface on which it is mounted.

16.   Wireless Communication Facility or Facility or Wireless Antenna. Any antenna, structure, or device any way named and any appurtenant facilities or equipment that transmits electronic waves or is used for the transmission or receipt of waves or signals that are used in connection with the provision of wireless communication service, including, but not limited to, Small Cell Sites, digital, cellular and radio service.

C.     Applicability. This section shall apply to all Wireless Communication Facilities which are erected, located, placed or modified within the City of Huntington Beach.

D.    Exceptions. The following Wireless Communication Facilities shall be exempt from this section.

1.     Any Facility, which is subject to a previously approved and valid entitlement, may be modified within the scope of the applicable permit without complying with these regulations. However, modifications outside the scope of a valid entitlement or any modification to an existing Facility that has not been approved or entitled is subject to the requirements of the City’s existing wireless ordinance.

2.     Any antenna structure that is one meter (39.37 inches) or less in diameter that is designed to receive direct broadcast satellite service, including direct-to-home satellite service for television purposes, as defined by Section 207 of the Telecommunication Act of 1996, Title 47 of the Code of Federal Regulations, and any interpretive decisions thereof.

3.     Any antenna structure that is two meters (78.74 inches) or less in diameter located in commercial or industrial zones and is designed to transmit or receive radio communication by satellite antenna.

4.     Any antenna structure that is one meter (39.37 inches) or less in diameter or diagonal measurement and is designed to receive multipoint distribution service, provided that no part of the antenna structure extends more than five feet above the principle building on the same lot.

5.     Any antenna structure used by authorized amateur radio stations licensed by the FCC.

6.     Any data collection unit (DCU) on existing poles, or on any new poles within the public right-of-way or on City property. DCUs shall comply with setback and height requirements for the zone in which they are located. In addition, all DCUs must comply with all City Municipal Code requirements, including, but not limited to, Chapter 12.38 regarding encroachments and Chapter 17.64 regarding undergrounding of utilities. DCUs shall be at least 500 feet from another DCU within the same network.

E.     Process to Install and Operate Wireless Communication Facilities. No Facility shall be installed anywhere in the City without first securing either a wireless permit or a conditional use permit as required below.

1.     Wireless Permit Application. The applicant shall initially apply to the Community Development Department or the Public Works Department for a wireless permit.

If the request is to install a Wireless Communication Facility on a City owned facility including the public right-of-way, the applicant shall submit a completed wireless permit application (“application”) and pay all required fees to the Public Works Department. All other wireless permit applications shall be submitted to the Community Development Department. The application shall be in the form approved by the Community Development Director or the Public Works Director, and at a minimum shall provide the following information:

a.     Precise location of the Facility.

b.     Evidence that the Facility is compatible with the surrounding environment or that the Facility is architecturally integrated into a structure.

c.     Evidence that the Facility is screened or camouflaged by existing or proposed topography, vegetation, buildings or other structures as measured from beyond the boundaries of the site at eye level (six feet).

d.     Evidence that the massing and location of the proposed Facility are consistent with surrounding structures and zoning districts.

e.     Evidence that no portion of the Facility will encroach over property lines.

f.      Property owner authorization or evidence of fee ownership of property where the Facility will be installed. In the case of City owned property or any public right-of-way, the applicant shall provide a license, lease, franchise, or other similar agreement from the City to place any Facility over, within, on, or beneath City property or right-of-way.

g.     Locations of all other Wireless Antennas within 1,000 feet of a proposed ground-mounted Facility. Co-location of ground mounted facilities shall be required where feasible whenever such a Facility is proposed within 1,000 feet of any existing Wireless Antenna.

h.     Any other relevant information as required by the Director of Community Development or the Director of Public Works.

The Community Development Department or Public Works Department will initially review and determine if the application is complete. The City may deem the application incomplete and require re-submittal if any of the above information is not provided.

2.     Director Approval. Following submittal of a complete application, the City will determine whether the Facility may be approved by the Community Development Director or Public Works Director or whether a conditional use permit or other entitlement is required. Wireless permit applications will be processed based upon the location and type and size of antennas defined herein. Although said classifications are assigned at project intake, a re-evaluation of antenna classifications may occur at any point in the process including at the time of review by the Director, Zoning Administrator, Planning Commission or City Council.

A Facility not subject to any other discretionary approval may be administratively approved by the Director by issuing a wireless permit if it is:

a.     Co-located on an existing approved wireless Facility, does not exceed the existing Wireless Facility heights, and employs stealth techniques such that the co-located wireless Facility is compatible with surrounding buildings and land uses; or

b.     A modified Facility that complies with the base district height limit plus up to an additional 10 feet of height as permitted in Section 230.72 and compatible with surrounding buildings and land uses by incorporating stealth techniques; or

c.     A Facility that complies with the base district height limit plus up to an additional 10 feet of height as permitted in Section 230.72, is completely stealth and is not ground or utility mounted; or

d.     A Small Cell Site.

The Director may require conditions of approval of the Wireless Communication Facility in order to minimize adverse health, safety and welfare impacts (including aesthetic impacts) to the community.

A decision of the Director to grant a wireless permit shall become final 10 days following the date of the decision unless an appeal to the Planning Commission is filed as provided in Chapter 248 of the Huntington Beach Zoning and Subdivision Ordinance (HBZSO).

The Director shall issue findings of approval that the Facility meets the above criteria and is not a detriment to the health, safety and welfare of the community.

3.     Zoning Administrator Approval. In the event the Director determines that the applicant does not meet the requirements for Director approval of a wireless permit, then the applicant must apply for a conditional use permit (CUP) to the Zoning Administrator pursuant to Chapter 241 of the HBZSO.

Notwithstanding any other provisions of the HBZSO, any new ground, or utility-mounted wireless facilities shall be required to obtain a CUP.

The Zoning Administrator may require as a condition of approval that the applicant minimize adverse impacts to the community including aesthetic visual impacts by incorporating one or more of the following into project design and construction:

a.     Completely stealth installations;

b.     Stealth techniques;

c.     Co-location and locating facilities within existing building envelopes;

d.     Colorization or landscaping to minimize visual prominence; and/or

e.     Removal or replacement of facilities that are obsolete.

Further conditions of approval of a CUP may be imposed as provided in Chapter 241 of the HBZSO. The Zoning Administrator’s decision may be appealed to the Planning Commission in accordance with Chapter 248 of the HBZSO.

4.     Design Review. Design review shall be required for any Wireless Communication Facilities pursuant to the HBZSO. In addition, Wireless Communication Facilities located on public rights-of-way and on or within 300 feet of a residential district or use in the City shall be required to obtain design review approval.

Notwithstanding any other provisions of the HBZSO, design review is not required for Wireless Communication Facilities (including Small Cell Sites) that may be approved by the Director pursuant to Subsection E.2 (Director Approval) above and have all appurtenant facilities and equipment located underground or within an existing building or existing enclosure.

F.     Applicant May Assert Federal Preemption at Time of Appeal to Planning Commission.

1.     If the decision on the wireless permit or conditional use permit is appealed (either by applicant or an aggrieved party) to the Planning Commission, the applicant may assert that Federal law preempts the City from denying the application because denial would effectively prohibit wireless service. The applicant shall pay a Denial of Effective Service appeal fee in an amount to be established by City Council resolution, which amount shall be the estimated cost for the City to retain an independent, qualified consultant to evaluate any technical aspect of a proposed Wireless Communication Facility, including, but not limited to, issues involving whether a significant gap in coverage exists. A Denial of Effective Service appeal must be submitted prior to the expiration of the appeal period for a wireless permit or conditional use permit.

2.     The Director shall establish the form of the Denial of Effective Service appeal. At a minimum, the applicant shall provide the following information as part of the appeal:

In order to prevail in establishing a significant gap in coverage claim the applicant shall establish at minimum the following based upon substantial evidence:

a.     Evidence demonstrating the existence and nature of a significant gap in service in the vicinity of the proposed Facility, including, but not limited to, whether the gap pertains to residential in-building, commercial in-building coverage, in-vehicle coverage, and/or outdoor coverage.

b.     Evidence demonstrating that the applicant has pursued other feasible sites for locating the Facility, but that they are unavailable on commercially practicable terms.

c.     Evidence demonstrating the radio frequency signal strength transmission requirements and objectives that the applicant has established for the Southern California region, and for the City of Huntington Beach.

d.     Radio frequency propagation maps demonstrating actual transmission levels in the vicinity of the proposed Facility site, and any alternative sites considered.

e.     Radio frequency drive tests demonstrating actual transmission levels in the vicinity of the proposed Facility site, and any alternative sites considered.

f.      Reports regarding the applicant’s monthly volume of mobile telephone calls completed, not completed, dropped, handed-off, not handed-off, originated and not originated for the signal area to be covered by the proposed Facility.

g.     Any proprietary information disclosed to the City or the consultant is deemed not to be a public record, and shall remain confidential and not be disclosed to any third party without the express consent of the applicant, unless otherwise required by law. In the event the applicant does not provide this information, the City may conclusively presume that no Denial of Effective Service exists.

All of the information noted above shall be submitted to the City within 30 days of the filing of the Denial of Effective Service appeal unless an extension is granted by the Director.

3.     The Denial of Effective Service appeal shall be considered concurrently with the wireless permit or CUP appeal hearing before the Planning Commission. Prior to the scheduling of the public hearing on the wireless permit or CUP appeal, the City Attorney shall be authorized to issue administrative subpoenas to compel production of such documents, testimony and other evidence relevant to the applicant’s Denial of Effective Service claims.

G.    Wireless Communication Facility Standards. The following standards shall apply to all Wireless Communication Facilities:

1.     Screening. All screening used in conjunction with a wall or roof-mounted Wireless Antenna shall be compatible with the architecture of the building or other structure to which it is mounted, including color, texture and materials. All ground or utility-mounted facilities shall be designed to blend into the surrounding environment, or architecturally integrated into a building or other concealing structure.

2.     Equipment/Accessory Structures. All equipment associated with the operation of the Wireless Antenna, including but not limited to transmission cables, shall be screened in a manner that complies with the development standards of the zoning district in which such equipment is located and Section 230.76. Screening materials and support structures housing equipment shall be architecturally compatible with surrounding structures by duplicating materials and design in a manner as practical as possible. Chain link fencing and barbed wire are prohibited.

3.     General Provisions. All Wireless Communication Facilities shall comply with the Huntington Beach Urban Design Guidelines.

4.     Building Codes. To ensure the structural integrity of Wireless Communication Facilities, the owners of a Facility shall ensure that it is maintained in compliance with standards contained in applicable state or local building codes and the applicable standards for facilities that are published by the Electronic Industries Association, as amended from time to time.

5.     Co-Location. Co-location of ground-mounted facilities shall be required where feasible whenever such a Facility is proposed within 1,000 feet of any existing Wireless Antenna.

6.     Federal and State Requirements. All Wireless Communication Facilities must meet or exceed current federal and state laws, standards and regulations of the FCC, and any other agency of the federal or state government with the authority to regulate Wireless Communication Facilities.

7.     Interference. To eliminate interference at all times, other than during the 24-hour cure period, the applicant shall comply with all FCC standards and regulations regarding interference and the assignment of the use of the radio frequency spectrum. The applicant shall not prevent the City of Huntington Beach or the countywide system from having adequate spectrum capacity on the City’s 800 MHz voice and data radio frequency systems. The applicant shall cease operation of any Wireless Antenna causing interference with the City’s facilities immediately upon the expiration of the 24-hour cure period until the cause of the interference is eliminated.

8.     Lighting. All outside lighting shall be directed to prevent “spillage” onto adjacent properties, unless required by the FAA or other applicable authority, and shall be shown on the site plan and elevations.

9.     Maintenance. All facilities and appurtenant equipment including landscaping shall be maintained to remain consistent with the original appearance of the Wireless Antenna. Ground-mounted facilities shall be covered with anti-graffiti coating.

10.   Monitoring. The applicant shall provide a copy of the lease agreement between the property owner and the applicant prior to the issuance of a building permit.

11.   Signs. The Wireless Antenna shall not bear any signs or advertising devices other than owner identification, certification, warning, or other required seals of signage.

12.   Landscaping. Landscape planting, irrigation and hardscape improvements may be imposed depending on the location, the projected vehicular traffic, the impact on existing facilities and landscape areas, and the visibility of the proposed Wireless Antenna. Submittal of complete landscape and architectural plans for review and approval by the Directors of Public Works and Community Development Departments may be required.

13.   Utility Agreement. If the proposed Facility will require electrical power or any other utility services to the site, the applicant will be required to furnish the City’s Real Estate Services Manager either a drafted utility franchise agreement between the City of Huntington Beach and the applicant to place those lines in the public right-of-way, or a written statement from the utility company that will be supplying the power or other services, that they accept all responsibility for those lines in the public right-of-way.

H.    Facilities in the Public Right-of-Way and City Owned Facilities. Any Wireless Communication Facility to be placed over, within, on or beneath the public right-of-way including on/within City owned facilities shall comply with all City Municipal Code requirements, including, but not limited to, the Zoning and Subdivision Ordinance section 230.96 (above); Chapter 12.38 regarding encroachments; and Chapter 17.64 regarding undergrounding of utilities. All Facilities proposed to be located on City owned property/facilities (including those located in the public right-of-way) must also execute a License Agreement with the City.

I.      Facility Removal. Wireless Communication Facilities affecting the public view and/or located in areas designated Water Recreation, Conservation, Parks and Shoreline, and Public Rights-of-Way shall be removed in its entirety within six months of termination of use and the site restored to its natural state.

J.      Cessation of Operation.

1.     Abandonment. Within 30 calendar days of cessation of operations of any Wireless Communication Facility approved under this section, the operator shall notify the Director in writing. The Wireless Antenna shall be deemed abandoned pursuant to the following sections unless:

a.     The City has determined that the operator has resumed operation of the Wireless Communication Facility within six months of the notice; or

b.     The City has received written notification of a transfer of the Wireless Communication Facility.

2.     City Initiated Abandonment. A Wireless Antenna that is inoperative or unused for a period of six continuous months shall be deemed abandoned. Written notice of the City’s determination of abandonment shall be provided to the operator of the Wireless Antenna and the owner(s) of the premises upon which the antenna is located. Such notice may be delivered in person, or mailed to the address(es) stated on the permit application, and shall be deemed abandoned at the time delivered or placed in the mail.

 

3.     Removal of Abandoned Wireless Antenna. The operator of the Wireless Antenna and the owner(s) of the property on which it is located, shall within 30 calendar days after notice of abandonment is given either (1) remove the Wireless Antenna in its entirety and restore the premises, or (2) provide the Director with written objection to the City’s determination of abandonment.

a.     Any such objection shall include evidence that the Wireless Antenna was in use during the relevant six-month period and that it is presently operational. The Director shall review all evidence, determine whether or not the Facility was properly deemed abandoned, and provide the operator notice of its determination.

b.     At any time after 31 calendar days following the notice of abandonment, or immediately following a notice of determination by the Director, if applicable, the City may remove the abandoned Wireless Antenna and/or repair any and all damage to the premises as necessary to be in compliance with applicable codes. The City may, but shall not be required to, store the removed antenna (or any part thereof). The owner of the premises upon which the abandoned antenna was located, and all prior operators of the antenna, shall be jointly liable for the entire cost of such removal, repair, restoration and/or storage, and shall remit payment to the City promptly after demand thereof is made. The City may, in lieu of storing the removed Wireless Antenna, convert it to the City’s use, sell it, or dispose of it in any manner deemed appropriate by the City.. (3568-9/02, 3779-10/07, 3934-4/12, 4040-12/14, 4069-10/15, 4096-10/16, 4136-9/17)

 

Chapter 231 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING PROVISIONS
231.02 Basic Requirements for Off-Street Parking and Loading
A.    When Required. At the time of initial occupancy of a site, construction of a structure, or major alteration or enlargement of a site or structure, off-street parking facilities and off-street loading facilities shall be provided in accord with this chapter and parking area landscaping shall be provided in accord with Chapter 232. For the purposes of these requirements, “major alteration or enlargement” shall mean a change of use, an expansion of greater than 50% of the existing space in a non-residential building or an addition of bedrooms or units in a residential building. A change in occupancy that does not involve a change in the use classification is not considered a change in use for purposes of this requirement unless the change in occupancy involves an intensification of use or an increase in parking demand.

B.     Nonconforming Parking or Loading. No existing use of land or structure shall be deemed to be nonconforming solely because of the lack of off-street parking or loading facilities required by this chapter, provided that facilities being used for off-street parking and loading as of the date of adoption of this chapter shall not be reduced in number to less than that required by this chapter. Expansion of a use with nonconforming parking shall be subject to the following requirements:

1.     A multifamily residential use with nonconforming parking may be expanded by adding bedrooms or additional units provided that the expansion complies with current standards contained in this chapter;

2.     A single-family residence with nonconforming parking may be expanded by adding bedrooms provided the dwelling complies with current standards contained in this chapter; and

3.     A nonresidential use with nonconforming parking may be expanded less than 50% of the existing square footage or intensified if additional parking is provided for the expansion or intensification. Expansions of 50% or more of the existing square footage require the site to be in total compliance with the current parking standards contained in this chapter.

C.     Spaces Required for Alteration or Enlargement. The number of parking spaces or loading spaces required for an alteration or enlargement of an existing use or structure, or for a change of occupancy, shall be in addition to the number of spaces existing prior to the alteration, enlargement, or change of occupancy unless the preexisting number is greater than the number prescribed in this chapter. In this case, the number of spaces in excess of the prescribed minimum shall be counted in determining the required number of parking or loading spaces.

D.    Spaces Required for Multiple Uses. If more than one use is located on a site, the number of off-street parking spaces and loading spaces to be provided shall be equal to the sum of the requirements prescribed for each use. This requirement applies not only to multiple uses under separate ownership but also to multiple uses in the same ownership. If the gross floor area of individual uses on the same site is less than that for which a loading space would be required by Section 231.06(A), but the aggregate gross floor area of all uses is greater than the minimum for which loading spaces would be required, the aggregate gross floor area shall be used in determining the required number of loading spaces.

E.     Location and Ownership. Parking facilities required by this chapter shall be on the same site as the use served, except that an adjacent lot may be used which is in the same person’s possession as the structure or use. Such possession may be by deed or long-term lease, approved as to form by the City Attorney, and recorded in the Office of the County Recorder. A copy of the recorded document stipulating the reservation of the property for parking purposes shall be filed with the City prior to issuance of a building permit and/or certificate of occupancy, whichever occurs first. No use shall be continued if the parking is removed from the adjacent lot unless substitute parking is provided. Parking facilities provided by a parking district or parking authority are not subject to these locational requirements.

1.     Parking in Yards in R Districts. The parking of motor vehicles, trailers, campers and boats shall be prohibited on all landscaped areas within the front one-half of the lot except as provided below.

a.     Oversized vehicles (see Chapter 203, Definitions), campers, trailers and boats on trailers may be parked on the paved driveway area or on a paved area between the driveway and the nearest side property line provided that they do not project over any property line and that the area is kept free of trash, debris and parts.

b.     Commercial oversized vehicles (see Chapter 203, Definitions) or special purpose machines shall be prohibited in any yard area.

2.     Parking in Yards in C or I Districts. Required yards may be used for required parking, subject to the landscaping standards of Chapter 232.

3.     Access. When a lot abuts an arterial highway and a local street, access to on-site parking shall be from the local street. When a lot abuts an alley, then access to parking shall be provided from the alley unless the Planning Commission approves a different access. When a lot abuts two arterial highways or two local streets, access shall be subject to the approval of the Director of Public Works.

4.     Nonresidential Parking in R Districts. Nonresidential parking serving adjacent commercial or industrial uses shall not be located in any R-zoned property.

F.     Computation of Spaces Required. If, in the application of the requirements of this chapter, a fractional number is obtained, one additional parking space or loading space shall be required.

G.    Other Requirements.

1.     Any off-street parking or loading facility which is permitted but not required shall comply with all provisions of this chapter governing location, design, improvement and operation.

2.     Any motor vehicle incapable of movement by its own power and/or not licensed to operate on California streets shall be stored either in an enclosed building or entirely screened from view. (3334-6/97, 4172-3/19, 4183-10/19)

 

231.04 Off-Street Parking and Loading Spaces Required
A.    Nonresidential uses shall provide one loading space (minimum 14 feet in width, 20 feet in length, and 14 feet in height) for each 20,000 square feet, or fraction thereof, of gross floor area; however, a maximum of three such spaces are required for buildings exceeding 60,000 square feet. No loading space is required for nonresidential uses with less than 20,000 square feet of gross floor area.

B.     Off-street parking spaces shall be provided in accord with the following schedule. References to spaces per square foot are to be computed on the basis of gross floor area, unless otherwise specified.

Where the use is undetermined, the approving body shall determine the probable use and the number of parking and loading spaces required. In order to make this determination, the Director may require the submission of survey data prepared by a state-registered traffic engineer for the applicant or collected at the applicant’s expense. Parking spaces over and above the minimum number specified in this section may be required by the body responsible for reviewing the use itself based on the intensity of the use.

C.     The Director may allow a parking reduction for a change of use if the increase in the required parking is not more than five spaces. The change of use request must be on a site with two or more uses, have a minimum of 50 existing parking spaces and provide an upgrade of existing landscaping. This same reduction may be considered for uses complying with state handicap regulations as mandated by state law and applicable to parking requirements. This provision shall not apply to applications for development within the coastal zone that necessitate a Coastal Development Permit.

 

Off-Street Parking Spaces Required: Schedule A

 

Use Classification

Off-Street Parking Spaces

Residential

 

Single-family dwellings

 

New construction

 

0-4 bedrooms

2 enclosed and 2 open

5 or more bedrooms

3 enclosed per unit and 3 open per unit

Existing dwellings

 

0-4 bedrooms

2 enclosed and 2 open*

5 or more bedrooms

2 enclosed per unit and 3 open per unit*

In the RMH-A district

2 enclosed spaces per unit with up to 3 bedrooms, and 1 space for each additional bedroom; 1 additional space per dwelling where no on-street parking is allowed

Multifamily dwellings

 

Studio/1 bedroom

1 enclosed space per unit

2 bedrooms

2 spaces (1 enclosed) per unit

3 or more bedrooms

2.5 spaces (1 enclosed) per unit

Guests

0.5 space per unit

 

 

Senior

 

Studio/1 bedroom

1 covered space per unit

2 bedrooms

1.5 spaces per unit (1 covered)

Manufactured homes

2 spaces per unit; 1 covered, and 1 may be behind the first

Guest

1 per 3 manufactured homes

Rooming house

1 space per guest room; plus 1 space per owner/manager; plus 1 space per each 10 guest rooms

Residential care, limited

1 per 3 beds

Public and Semi-Public

 

Convalescent Facilities

 

Skilled nursing facilities

0.75 per each bed

Assisted living facilities

0.6 per each bed

Continuing care retirement communities

1.4 per each independent living unit, plus parking required for the assisted living and skilled nursing components of the community

Clubs and lodges

1 per 35 sq. ft. used for assembly purposes of 1 per 3 fixed seats (18 inches = 1 seat), whichever is greater

Cultural facilities

1 per 300 sq. ft. gross floor area

Day care, general

1 per staff member plus 1 per classroom

Government offices

1 per 250 sq. ft. gross floor area

Heliports

As specified by use permit

Hospitals

1 per 1.5 beds

Maintenance and service facilities

1 per 500 sq. ft.

Park and recreation facilities

As specified by conditional use permit for private facilities

Public safety facilities

As specified by the conditional use permit

Religious assembly

1 per 35 sq. ft. of public assembly area, or 1 per 3 fixed seats (18 inches = 1 seat), whichever is greater

Residential care, general

1 per 3 beds; plus additional spaces, as specified by conditional use permit

Schools, public or private

 

Preschools, nursery day care

1 per staff member, plus 1 per classroom

Elementary, junior high

1.5 per classroom

High school/college

7 per classroom

Trade schools, music conservatories

1 per 35 sq. ft. of instruction area

Utilities, major

As specified by conditional use permit

Commercial

 

Ambulance services

1 per 500 sq. ft.; plus 2 storage spaces

Animal sales and services

 

Animal boarding

1 per 200 sq. ft.

Animal grooming

1 per 200 sq. ft.

Animal hospitals

1 per 200 sq. ft.

Animal, retail sales

1 per 200 sq. ft.

Artists’ studios

1 per 1,000 sq. ft.

Banks and savings & loans

1 per 200 sq. ft.

Drive-up service

Queue space for 5 cars per teller

Building materials and services

1 per 1,000 sq. ft. of lot area; minimum 10 plus 1/300 sq. ft. office area

Catering services

1 per 400 sq. ft.

Commercial recreation and entertainment

 

Bowling alleys

3 per lane, plus 1 per 250 sq. ft. of public assembly and retail areas

Electronic game centers

1 per 200 sq. ft.

Health clubs

1 per 200 sq. ft. except that area designated for group instruction shall be parked at a ratio of 1 per 100 sq. ft.

Stables

1 per 3 corrals plus 1 horse trailer space for each 10 corrals plus 2 for caretaker’s unit

Tennis/racquetball

3 per court

Theaters

1 per 3 fixed seats, or 1 per 35 sq. ft. seating area if there are no fixed seats

Other commercial recreation and entertainment

As specified by the Zoning Administrator or Planning Commission

Communications facilities

1 per 500 sq. ft.

Eating and drinking establishments

 

With 12 seats or less

1 per 200 sq. ft.

With more than 12 seats

1 per 60 sq. ft. or 1 per 100 sq. ft. when on a site with 3 or more uses

With dancing

Plus 1 per 50 sq. ft. of dancing area

With drive through service

Plus queue space for 5 cars per service window

Food and beverage sales

1 per 200 sq. ft.

Furniture and appliance stores

1 per 500 sq. ft. excluding areas used for storage or loading, but not less than 5

Funeral and interment services

1 per 35 sq. ft. of seating space

Hardware stores

1 per 200 sq. ft. excluding areas used for storage or loading, but not less than 5

Horticulture, limited

1 per 2 acres

Laboratories

1 per 500 sq. ft.

Maintenance and repair services

1 per 500 sq. ft.

Marine sales and services

1 per 500 sq. ft.

Nurseries

1 per 1,000 sq. ft. of indoor/outdoor sales and/or display lot area accessible for public viewing, but no less than 10; plus 1 per 300 sq. ft. office area

Offices, business and professional

1 per 250 sq. ft. for less than 250,000 sq. ft.; 1 per 300 sq. ft. for 250,000 sq. ft. or more

Offices, medical and dental

1 per 175 sq. ft. (includes out-patient medical/surgery centers)

Pawn shops

1 per 200 sq. ft.

Personal enrichment services

1 per 35 sq. ft. of instruction area; or maximum 1 per 200 sq. ft. provided the number of students per classroom does not exceed required number of parking spaces, plus instruction area does not exceed 75% of floor area

Personal services

1 per 200 sq. ft.

Research and development services

1 per 500 sq. ft.

Retail sales not listed under another use classification

1 per 200 sq. ft.

Sex-oriented business

 

Cabaret

 

With less than 12 seats

1 per 200 sq. ft.

With 12 seats or more

1 per 60 sq. ft. or 1 per 100 sq. ft. if on a site with 3 or more uses

Encounter center

1 per 35 sq. ft. of instruction area

Escort bureau

1 per 250 sq. ft.

Hotel/motel

1.1 per guest room; plus 1 per passenger transport vehicle (minimum of 2 stalls) and 2 spaces for any manager’s unit and parking for other uses as required by this schedule

 

Mini-motion picture theater, motion picture theater or motion picture arcade

1 per 3 fixed seats, or 1 per 35 sq. ft. seating area if there are no fixed seats

Retail sales

1 per 200 sq. ft.

Swap meets, indoor/flea markets

1 per 100 sq. ft. except as may be modified by the Planning Commission through the conditional use permit process, after submittal, review and approval of a traffic engineering study

Vehicle/equipment sales and services

 

Automobile rentals

1 per 1,000 sq. ft. of indoor/outdoor sales and/or display lot area accessible for public viewing, but no less than 10; plus 1 per 300 sq. ft. office area; 1/200 sq. ft. auto service area

Automobile washing (car wash)

 

Full-service (attended)

10

With fuel sales

12

Self-service (unattended)

1.5 per wash stall

Service stations

 

Full-serve/repair garage

1 per 500 sq. ft. but no less than 5

Self-serve

2

With convenience markets

1 per 200 sq. ft. of retail space but no less than 8

With self-serve car wash

4

With self-serve car wash and convenience market

10

Vehicle/equipment repair

1 per 200 sq. ft. but no less than 5

Vehicle/equipment sales and rentals

1 per 1,000 sq. ft. of indoor/outdoor sales and/or display lot area accessible for public viewing, but no less than 10; plus 1 per 300 sq. ft. office area; 1 per 200 sq. ft. auto service area

Vehicle storage

1 per 5,000 sq. ft. lot area; no less than 5

Visitor accommodations

 

Bed and breakfast

1 per guest room plus 1 guest and 1 manager/owner space

Hotels, motels

1.1 per guest room; plus 1 per passenger transport vehicle (minimum of 2 stalls) and 2 spaces for any manager’s unit and parking for other uses as required by this schedule

Single room occupancy residential hotels

1 per unit, 10% shall be designated as visitor parking; 1 per passenger transport vehicle (minimum of 1 stall), 1 loading space, and 2 spaces for any manager’s unit, plus 0.5 per all remaining personnel

Warehouse and sales outlets

1 per 200 sq. ft.

Industrial

 

Speculative buildings

1 per 500 sq. ft.

(Maximum 10% office area in IG or IL District)

(Maximum 30% office area in RT District)

Manufacturing, research assembly, packaging

1 per 500 sq. ft.

Wholesaling, warehousing and distributing space

1 per 1,000 sq. ft.

Offices

1 per 250 sq. ft. if office area exceeds 10% of gross floor area in IG or IL District; 30% in RT District

Outside uses: storage and lumber yards

1 per 5,000 square feet of lot area, but no less than 5

Mini-storage facilities

 

Single-story

1 per 5,000 square feet

Each additional story

1 per 2,000 square feet plus 2 spaces for caretaker’s unit

*       Open spaces may be behind any required spaces and/or on a street adjacent to the property. On-street parking may not be reserved for residents and/or guests but must be available to the general public on a first-come, first-serve basis.

 

(3334-6/97, 3378-2/98, 3494-5/01, 3526-2/02, Res. 2004-80-9/04, 3677-12/04, 4172-3/19, 4183-10/19)

 

231.06 Joint Use Parking
A.    In the event that two or more uses occupy the same building, lot or parcel of land, the total requirement for off-street parking shall be the sum of each individual use computed separately except as provided in this section.

B.     The Planning Commission or Zoning Administrator may grant a reduction in the total number of required spaces as part of the entitlement for the use or uses, or by conditional use permit when no other entitlement is required, when the applicant can demonstrate that the various uses have divergent needs in terms of daytime versus nighttime hours or weekday versus weekend hours. Such joint use approvals shall be subject to the following:

1.     The maximum distance between the building or use and the nearest point of the parking spaces or parking facility shall be 250 feet; and

2.     There shall be no conflict in the operating hours based on parking space requirements for the different uses on the parcel; and

3.     Evidence of an agreement for such joint use shall be provided by proper legal instrument, approved as to form by the City Attorney. The instrument shall be recorded in the Office of the County Recorder and shall be filed with the City prior to issuance of building permit and/or certificate of occupancy, whichever occurs first. (3334-6/97, 4172-3/19, 4183-10/19)

 

231.08 Reduced Parking for Certain Uses
A.    The Zoning Administrator may approve a conditional use permit to reduce the number of parking spaces to less than the number required per Schedule A in Section 231.04, provided that the following findings are made:

1.     The parking demand will be less than the requirement in Schedule A; and

2.     The proposed use of the building or structure, will not generate additional parking demand; and

3.     A transportation demand management plan which exceeds the minimum required by Section 230.36 has been approved by the Director.

B.     The Zoning Administrator may consider survey data prepared by a state-registered traffic engineer and submitted by an applicant or collected at the applicant’s request and expense as a basis for approval of a reduction in required parking. (3334-6/97, 3526-2/02, 3677-12/04, 4172-3/19, 4183-10/19)

 

231.10 Parking In-Lieu Payments Within Downtown Specific Plan Area
Parking requirements for private property uses within the Downtown Specific Plan Area may be met by payment of an “in-lieu” fee for providing parking in a parking facility subject to conditional use permit approval by the Planning Commission. Said fee may be paid in multiple installments. The first installment in an amount established by City Council resolution for each parking space shall be paid prior to the issuance of building permits or of a certificate of occupancy, whichever comes first. Any successive installments shall be paid and secured by a mechanism established in the conditions of approval. (3334-6/97, 4172-3/19, 4183-10/19)

 

231.12 Parking Spaces for the Handicapped
New and existing parking facilities shall comply with the State Handicapped Regulations as mandated in state law. (3334-6/97, 4172-3/19, 4183-10/19)

 

231.14 Parking Space Dimensions
Required parking spaces shall have the following minimum dimensions in feet. Striping requirements are depicted in Diagram A. Directional signs and/or pavement markings shall be provided in any facility in which one-way traffic is established.

 

 

 

 

 

Aisle Width1

Angle of Parking

Stall Width

Stall Depth

1-way

2-way

0° (Parallel)

9

192

12

20

30°

9

19

14

20

45°

9

19

15

20

60°

9

19

20

20

90°

9

19

26

26

Residential

9

19

25

25

Bicycle

8

17

subject to § 231.20

1      Minimum 24 feet when determined by Fire Department to be a fire lane.

2      With 8 ft. striped maneuvering area between every 2 spaces.

 



Striping Requirements—Diagram A

 

(3334-6/97, 4172-3/19, 4183-10/19)

 

231.16 Application of Dimensional Requirements
A.    Relation to Walls and Posts/Columns. A parking space on a site with more than five parking spaces and which is adjacent to a wall over 12 inches in height shall be increased in width by three feet. Post/columns may be permitted along the side of each space only within three feet of the head and foot of each stall.

B.     Vertical Clearance.

1.     Vertical clearance for parking spaces shall be seven feet, except that an entrance may be 6.67 feet. When handicapped parking is provided, vertical clearance shall comply with California Code of Regulations (Title 24, Part 2, Chapter 2-71).

2.     For residential uses, non-structural improvements including wall-mounted shelves, storage surface racks, or cabinets may encroach into the vertical clearance, provided a minimum 4.5 feet vertical clearance is maintained above the finished floor of the garage within the front five feet of a parking space.

C.     Wheel Stops. All spaces shall have wheel stops 2.5 feet from a fence, wall, building or walkway.

D.    Parking Space Dimension Reduction. When a parking space abuts a landscape planter, the front two feet of the required 19-foot length for a parking space may overhang the planter as provided in Chapter 232. (3334-6/97, 4172-3/19, 4183-10/19)

 

231.18 Design Standards
A.    Public Works Requirements. Drive entrances on arterial highways shall be located in a manner to coordinate with future median openings and in accord with Department of Public Works standards. The paved surface of driveways and drive entrances shall comply with Department of Public Works specifications. Parking facilities shall be prepared, graded, and paved to ensure that all surface waters will drain into a public street, alley, storm drain, or other drainage system approved by the Department of Public Works. Aisle ways without adjacent parking shall be a minimum 24 feet in width.

B.     Circulation Design. All off-street parking spaces shall have access to a public street or alley, and shall have internal circulation, safe entrances and exits, drives, and aisles in conformance with City standards. Every required parking space shall have unobstructed access from an aisle without moving another vehicle. All parking spaces, except residential garages and carports for single-family dwellings and duplexes, shall have forward travel to and from parking facilities when access is to a dedicated street. Traffic circulation shall be designed so that no vehicle need enter a public street in order to progress from one aisle to any other aisle within the same development.

Commercial centers which have 200 parking spaces or more shall have at least one main entrance designed as depicted in Diagram B.



Commercial Center Main Entrance for Parking Lots With Over 200 Spaces

Diagram B

 

A minimum three-foot-by-three-foot-wide maneuvering area shall be provided at the end of dead-end parking aisles less than 150 feet in length. A vehicle turnaround space shall be provided at the end of all dead-end parking aisles which exceed 150 feet in length (measured from the closest intersecting aisle with complete circulation). The maneuvering area and turnaround space shall be designed as depicted in Diagram C. Other turnaround arrangements providing the same maneuverability are subject to approval by the Director.



Turnaround Space and Maneuvering Area

Diagram C

 

C.     Illumination. All parking area lighting shall be energy-efficient and designed so as not to produce glare on adjacent residential properties. Security lighting shall be provided in areas accessible to the public during nighttime hours, and such lighting shall be on a time-clock or photo-sensor system.

D.    Residential Parking.

1.     Garages and Carports. All required garages and carports, permitted as accessory structures, shall be constructed at the same time as the main building and shall be used only by persons residing on the premises for storage of personal vehicles and other personal property.

2.     Assignment of Spaces. Each studio and one bedroom dwelling unit shall have a minimum of one assigned parking space and each two or more bedroom units shall have a minimum of two assigned parking spaces. Each dwelling unit shall have an enclosed, assigned space which shall be within 200 feet walking distance of that unit and designated as such. The assigned spaces shall be provided with the rental of a dwelling unit without any additional cost. All unassigned spaces provided on site shall be open and only used for the parking of vehicles by persons residing on the property or their guests.

3.     Turning Radius. The minimum turning radius for any garage, carport or open parking space, entered directly from an alley or driveway, shall be 25 feet (see Diagram D).



Turning Radius

Diagram D

 

4.     Driveway Width.

 

 

Length of Drive

Minimum Driveway Width

150 feet or less

10 ft. for single-family dwellings

 

20 ft. for multifamily dwellings

Greater than 150 feet

20 feet clear width

 

Exception: when designated as fire lane, all Fire Department requirements shall apply.

 

5.     Guest Parking. All guest parking shall be fully accessible.

6.     Coastal Zone. The following requirements shall apply to residential development in the Coastal Zone.

a.     Each dwelling unit located in the Coastal Zone shall have a minimum of two on-site parking spaces. If the total coastal parking requirements exceed the total minimum parking as required by this chapter, the additional required parking spaces may be in tandem with enclosed spaces, provided the tandem space is assigned to an enclosed space and complies with the required turning radius.

b.     The streets of new residential subdivisions between the sea and the first public road shall be constructed and maintained as open to the public for vehicular, bicycle and pedestrian access. General public parking shall be provided on all streets throughout the entire subdivision. Private entrance gates and private streets shall be prohibited. All public entry controls (e.g., gates, gate/guard houses, guards, signage, etc.) and restriction on use by the general public (e.g., preferential parking districts, resident-only parking periods/permits, etc.) associated with any streets or parking areas shall be prohibited.

7.     Planned Residential Developments. In a planned residential development where a garage is constructed a minimum of 20 feet from the curb, the driveway in front of the garage may be used to provide one of the required uncovered spaces.

8.     Privacy Gates. Privacy gates may be installed without a conditional use permit provided there is compliance with the following criteria prior to the issuance of building permits:

a.     Fire Department approval for location and emergency entry.

b.     Public Works Department approval of stacking and location.

c.     Postmaster approval of location for mail boxes or entry for postal carrier.

d.     Shall provide a driveway with a minimum of 20 feet for vehicle stacking.

e.     No adverse impacts to public coastal access, including changes in the intensity of use of water, or access thereto, shall result from installation of the privacy gates.

9.     Driveway Air Space. The air space above all driveways which exceed 150 feet in length shall remain open to the sky, except that eaves or roof overhangs with a maximum four-foot projection may be permitted above a height of 14 feet.

10.   Storage Space. One hundred cubic feet of enclosed storage space for each unit shall be provided in a secured parking area where there is no private garage.

11.   Accessory Dwelling. One additional off-street parking space shall be required for an accessory dwelling, except that in the coastal zone there shall be a minimum of four parking spaces on-site.

E.     Nonresidential Parking and Loading.

1.     Designated Parking. Parking spaces within an integrated, nonresidential complex shall not be designated for exclusive use of any individual tenant except as authorized by a parking management plan approved by the Director.

2.     Parking Controls. Parking controls, such as valet service, or booths, and/or collection of fees may be permitted when authorized by conditional use permit approval by the Zoning Administrator. Privacy gates may be installed without a conditional use permit provided there is compliance with the following criteria prior to the issuance of building permits.

a.     Fire Department approval for location and emergency entry.

b.     Public Works Department approval of stacking and location.

c.     Postmaster approval of location for mail boxes or entry for postal carrier.

d.     Shall provide a driveway with a minimum of 20 feet for vehicle stacking.

e.     No adverse impacts to public coastal access, including changes in the intensity of use of water, or of access thereto, shall result from installation of the privacy gates.

3.     Minimum Driveway Width. Twenty-five feet when providing access to the rear of a structure.

4.     Reciprocal Access. Reciprocal ingress/egress access with adjacent properties shall be provided for all commercial properties.

5.     Loading Location. On a site adjoining an alley, a required loading space shall be accessible from the alley unless alternative access is approved by the Director. An occupied loading space shall not prevent access to a required parking space. Truck or rail loading, dock facilities, and doors for such facilities shall not face or be located within 45 feet of property zoned for general planned residential.

6.     Loading Design. Any loading facility shall be designed and located so that vehicles need not extend onto the public sidewalks, streets or alleys during loading activities.

7.     Landscape Buffer. Where the side or rear yard of a parcel is used for loading activities and abuts an R District, a landscaped buffer along the property line shall be provided.

8.     Parking Spaces. Parking spaces shall not be utilized or occupied by any other use or for any other purpose than as parking for the associated on-site uses as required by this chapter, unless in compliance with Section 231.06, Joint Use Parking.

F.     Seasonal and Temporary Parking Lots. Seasonal and temporary parking lots may be allowed upon approval of a conditional use permit by the Zoning Administrator. Seasonal lots may operate only from Memorial Day through the third weekend in September and shall be located within 1,000 yards of the mean high tide line of the Pacific Ocean. Temporary and seasonal commercial parking lots may be permitted for a maximum of five years. The design and layout of seasonal and temporary parking lots shall comply with this chapter, Fire Department requirements, and the following standards:

1.     Paving shall be two inches of asphalt over compacted native soil, or as approved by the department; except seasonal parking lots shall be surfaced to meet minimum specifications for support of vehicles and to provide dust control as required by the Zoning Administrator.

2.     Boundaries of such lots shall be marked off and secured by chain or cable, with posts a minimum of three feet in height, solidly built. At a minimum, posts shall consist of four-inch by four-inch wood or equivalent metal posts a minimum of one and one-half inches in diameter securely set in the ground and placed eight feet on center. The posts shall be connected with at least one strand of half-inch cable or chain securely fastened to each post. An opening shall be provided to accommodate vehicle access during business hours. Seasonal lots shall be secured to prevent overnight parking between the closing hour on one business day and the opening hour the following business day.

3.     Temporary parking lots shall have landscaped planters with an inside dimension of three feet along street-side property lines excluding driveways. Landscaping shall be protected from vehicle and pedestrian damage by wheel bumpers (asphalt, concrete, or wood), or asphalt or concrete curbs, or any other design that will provide adequate protection.

4.     Seasonal parking lots are exempt from landscaping requirements of Chapter 232.

5.     Directional and informational signs shall be displayed on-site to identify the entrance(s), fees, and hours of operation. Such signs shall be located at the entrance of the parking lot and shall not exceed 12 square feet and shall be six feet high. Signs for seasonal parking lots shall be removed from the site each season no later than the third weekend in September.

6.     Automatic entry devices or fee collection points shall be set back a minimum of 20 feet from the public right-of-way, or at a distance recommended by the Department of Public Works and approved by the Director.

7.     An attendant shall be on duty at all times during business hours of seasonal parking lots.

8.     An approved fire extinguisher shall be provided on the premises during business hours.

9.     The site shall be maintained in a clean condition, free from trash and debris. Trash containers shall be placed on the site to accommodate and store all trash that accumulates on the lot.

For seasonal parking lots, a certificate of insurance for combined single limit bodily injury and/or property damage including products liability in the amount of $1,000,000.00 per occurrence shall be filed with the Department of Administrative Services. A hold harmless agreement holding the City harmless shall also be filed with the Department of Administrative Services.

Subsequent to approval of an application for any seasonal or temporary parking lot, the applicant shall meet all standards and requirements and install all improvements. The parking lot shall then be inspected and approved by the Director prior to issuance of a certificate to operate.

G.    Parking Structures. Above-grade parking structures where the finished elevations of the structure are facing a public right-of-way shall be subject to conditional use permit approval by the Planning Commission when no other entitlement is required. In addition, parking structures proposed within the coastal zone shall be subject to approval of a Coastal Development Permit in accordance with Chapter 245. All parking structures, subterranean parking, and semi-subterranean parking shall comply with the following requirements:

1.     Transition ramps which are also used as back-up space for parking stalls shall have a maximum slope of five percent. The maximum slope for transition ramps with no adjacent parking spaces shall be 15% with minimum 12-foot long transitions at the top and bottom of the ramp. A ramp used for ingress and egress to a public street shall have a transition section at least 16 feet long and a maximum slope of five percent.

2.     Parking structures with over 300 spaces shall provide secondary circulation ramps and additional ingress and egress if deemed necessary by a traffic study prepared by a state-registered traffic engineer.

3.     Above-grade parking structures adjacent to any public right-of-way or any property zoned or used for residential purposes shall be provided with a minimum 10-foot-wide perimeter landscape planter at ground level.

4.     All above-grade parking structures shall screen parked cars on each level through a combination of landscaping or trellises and/or decorative screening wall or railings.

5.     All parking structure elevations shall be architecturally compatible with existing or proposed structures and shall be subject to review and approval by the Design Review Board prior to hearing. The following design guidelines shall apply to parking structures:

a.     The exterior elevations of a parking structure should be designed to minimize the use of blank façades. This can be accomplished through the use of textured concrete, planters or trellises, or other architectural treatments.

b.     To soften the horizontal lines and greatly enhance the look of the structure, elevations should be articulated and elements added that give the structure proportions that reflect a regular building. To give the structure proportions reflective of a regular building, design openings to look more like window openings than long, horizontal parking garage openings.

c.     Framing that mimics windows should be added to openings. The framing should have vertical members to de-emphasize the horizontal lines of the structure.

d.     Substantial massing should occur at the corner of the structures to anchor the building and give the structure proportions more similar to a regular commercial building. These panels should incorporate relief to create shadow patterns and add visual interest.

e.     Height should be added to the parapet at key areas on the building structure to accent entries and reduce the long, horizontal facade that is typical of parking structures.

f.      Horizontal openings should be broken up with vertical columns to create a rhythm of openings, again reflecting proportions of a regular commercial building.

g.     Awnings or trellis structures should be added at vehicular and pedestrian entrances to create more pedestrian scale.

h.     Where appropriate and feasible, retail spaces should provide articulation at the ground floor.

6.     All parking structures proposed for conversion to a fee parking arrangement shall be subject to conditional use permit approval by the Planning Commission. Public parking structures within the coastal zone proposed for conversion to a fee parking arrangement shall be subject to approval of a Coastal Development Permit. (3334-6/97, 3526-2/02, Res. 2004-80-9/04, 3677-12/04, 3758-1/07, 3763-3/07, Res. 2009-36-9/09, 4172-3/19, 4183-10/19, 4196-3/20)

 

231.20 Bicycle Parking
A.    Bicycle Parking Requirements.

1.     Nonresidential Uses.

a.     Buildings up to 50,000 square feet of gross building area: One bicycle space for every 25 automobile parking spaces required; minimum of three.

b.     Buildings over 50,000 square feet of gross building area: The Director shall determine the number of bicycle spaces based upon the type of use(s) and number of employees.

2.     Multiple-Family Residential Uses. One bicycle space for every four units.

B.     Facility Design Standards. Bicycle parking facilities shall include provision for locking of bicycles, either in lockers or in secure racks in which the bicycle frame and wheels may be locked by the user. Bicycle spaces shall be conveniently located on the lot, close to the building entrance as possible for patrons and employees, and protected from damage by automobiles. (3334-6/97, 3677-12/04, 3763-3/07, 4172-3/19, 4183-10/19)

 

231.22 Driveways—Visibility
Visibility of a driveway crossing a street or alley property line or of intersecting driveways shall be consistent with the requirements of Section 230.88. (3334-6/97, 4172-3/19, 4183-10/19)

 

231.24 Landscape Improvements
Landscape, planting and irrigation plans shall be prepared consistent with the requirements of Chapter 232. (3334-6/97, 4172-3/19, 4183-10/19)

 

231.26 Parking Area Plan Required
Prior to the construction, reconstruction, or re-striping of an off-street parking area, a parking area plan shall be submitted to the Director for the purpose of indicating compliance with the provisions of this section. This plan shall include:

A.    Location and description of fencing and architectural screen walls.

B.     Location and placement of parking stalls, including bumpers, striping and circulation, all dimensioned to permit comparison with approved parking standards.

C.     Location and placement of lights provided to illuminate the parking area.

D.    A drainage plan showing drainage to a public way in accordance with accepted standards or practices.

E.     A landscape, planting and irrigation plan prepared consistent with the requirements of Chapter 232.

F.     Existing off-street parking areas that were approved at a reduced dimension (e.g., width, length, aisle width) may be reconstructed and re-striped or only re-striped at their previous reduced dimension.

G.    When re-striping, parking stalls shall be as depicted in Section 231.14, Diagram A.

H.    If a parking area is proposed to only be re-striped, no landscape, drainage, or lighting plan is required.

Single-family dwellings on pre-existing lots are exempt from this requirement. (3334-6/97, 3677-12/04, 4172-3/19, 4183-10/19)

 

231.28 Oceanside or On-Street Parking Within the Coastal Zone
If any existing oceanside or on-street parking within the coastal zone is removed, it shall be replaced on a one for one basis in an area that would not result in the loss of any sandy beach area and within walking distance of the existing site. Replacement parking shall be assured prior to the issuance of the Coastal Development Permit and shall be provided before any existing parking is removed so that there will be no reduction in the number of parking spaces available. (3334-6/97, 4172-3/19, 4183-10/19)

 

Chapter 232 LANDSCAPE IMPROVEMENTS
232.02 Applicability
Minimum site landscaping and required planting areas shall be installed and maintained in accord with the standards and requirements of this chapter, which shall apply to all nonresidential projects, multifamily residential projects consisting of five or more units, residential projects in the RMH-A subdistrict, and common areas of common interest residential subdivisions. All other residential projects in RL, RM, RMH, and RH districts consisting of four or less units shall comply only with the general tree requirements of this chapter.

 

232.04 General Requirements
A.    Landscape plans shall be prepared by a California state licensed landscape architect except plans for residential projects with four units or less may be prepared by the developer or a California licensed landscape contractor. The plans shall be submitted to the Public Works and Community Development Departments and receive approval prior to issuance of a building permit. No significant or substantive changes to approved landscaping or irrigation plans shall be made without prior written approval by the director and the landscape designer. Substantial changes shall require approval of the Planning Commission or Zoning Administrator, whichever granted approval of the project.

B.     Landscape improvements shall comply with the Arboricultural and Landscape Standards and Specifications on file in the Department of Public Works.

C.     Landscape materials shall not be located such that, at maturity:

1.     They interfere with safe sight distances for vehicular, bicycle or pedestrian traffic;

2.     They conflict with overhead or underground utility lines, overhead lights, or walkway lights; or

3.     They block pedestrian or bicycle ways.

D.    Evidence of completion of required landscaping and irrigation improvements shall be supplied to the Public Works Department on a landscape certification form. This form shall be required to be submitted prior to issuance of an occupancy permit for new construction. The director shall approve a postponement of the required tree planting for specific residential projects when the Covenants, Conditions, and Restrictions (CC&Rs) for the project require installation of the City-required tree planting within 90 days from date of occupancy of residential dwelling by the prospective homeowner.

E.     If mature trees that were originally required to be planted by this Code, conditions of approval, or designed plans are removed, or if mature trees that are considered as specimen trees are removed, or if the trees are permanently disfigured or mutilated beyond their ability to regrow to an acceptable form for that specific variety, then those trees shall be replaced and, whenever possible, with equivalent size and specie per the project’s original approved plans.

 

232.06 Materials
Landscape improvement plans shall be harmonious with the architectural design and demonstrate a recognizable pattern or theme for the overall development by choice and location of materials. Landscape plans shall conform to the following:

A.    Plant materials shall be selected for energy efficiency and drought tolerance; adaptability and relationship to Huntington Beach environment; color, form and pattern; ability to provide shade; soil retention, fire resistiveness, etc. The overall landscape plan shall be integrated with all elements of the project, such as buildings, parking lots and streets, to achieve desirable micro-climate and minimize energy demand and water use.

B.     The use of crushed rock or gravel for large area coverage shall be avoided.

C.     Nonturf areas, such as shrub beds, shall be top dressed with a bark chip mulch or approved alternative.

D.    Where shrubs or low-level vegetation are used, vegetative matter at maturity shall cover at least 75% of actual planted area.

E.     The use of landscape materials shall be designed to minimize sun exposure of paved surfaces and structures.

F.     Irrigation systems shall be in accordance with the City water efficient landscape requirements of Chapter 14.52 and the Arboricultural Standards and Specifications on file in the Department of Public Works.

G.    Turf areas shall be minimized. Those areas proposed shall be planted with field-grown established drought-tolerant sod. Seeding may be allowed by the director.

H.    Seventy-five percent of all shrubs, except those used for ground cover, shall be a minimum five-gallon size.

I.      Groundcover areas shall be planted with well-rooted cuttings or container stock.

 

232.08 Design Standards
A.    General Planting Provisions.

1.     A minimum of eight percent of the total net site area shall be landscaped, or as required by Title 21 or conditions of approval.

2.     For traffic visibility purposes, the maximum height of shrubbery shall be 32 inches within any parking area and within five feet of any driveway (see Diagrams A, B, C, D).

3.     Turf shall not be installed on grade differential greater than 4:1. Where the maximum overall grade differential is three feet, 3:1 shall be considered maximum.

4.     Any planter or screen wall shall be placed behind the landscape area and shall set back five feet from the edge of any alley or driveway (see Diagram C).

B.     General Tree Requirements.

1.     Each single-family residential lot less than 45 feet in width shall have one 24-inch box tree planted within the front setback area. The City’s landscape architect shall determine whether a minimum four to six-foot square (16 to 36 square feet) planting area will be required upon review of the landscape plan. One 24-inch box tree shall also be planted in the streetside yard adjacent to a street without a parkway.

2.     Each single-family residential lot 45 feet or greater in width shall have one 36-inch box tree planted within the front setback area. One 36-inch box tree shall also be planted in the streetside yard adjacent to a street without a parkway.

3.     Multifamily residential lots shall have one 36-inch box tree for every 45 lineal feet of street frontage planted within the setback areas adjacent to a street. In addition, there shall be one 36-inch box tree planted within the common open space areas for each ground or first level unit.

4.     Nonresidential developments shall have one 36-inch box tree for each 45 lineal feet of street frontage planted within the first 15 feet of the setback area adjacent to a street.

5.     Specimen palms may be substituted at a ratio of one-half foot brown trunk height for one inch of box tree inch required.

C.     Off-Street Parking Facilities.

1.     A 10-foot-wide landscaped planter area (inside dimension) shall be provided between any streetside property line and a parking area except at driveway openings. Berming shall be a minimum of 20 inches in height. When a planting area is less than 10 feet wide, a 32-inch-high wall shall be provided. Where grade differential would not permit mounding, alternatives shown in Diagram B may be used (see Diagrams A, B, C).

2.     Parking facilities shall have perimeter landscaping areas as follows:

a.     Areas shall be a minimum three feet in plantable width and include one tree for each 90 square feet of landscaped area.

b.     Areas shall be increased to five feet in plantable width when the parking facility dimension is more than 100 feet adjacent to the side or rear property line.

c.     Minimum plantable area for each tree shall be 48 inches square.

3.     Interior landscaping areas shall be distributed throughout the parking area and shall equal five percent of the perimeter landscaping area. These areas shall include a minimum of one minimum 24-inch box tree for every 10 parking spaces and shall be located throughout the parking area.

4.     The end of each row of parking spaces shall be separated from driveways by a landscaped planter, minimum two feet wide and in addition include a step off area (see Diagrams C, E).

5.     Planter areas adjacent to parking spaces shall be provided with a 12-inch-wide by three-and-one-half-inch-thick “step off” area flush with and behind the curb for the entire length of planter or provide four-foot-square or five-foot-diameter circular planter surrounded by textured and/or colored concrete.

6.     A concrete curb may be required adjacent to the sidewalk within the right-of-way. (Refer to the Arboricultural and Landscape Standards and Specifications.)

7.     All parking area landscaping shall be protected from vehicular and pedestrian damage by a six-inch-high, six-inch-wide curb of Portland cement concrete. Additional protection shall be provided by one of the following methods:

a.     Two feet of landscaping consisting of low shrubs or ground cover may be provided between a parking stall and the required landscape area. The additional landscaping shall not count toward the required percentage of landscaping or minimum planter width. This method will allow vehicles to extend over the additional landscape area in conjunction with permitting a reduction in the required length of the parking space from 19 feet to 17 feet; or

b.     Other alternatives acceptable to the director. (3334-6/97, 3410-3/99)

 

232.10 Irrigation
All landscape areas shall be provided with a permanent underground, electrically automated irrigation system, designed to provide complete and adequate coverage to sustain and promote healthy plant life. The irrigation system shall not cause water to spray onto or cause water, mud or debris to flow across a public sidewalk. Pop-up sprinkler heads shall be required directly adjacent to all pedestrian or vehicular surfaces and located in areas that avoid vehicle overhang. See Section 232.06(F).

 

232.12 Exceptions
A.    Existing developments approved prior to June 7, 1983, shall, at the time of expansion and/or exterior modification, provide six percent of the total net site area in landscaping with a minimum six-foot-wide landscape planter (inside dimension) along any street side property line. Current tree quantity and size requirements shall apply.

B.     Existing developments located adjacent to a landscape corridor as depicted in the General Plan shall at the time of expansion and/or exterior modification provide a 10-foot-wide planter with six percent of the site landscaped.

 



 

Diagram A

Required Landscape Planter and Berming

 



 

Diagram B

Grade Differential Sections

 



 

Diagram C

Landscape Planter and Berming

 



 

Diagram D

 



 

Diagram E

Parking Island With Step off Area

 



 

Diagram F

 



 

Diagram G

Palm Height Measurement

 

Chapter 233 SIGNS
233.02 Reserved
 

233.04 Permits Required
Sign permits are required for all signs, unless expressly exempted under Section 233.08 or otherwise provided by this Code. A building permit application for a new sign or change in sign panel/face shall be approved by the Planning Division prior to installation and issuance of a building permit by the Building and Safety Department.

A.    Sign Permit. A complete sign application shall include the following information:

1.     Two sets of fully-dimensioned plans drawn to scale. The plans shall include the following:

a.     Site plan indicating the location of all proposed signs, as well as the size and location of existing signs on the site. Photographs should be submitted if available.

b.     Sign elevations, indicating overall square footage and letter/figure dimensions, letter style, color (indicate standard color number if applicable), materials, proposed copy and illumination method.

c.     Dimensioned building elevations with existing and proposed signs depicted.

2.     Property owner approval in the form of a letter or signature on the plans, approving the proposed signs and authorizing submission of the sign application.

3.     For wall signs, method of attachment; for freestanding signs, foundation plan, sign support and attachment plan.

4.     Type and method of electrical insulation devices, where applicable.

 

5.     Any design modifications from the requirements of this chapter that have been approved shall be noted, and compliance with the Planned Sign Program, limited sign permit, or sign code exception shall be demonstrated.

B.     Planned Sign Program. Review and approval of a Planned Sign Program pursuant to Section 233.20 is required for a sign permit for the following requests:

1.     A site with five or more nonresidential businesses or uses.

2.     A site with two or more freestanding identification signs where there is a request for a new freestanding sign.

3.     Commercial properties with 1,300 feet or more on one street frontage requesting more freestanding signs than allowed pursuant to Section 233.06.

4.     Consolidated subdivision directional signs identifying multiple projects on multiple sign panels.

5.     Service stations.

6.     Wall signs for second floor businesses with exterior access.

7.     Wall signs installed on a building wall not adjacent to the business suite.

C.     Sign Code Exception. The director may grant approval for a sign code exception of not more than 20% in sign height or sign area. Ten working days prior to submittal for a building permit, applicant shall notice adjacent property owners and tenants by first class mail. Notice of application shall include the following:

1.     Name of applicant.

2.     Location of planned development or use, including address.

3.     Nature of the proposed development shall be fully disclosed in the notice.

4.     Planning department phone number and address of City Hall shall be provided in the notice to call for viewing plans.

5.     The date by which any comments must be received in writing by the Planning Department.

6.     Planning Director shall receive entire list including name and address of those receiving the mailing.

7.     The Design Review Board shall review and render a recommendation to the director for sign code exception requests of more than 20% in sign height or sign area supergraphics, three-dimensional signs, and relief from the strict application of Section 233.06. Neighborhood notification required pursuant to Chapter 241. The following findings shall be made prior to approval of any sign code exception:

a.     The sign is compatible with the character of the area and is needed due to special circumstances defined by the applicant and applicable to the property.

b.     The sign will not adversely affect other signs in the area.

c.     The sign will not be detrimental to properties located in the vicinity.

d.     The sign will not obstruct vehicular or pedestrian traffic visibility and will not be a hazardous distraction.

D.    Limited Sign Permit. The owner of a sign which does not conform to the provisions of Section 233.06 may file an application for a limited sign permit to the director for permission to change the face or copy of such sign. A limited sign permit cannot be processed for an illegal sign or a prohibited sign listed in Section 233.10. The director may approve the face change and extend a sign’s use for a time period deemed appropriate, not to exceed two years. A sign permit shall be obtained pursuant to Section 233.04(A) prior to installation of the new sign panel/face.

A cash bond in an amount determined by the director to reflect the cost of removal based on information provided by a sign company shall be required to guarantee the sign’s removal upon expiration of the limited sign permit. Approval shall be subject to the following findings:

1.     Due to unique circumstances, the sign’s immediate removal will result in a substantial hardship for the applicant.

2.     The sign will not adversely affect other lawfully erected signs in the area.

3.     The sign will not be detrimental to properties located in the vicinity.

4.     The sign will be in keeping with the character of the surrounding area.

5.     The sign will not obstruct vehicular or pedestrian traffic visibility and will not be a hazardous distraction.

E.     Design Review Board. The Design Review Board (DRB) shall review and render a recommendation to the appropriate decision maker (Zoning Administrator, Director, Planning Commission, etc.) on the following items prior to issuance of a permit by the Planning and/or Building and Safety Departments for the following:

1.     Electronic readerboard signs.

2.     Signs on properties within the following areas:

a.     Areas subject to specific plans which do not include specific guidelines for signs;

b.     OS-PR (Open Space-Parks and Recreation) and OS-S (Open Space-Shoreline districts); and

c.     Any other area designated by the City Council.

3.     DRB review or approval shall not be required for signs in Redevelopment Agency project areas.

F.     Temporary Sign Permits. The director may issue a temporary sign permit valid for up to 30 days, if it is found that the temporary sign is necessary to establish or maintain identity until a permanent sign can be erected. Extensions of the 30-day permit may be granted at the discretion of the director. The director may also approve a temporary sign permit for the following temporary signs provided the signs conform with the standards defined in Section 233.06:

1.     Signs necessary to avoid a dangerous condition, including directional signs during construction.

2.     Signs pertaining to a use permitted by a temporary use permit.

3.     Promotional activity signs that comply with Section 233.18 are permitted up to a maximum of 90 days per calendar year. (3334-6/97, 3360-12/97, 3527-2/02, 3711-6/05, 3826-4/09, 3872-3/10, 4097-10/16)

 

233.06 Permitted Signs
All signs shall be governed by the following schedule, except if addressed elsewhere in this chapter. The schedule lists maximum standards for number, area, and height of allowed signs which does not necessarily ensure architectural compatibility. Therefore, in addition to the enumerated standards, consideration shall be given to building setbacks, visibility of attached signing on the site, and the proposed sign’s relationship to the overall appearance of the property, to the surrounding neighborhood, and to community goals. Compatible design, simplicity, sign effectiveness and adherence to the objectives and policies in the Urban Design Element of the General Plan shall be used as guidelines for sign approval. Nothing in this chapter shall preclude public access signage.

The City may, in addition, from time to time adopt policies regarding sign standards. Such policies may include separate standards or provisions for specific areas of the community.

A.    Commercial Districts.

1.     Freestanding Signs on Adams Avenue, Beach Boulevard, Brookhurst Street, Edinger Avenue, Goldenwest Street and Warner Avenue.

 

 

LOT FRONTAGE

MAX. NO. OF SIGNS

MAX. SIGN HEIGHT

MAX. SIGN AREA

a.

Interior lots with less than 200 feet of street frontage

One

10 ft. +5 ft. for Bonus

50 sq. ft. +25 sq. ft. for Bonus

b.

Interior lots with min. 200 feet but less than 400 feet

One

15 ft. +5 ft. for Bonus

70 sq. ft. +30 sq. ft. for Bonus

c.

Corner lots with the greatest street frontage less than 400 feet

One per street frontage

7 ft. +3 ft. for Bonus

30 sq. ft. +15 sq. ft. for Bonus

d.

Interior lots with min. 400 feet of frontage AND Corner lots with min. 400 feet on one street frontage

One primary (P) and two secondary (S) signs per street

20 ft. (P) +5 ft. for (P) Bonus 7 ft. (S)

100 sq. ft. (P) +25 sq. ft. (P) Bonus 30 sq. ft. (S)

e.

Regional mall identification sign

One per street frontage

25 ft.

100 sq. ft.

 

 

One freeway sign

25 ft. above freeway

200 sq. ft.

 

2.     Freestanding Signs on All Other Arterials Not Listed in Subsection (A)(1) of this Section.

 

 

LOT FRONTAGE

MAX. NO. OF SIGNS

MAX. SIGN HEIGHT

MAX. SIGN AREA

a.

Interior lots with less than 400 feet of street frontage

One

7 ft. +1 ft. for Bonus

50 sq. ft. +10 sq. ft. for Bonus

b.

Corner lots with the greatest street frontage less than 400 feet

One per street

7 ft. +1 ft. for Bonus

30 sq. ft. +10 sq. ft. for Bonus

c.

Interior lots with min. 400 feet of frontage AND Corner lots with min. 400 feet on one street frontage

One primary (P) and two secondary (S) signs per street

15 ft. (P) +0.5 ft. for Bonus 7 ft. (S)

70 sq. ft. (P) + 10 ft. for Bonus 30 sq. ft. (S)

–       Bonus signs (B) shall have an opaque background, internal illumination for items of information only.

–       Multi-tenant panels are permitted provided the panels are minimum 10 inches in height, with a minimum six-inch letter height. They shall be restricted to one uniform background color and two colors for the sign copy, with the exception that the Center Identification may have a separate background color. Sign copies shall be limited to the company name or one generic item of information. Major tenant identification shall be encouraged by being placed on the largest panel.

–       Secondary signs (S) are in addition to the Primary (P) sign. Secondary sign copy shall be limited to business identification only.

–       Street addresses shall be included on all freestanding signs with minimum six-inch numerals.

 

Other Locational Criteria for Freestanding Commercial Signs

–       No business shall have more than one freestanding sign facing each frontage.

–       Freestanding signs on the same site shall be located a minimum of 150 feet apart unless approved by a Planned Sign Program.

–       A freestanding sign shall not be permitted in an area between the building and right-of-way when that portion of the building is located at the minimum setback.

–       Signs shall be located in a landscape planter a minimum of two feet wider than the sign itself. Square poles or other architectural treatment shall be required, except if the sign is eight feet or less in height, it shall be of monument type, with a minimum two-foot base. Placement shall conform with Diagram A.

–       No freestanding sign shall be located along a local street.

 

3.     Wall Signs.

 

SITE CRITERIA

TYPE

MAX. NUMBER

MAX. SIGN AREA

OTHER STANDARDS

Individual business identification

Wall

One per street or parking lot frontage for each separate business on the ground floor

1.5 sq. ft per linear ft. of business frontage

1.  Channel letter signs required on all sites consisting of 5 or more uses.

Signs for second floor businesses with exterior access may be permitted by Planned Sign Program

Business <50,000 sq. ft.; max. total = 200 sq. ft.*

2.  Signs over 50 sq. ft. shall have an opaque background and internal illumination for items of information only or shall be of channel letter design.

 

Business 50,000+ sq. ft.; no max.*

3.  Multi-business consolidated wall signs shall be permitted provided the signs do not exceed the allowable sign area.

 

Channel letter signs: 15% bonus after above calculation

4.  Placement shall conform to Diagram B.

5.  One nameplate may be placed at each door, loading dock, or other entrance facing a public street; max. 6 sq. ft.

 

 

6.  Signs on projecting canopies/awnings shall be considered wall signs.

 

7.  Raceways shall only be permitted when unable to place electrical components within wall/parapet.

 

Under canopy

One per business

8 sq. ft.

1.  Canopy signs shall be attached perpendicular to the building face, centered above the store entrance or lease length.

2.  Minimum 8 ft. ground clearance.

3.  Signs shall not be illuminated.

*       No sign shall exceed 200 sq. ft. or 1.5 sq. ft. per linear ft. of the wall upon which it is placed.

 

4.     Changeable Copy Signs.

 

SITE CRITERIA

TYPE

MAX. NUMBER

MAX. SIGN AREA

MAX. HEIGHT

OTHER STANDARDS

Hotel with convention facility

F/S

One per site

30% of allowable F/S area

See Commercial Districts—Freestanding Signs, subsection (A)(1)(a) through (d) of this section

To be combined with permitted sign.

Live entertainment

F/S

One per site

30% of allowable F/S area

See Commercial Districts—Freestanding Signs, subsection (A)(1)(a) through (d) of this section

To be combined with permitted sign.

Tenant directory

F/S

One per site

30 sq. ft.

7 ft.

Low intensity illumination, oriented toward pedestrians and motorists on site; min. 30 ft. from exterior property lines, and 25 ft. from other freestanding signs.

Menu board

F/S or wall

One per drive-thru lane

32 sq. ft.

7 ft.

May be in addition to permitted sign.

Electronic readerboards

See Sections 233.12 and 233.14 for specifications

 

 

B.     Industrial Districts.

1.     Freestanding Signs.

 

SITE CRITERIA

MAX. NUMBER

MAX. SIGN AREA

MAX. SIGN HEIGHT

OTHER STANDARDS

Industrial/mixed uses

One business identification sign per site

Under 1 acre: 32 sq. ft.

7 ft.

1.  Sign copy shall be limited to center or single business identification only. No multi-tenant panels shall be permitted.

Industrial centers over 1 acre: 50 sq. ft.

2.  Freestanding signs shall conform to Diagram A, and shall be located in a landscaped planter a minimum of 2 feet wider than the sign itself.

 

3.  All freestanding signs shall have the street address included on the sign.

 

4.  Signs shall be monument type.

 

5.  Internally illuminated signs shall be designed as bonus signs.

Mixed use businesses with frontages on Gothard Street

One per street frontage

Under 1 acre: 32 sq. ft.

 

Industrial centers over 1 acre: 50 sq. ft.

10 ft.

1.  Multi-tenant panels are permitted provided the panels are minimum 10 inches in height with minimum 6 inch high letters. They shall be restricted to one uniform background color and two colors for the sign copy, with the exception that the Center Identification may have a separate background color. Sign copies shall be limited to the company name or one generic item of information.

 

2.  Major tenant identification shall be encouraged by being placed on the largest panel.

 

3.  Signs eight feet or less shall be monument type.

 

4.  Internally illuminated signs shall be designed as bonus signs.

 

2.     Wall Signs.

 

SITE CRITERIA

MAX. NUMBER

MAX. SIGN AREA

MAX. SIGN HEIGHT

OTHER STANDARDS

All industrial/mixed uses

One per street or parking lot frontage for each separate business

1 sq. ft. per linear ft. of building frontage.

Below roofline

1.  One nameplate may be placed at each door, loading dock, or other entrance facing a public street; max. 6 sq. ft.

Channel letter signs receive a 10% bonus after the above calculation.

2.  Internally illuminated signs shall be designed as bonus signs.

Max. 100 sq. ft. per business for all wall signs.

3.  Raceways shall only be permitted when unable to place electrical components within wall/parapet.

 

C.     Residential.

 

SITE CRITERIA

TYPE

MAX. NUMBER

MAX. SIGN AREA

MAX. SIGN HEIGHT

OTHER STANDARDS

Neighborhood identification

F/S

1 per street entrance

1 sq. ft. per unit; max. 50 sq. ft.

6 ft.

1.  Signs shall be affixed to perimeter wall or placed within a landscaped planter.

OR

 

 

2.  Sign copy shall be limited to 18 inches in height, name of development only.

Wall

1 on each side of each street entrance

0.5 sq. ft. per unit; max. 25 sq. ft.

3.  Freestanding signs shall be set back 20 feet from any interior property line. Placement shall conform to Diagram A.

Vacancy signs for multi-family developments

Wall

1 per street frontage

6 sq. ft.

Below roofline

Copy limited to “vacancy,” type of unit available, and source of information.

 

D.    Churches, Schools, and Commercial Recreational Uses Within Public Parks.

 

SITE CRITERIA

TYPE

MAX. NUMBER

MAX. SIGN AREA

MAX. SIGN HEIGHT

OTHER STANDARDS

Identification

F/S

One per site

32 sq. ft.

7 ft.

1.  Freestanding signs shall be completely located within a landscaped planter.

AND

 

 

 

2.  Signs shall be monument type.

Wall

One per site

1 sq. ft. per linear ft. of bldg. frontage max. 32 sq. ft.

Below roofline

3.  Freestanding signs shall be set back 5 ft. from any interior property line.

4.  All freestanding signs shall have the address included on the sign.

5.  Raceways shall only be permitted when unable to place electrical components within wall/parapet.

Changeable copy

F/S

One per site

30% of allowable F/S area

7 ft.

To be combined with permitted sign.

Wall

One per site

32 sq. ft.

May be in addition to permitted sign.

 

E.     Service Stations.

 

SITE CRITERIA

TYPE

MAX. NUMBER

MAX. SIGN AREA

MAX. SIGN HEIGHT

OTHER STANDARDS

Business identification

F/S

One per site

Alternative A: 20 sq. ft. if sign contains only identification and no changeable copy panels for pricing.

7 ft.

1.  Service stations with convenience markets shall use Alternative A.

OR

2.  Freestanding signs shall be located in a landscaped planter a minimum of 2 feet wider than the sign itself.

Alternative B: 50 sq. ft. if price information is incorporated on sign. Sign shall contain panels for fuel price only. No detached price signs shall be located elsewhere on the site.

3.  Signs shall be monument type.

4.  All freestanding signs shall have the address included on the sign.

 

Wall

One per street frontage

1 sq. ft. per linear foot of building frontage

Below roofline

1.  Internal illumination or channel letters only.

2.  If canopy fascia signs are used for business ID, no wall signs shall be permitted on bldg.

and/or

 

 

3.  Max. letter height for fascia signs shall be 75% of fascia width.

Canopy

One per street frontage

10 sq. ft.

4.  If canopy fascia signs are not provided, a logo may be permitted on each side of canopy column connector (spandrel) in addition to wall signs.

Fuel price and credit information

F/S

One per street frontage in conjunction with Alternative A sign

12 sq. ft.

6 ft.

1.  Price signs shall advertise fuel prices only and no other product available.

Price signs shall be located a minimum 15 ft. from other freestanding signs.

2.  Freestanding signs shall be completely located within a landscaped planter.

 

 

 

 

 

 

Pump instructions or identification

Attached to pump island column

One per canopy column

2 sq. ft.

10 ft.

1.  No other signs shall be permitted on the canopy or column except as specified.

2.  Point of purchase signs shall be prohibited.

3.  State or federal government required signs encompassed within a fuel pump shall not be regulated by this chapter.

 

F.     Permitted in All Districts.

 

SITE CRITERIA

TYPE

MAX. NUMBER

MAX. SIGN AREA

MAX. SIGN HEIGHT

OTHER STANDARDS

Building identification for buildings over 100 ft. in height

Wall

One per building frontage

3 sq. ft. per foot of bldg. height

Shall be placed within top 25 ft. of bldg.

1.  Such sign shall be in addition to that which is permitted elsewhere in this article.

2.  Raceways shall only be permitted when unable to place electrical components within wall/parapet.

Promotional activity signs

Repealed by 3826-4/09

 

 

 

(3334-6/97, 3360-6/97, 3826-4/09)

 

233.08 Exempt Signs
The following signs are exempt from the sign permit requirements of Section 233.04. These signs shall not be restricted by content and no fee, permit or application is required:

A.    Cornerstones (including names of buildings and dates of erection), and citations that are made an integral part of the structure.

B.     Signs not exceeding 0.5 square feet each posted by commercial establishments.

C.     Flags posted by any governmental agency.

D.    Signs posted by neighborhood safety organizations.

E.     Notices posted by a utility or other quasi-public agent in the performance of a public duty.

F.     Signs or notices posted by any court, public body or officer.

G.    Signs posted by property owners on private property, as required by law (including no trespass and legal notices).

H.    One sign, not over six square feet in area, may be posted at each door, loading dock, or other entrance facing a public street.

I.      One double-faced sign per each commercial parking entrance, not exceeding two square feet in area and four feet in height.

J.      Signs erected by a public agency.

K.    Signs manufactured as a standard, integral part of a mass-produced product accessory or display structure including telephone booths, vending machines, automated teller machines, and gasoline pumps.

L.     Signs within a building not visible from a public street and window signs not exceeding 20% of the visible area of a window (50% during December). No window sign shall be displayed above the second story.

M.    Signs required by the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA).

N.    Two signs (including, but not limited to, street numerals and “no solicitation” notices), not exceeding two square feet each, placed on any part of a building facing a public street.

O.    Temporary Signs. Temporary signs are permitted on private property where the property owner has granted permission for its display. Temporary signs are permitted in public rights-of-way, but not permitted in street medians or dividers, or affixed to trees, shrubs or other landscape materials. This signage shall not be restricted by content and shall be permitted as follows:

 

 

SITE CRITERIA

TYPE

MAX. NUMBER

MAX. SIGN AREA

MAX. SIGN HEIGHT

OTHER STANDARDS

Non-commercial signs on private property in all zones

F/S or Wall; no roof signs

N/A

8 sq. ft. total combined of all signs on a property

In all zones, 42 inches within front setback areas; 6 ft. in other areas

1.  Cannot create traffic or safety hazards; cannot encroach in the visibility triangular areas described in Section 230.88.

2.  In Commercial and Industrial Zones, F/S non-commercial signs are allowed only in landscaped areas and landscaped planters.

Non-commercial signs in public rights-of-way

F/S or Wall

N/A

N/A

N/A

1.  Cannot create traffic or safety hazards.

2.  Non-commercial signs in public rights-of-way may be posted no sooner than 50 days before an Election Day and must be taken down no later than 10 days following the Election Day. Non-commercial signs in public rights-of-way may be removed by anyone beginning the Friday after Election Day.

Real Estate Signs

 

 

 

 

 

Residential

F/S or Wall

1 per site

8 sq. ft.

6 ft.

1.  Cannot create traffic or safety hazards.

2.  May be erected no earlier than the date the property is placed on the market for sale, lease or rental, and is removed immediately after the sale, lease, or rental of the property which is defined as the close of escrow or execution of lease or rental agreement.

3.  No sign may be attached to the perimeter walls of residential communities.

Commercial Office District

F/S or Wall

1 per site

20 sq. ft.

10 ft.

12 ft.

1.  Cannot create traffic or safety hazards.

2.  May be erected no earlier than the date the property is placed on the market for sale, lease or rental, and is removed immediately after the sale, lease, or rental of the property which is defined as the close of escrow or execution of lease or rental agreement.

Commercial Industrial

F/S or Wall

1 per site

30 sq. ft.

12 ft.

1.  Cannot create traffic or safety hazards.

2.  May be erected no earlier than the date the property is placed on the market for sale, lease or rental, and is removed immediately after the sale, lease, or rental of the property which is defined as the close of escrow or execution of lease or rental agreement.

All Other Districts

F/S or Wall

1 per site

20 sq. ft.

10 ft.

1.  Cannot create traffic or safety hazards.

2.  May be erected no earlier than the date the property is placed on the market for sale, lease or rental, and is removed immediately after the sale, lease, or rental of the property which is defined as the close of escrow or execution of lease or rental agreement.

3.  Signs shall not be attached to the perimeter walls of residential communities.

Construction Signs

F/S or Wall

1 per site

32 sq. ft.

None

Is erected no earlier than the date a building permit is issued for the property, and is removed prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy or final inspection, whichever comes first.

Open House Signs

 

 

 

 

 

 

F/S or Wall

1 per site

6 sq. ft.

4 ft.

1.  Sign must be displayed adjacent to the entrance of a property or in the case of a residential subdivision at the immediate points of access to the property from an arterial, and is removed by sunset on any day it is erected.

2.  Placement shall not be in street medians, dividers, on street signs, traffic control devices and shall not obstruct the public right-of-way.

 

Flags

3 per site

2.5 sq. ft.

6 ft.

Must be displayed at the immediate points of access to a property or, in the case of a residential subdivision, from the immediate point of access from an arterial.

Pennants

 

 

30 sq. ft.

 

1.  Must be placed on light standards located on private property.

2.  Must have an 8-foot clearance from the ground.

3.  Must be removed within 5 business days of the completion of the City-sponsored event or theme.

(3334-6/97, 3360-12/97, 3826-4/09, 3872-3/10, 3881-8/10, 3927-1/12, 4047-5/15)

 

233.10 Prohibited Signs
A.    Canvas signs, banners, pennants, streamers, balloons or other temporary signs except as provided in Sections 233.08 (Exempt Signs), 233.16 (Subdivision Directional Signs) or 233.18 (Promotional Activity Signs).

B.     Mobile, A-frame, and portable signs and those of a similar nature which are not permanently attached to the ground or building except as provided in Section 233.18 or 233.20.

C.     Roof signs except those permitted under Section 233.18(D).

D.    Signs which resemble any official marker erected by the City, state, or any governmental agency, or which, by reason of position, shape, color or illumination would conflict with the proper functioning of any traffic sign or signal or would be a hazard to vehicular or pedestrian traffic.

E.     Signs which produce odor, sound, smoke, fire or other such emissions.

F.     Flashing, moving, pulsating, or intermittently lighted signs, mechanical movement signs, including searchlights, except electronic readerboards and public service signs such as those for time and temperature.

G.    Animals or human beings, live or simulated, utilized as signs.

H.    Projecting signs, except canopy or awning signs and under-canopy signs, subject to subsections 233.06(A) and 233.06(E).

I.      Signs which constitute a nuisance or hazard due to their intensity of light.

J.      Signs visible from and within 100 feet of an R district which are illuminated between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. unless they identify an establishment open for business during those hours.

K.    Off-premises signs, including billboards or advertising structures installed for the purpose of advertising a project, subject or business unrelated to the premises upon which the sign is located, except as permitted pursuant to Sections 233.14 (Readerboard Signs—Multiple Users) and 233.16 (Subdivision Directional Signs).

L.     Abandoned signs and signs which no longer identify a bona fide business conducted on the premises. Such signs shall be removed by the property owner within 60 days of the business’s closing date. The sign panel may be turned over (blank side out) if the sign complies with code.

M.    Signs located on public property, including signs affixed to utility poles, trees or projecting onto the public right-of-way, except otherwise exempt temporary signs pursuant to Section 233.08(O) and those required by law. This section shall not prohibit the placement of advertising panels on public service items including, but not limited to, trash receptacles, bicycle racks, bus benches, transit shelters, and telephone booths, within public rights-of-way or in publicly operated beaches or parks provided such items are placed in accord with an agreement granted by the City Council, and for such signs proposed in the coastal zone, subject to approval of a coastal development permit unless otherwise exempt.

N.    Vehicle signs, signs affixed to automobiles, trucks, trailers or other vehicles on public or private property for the purpose of advertising, identifying or providing direction to a use or activity not related to the lawful use of the vehicle for delivering merchandise or rendering service. Any such vehicle signs which have as their primary purpose to serve as a non-moving or moving display are prohibited.

O.    Within the coastal zone, signs that limit or prohibit public access to public coastal areas, public accessways and/or to public parks except, subject to approval of a coastal development permit, when necessary for public safety, no other feasible alternative exists, the signs are consistent with all other applicable local coastal program requirements, and are subject to a requirement that the signs shall be removed as soon as the public safety issue is resolved.

P.     Within the coastal zone, signs that adversely affect scenic and visual qualities of coastal areas and public parks shall be prohibited except, subject to approval of a coastal development permit, when necessary for public safety, no other feasible alternative exists, the signs are consistent with all other applicable local coastal program requirements, and are subject to a requirement that the signs shall be removed as soon as the safety issue is resolved. (3334-6/97, 3360-12/97, 3826-4/09, 3881-8/10, 3981-8/13, 4047-5/15)

 

233.12 Electronic Readerboards
Electronic readerboards are permitted subject to review by the Design Review Board, and approval of a conditional use permit by the Zoning Administrator.

A.    Required Findings. Prior to approving a conditional use permit to allow an electronic readerboard sign, the Zoning Administrator shall make the following findings:

1.     The proposed electronic readerboard sign conforms with the standards and criteria as set forth in this chapter;

2.     The proposed electronic readerboard sign is compatible with other signs on the site and in the vicinity;

3.     The proposed electronic readerboard sign will not adversely impact traffic circulation in adjacent rights-of-way or create a hazard to vehicular or pedestrian traffic; and

4.     The proposed electronic readerboard sign shall not have adverse visual impacts on adjoining commercial and/or residential neighborhoods.

 

B.     Readerboard Sign Criteria.

1.     Electronic readerboards may be freestanding or wall type signs.

2.     The maximum number of electronic readerboards shall be one per site.

3.     The maximum sign area shall be 115 square feet; 90 square feet for message center; and 25 feet for other information.

4.     The maximum height of a freestanding electronic readerboard sign shall be 25 feet.

5.     The electronic readerboard shall have cylinders, a shade screen and a photocell for reducing the intensity of lighting at night.

 

6.     The maximum measurable light output of the electronic readerboard shall not exceed 50 foot-candles at any property line.

C.     Location Requirements.

1.     Electronic readerboards shall only be allowed on parcels abutting a freeway and on parcels abutting Beach Boulevard, excluding the portion along Beach Boulevard designated as a landscape corridor south of Adams to Pacific Coast Highway.

2.     Minimum lot frontage: 200 feet.

3.     Minimum distance between electronic readerboards: 150 feet.

4.     Minimum distance to any residence: 150 feet.

D.    Other Standards.

1.     Where a site has an electronic readerboard, temporary banners, balloons, flags, etc., shall be permitted a maximum of 15 days per calendar year.

2.     Hours of operation: 6:30 a.m. to 10:30 p.m. At least 10% of the message time, or any percentage deemed necessary by the City for emergency conditions, shall be used for public service announcements.

3.     Messages in an electronic readerboard shall be no faster than one message every four seconds, and the minimum interval between messages shall be at least one second. Continuous motion of messages is not permitted.

4.     Light intensity changes (other than between day and night uses) are not permitted.

5.     In addition to the electronic readerboard sign, one monument sign, maximum of seven feet in height and a maximum 50 square feet in sign area, may be permitted and all other signage shall be brought into conformance with this chapter. (3334-6/97, 3360-12/97, 3711-6/05, 3826-4/09)

 

233.14 Readerboard Signs—Multiple Users
Off-site electronic readerboard signs may be permitted subject to review by the Design Review Board and approval of a conditional use permit by the Zoning Administrator. Approval of electronic readerboard signs shall be subject to the following:

A.    Required Findings. Prior to approving a conditional use permit to allow a multiple user electronic readerboard sign, the Zoning Administrator shall make the following findings:

1.     The proposed electronic readerboard sign conforms with the standards and criteria as set forth in the Huntington Beach Zoning and Subdivision Ordinance;

2.     The proposed electronic readerboard sign will not adversely impact traffic circulation in adjacent right-of-way or create a hazard to vehicle or pedestrian traffic.

B.     Multiple User Readerboard Sign Criteria.

1.     Multiple user electronic readerboard signs may be located at a site which is not the location of any of the parties using the sign for advertising.

2.     Multiple user electronic readerboard shall be freestanding.

3.     The maximum sign area shall be 1,200 square feet.

4.     The maximum height of a multiple user readerboard sign shall be 85 feet.

 

5.     The multiple user readerboard shall have cylinders or directional incandescent lamps and have a shade screen or louver system, a shade screen and a photocell for reducing the intensity of lighting at night.

C.     Lighting Standards.

1.     The maximum night time light intensity and illuminance shall conform to the following:

Maximum Night Time Intensity

 

Height from Ground (in feet)

5

10

20

30

50

70

85

Max. Intensity (x 1,000 lumens)

125

130

145

170

250

370

490

 

Maximum Night Time Illuminance

 

Land Use at Receptor Site

Residential

Commercial

Other

Max. Illuminance (foot-candles)

0.3

2.0

1.0

 

The maximum night time illuminance shall be measured at the receptor site, at ground level, by a direct reading, portable light meter. Measurements shall not be made within one hour after sunset or before sunrise.

2.     Illuminance shall be determined by the difference between a reading taken with the sign on and another reading taken within three minutes with the sign off.

3.     An illuminance chart shall be prepared by a licensed engineer and submitted to the director for approval prior to installation. Conformance with this section shall be verified by actual measurements made, as specified herein, after installation. The method of measurement and results shall be subject to approval of the director.

D.    Location Requirements.

1.     A multiple user readerboard shall be located no farther than 200 feet from a freeway.

2.     The minimum distance between multiple user readerboards shall be 1,000 feet.

3.     The sign shall be a minimum distance of 600 feet from residential properties.

E.     Other Standards.

1.     No off-site electronic readerboard will be permitted except for multiple users.

2.     At least 20% of the message time, or any percentage deemed necessary by the City for emergency conditions shall be used for public service announcements.

3.     Messages in a multiple user sign shall be no faster than one message every four seconds and the minimum interval between messages shall be at least one second.

4.     Light intensity changes (other than between day and night uses) are not permitted. (3334-6/97, 3360-12/97, 3711-6/05, 3826-4/09)

 

233.16 Subdivision Directional Signs
Subdivision directional signs shall contain only the name of a development, the developer, price information, and directional information for land development projects located within the City. Sign permits for off-site subdivision directional signs for land development projects shall be limited to no more than six off-site signs, and approval for such signs shall be subject to the following standards:

A.    Location Requirements.

1.     Signs shall not be located within any street medians, divides, or other public rights-of-way or on any property developed with residential uses other than that of the subdivision identified.

2.     Signs located on the same side of the street shall be a minimum of 600 feet from any other subdivision directional sign except a sign may be permitted on each corner of the intersection of arterial highways.

3.     Maximum Area and Height.

a.     64 square feet in area and 15 feet high provided there is a minimum 50-foot distance from any adjacent developed property.

b.     32 square feet in area and eight feet high provided there is a minimum 25-foot distance from any adjacent developed property.

B.     Permit Expiration. Sign permits issued for subdivision directional signs shall expire either one year from the date of issuance or on the date 90% of the project’s units have all been sold, leased, or rented for the first time, whichever is sooner. Annual renewals may be granted for such time as units still exist for sale; however, no more than one directional sign is allowed after 90% of the units are sold, leased or rented.

C.     Street Widening. When a sign conflicts with street widening or construction, it shall be removed upon written notice at no cost to any public agency.

D.    Required Bond. Prior to the issuance of a building permit, the applicant shall file a cash bond in an amount set by resolution of the City Council. The full bond amount shall be refunded if the sign structure is removed and the site restored to its original condition within 15 days after the expiration of the permit. If the sign structure is not removed, the City shall remove the sign and its supporting structure with the cost deducted from the cash bond, and any remainder refunded. (3334-6/97, 3826-4/09)

 

233.18 Promotional Activity Signs
A.    Promotional activity signs may be placed on a site subject to the issuance of a temporary sign permit by the director, and provided that such signs comply with all of the standards set forth in this section, and provided such signs do not create safety hazards or block signs identifying adjoining establishments.

B.     A temporary sign permit for a promotional activity sign, banners, pennant or pennants, unless otherwise specified, shall be valid for a maximum of 90 days in any calendar year and shall not be renewable.

C.     Promotional activity banners shall not exceed one square foot of banner area for each linear foot of building frontage and in no case shall the total banner area exceed 100 square feet. Pennants shall be limited to a maximum of one square foot for each pennant.

D.    A promotional activity banner, as permitted above, shall not be affected by the issuance of a grand opening promotional activity sign permit during the same calendar year. The size of a grand opening promotional activity banner shall not exceed the size specified in Section 233.18(C).

E.     Promotional activity signs, banners, and pennants shall be maintained and not be in a condition of disrepair. Disrepair shall include torn, faded or sagging signs.

F.     The director may approve a temporary sign permit for a promotional sign, to be displayed on a site with electronic readerboards up to a maximum of 15 days per calendar year.

G.    Vehicle sales businesses and automobile dealerships located on Beach Boulevard may, without first obtaining a temporary use permit from the director, display promotional activity signs, banners, pennants, and car-top signs that comply with the following standards:

1.     Eighteen-inch non-metallic helium balloons and large non-metallic inflatables may be displayed on the weekends (Friday 9:00 a.m. through Sunday 12:00 midnight), provided they do not project over the public right-of-way.

2.     Automobile dealerships on Beach Boulevard shall be permitted to display flags, pennants, banners and car-top signs throughout the year.

H.    Vehicle sales businesses and automobile dealerships located on Beach Boulevard shall obtain a temporary sign permit for the use of large displays and inflatables larger than 18 inches in diameter. The displays and inflatables shall be affixed directly to the ground or roof of a building. The displays and inflatables shall be limited to a maximum of 12 weekends per calendar year. (3334-6/97, 3360-12/97, 3826-4/09)

 

233.20 Planned Sign Program
A.    A Planned Sign Program shall be submitted to the director when required by Section 233.04(B). Such program shall be reviewed and approved by the director prior to issuance of any building permit. The purpose of the Planned Sign Program is to encourage coordinated and quality sign design as well as to permit more flexible sign standards for commercial and industrial centers.

B.     The standards of Section 233.06 shall be used as a guide in the design of a Planned Sign Program. The property owner shall designate a person or firm as the primary liaison with the City for the purpose of submitting sign permit requests in conformance with the approved Planned Sign Program.

C.     Planned sign program applications shall be submitted to the Planning Division and shall include the following:

1.     A site plan, drawn to scale, depicting the precise locations of all buildings and signs;

2.     Drawings and/or sketches indicating the exterior surface details of all buildings on the site on which wall signs, directory signs, or projecting signs are proposed;

3.     Written text describing the specific sign criteria for the property. The program shall, at minimum, include provisions regulating sign height, area, sign type, colors, design and location;

4.     A statement of the reasons for any requested modifications to the provisions or standards of this chapter; and

5.     The name, address, and telephone number of the person or firm responsible for administering the Planned Sign Program.

D.    A Planned Sign Program may include more than one freestanding sign per parcel or other deviations from the standards of this chapter, provided that the total sign area does not exceed the area otherwise permitted by Section 233.06 by more than 10%, or by 30% for multiple automobile franchises occupying the same lot, and commercial businesses with 50,000 square feet or more of floor area. In approving a Planned Sign Program, the director shall find that the proposed signs are compatible with the style or character of existing improvements on the site and are well related to each other, reflecting a common theme and design style.

E.     The director may require any reasonable conditions necessary to carry out the intent of the Planned Sign Program. For developments with existing signs, a schedule or phasing plan for bringing such signs into conformance with the Planned Sign Program shall be submitted and become part of the approval of the Planned Sign Program. A cash bond may be required to guarantee their modification or removal. (3334-6/97, 3360-12/97, 3527-2/02, 3826-4/09)

 

233.22 Miscellaneous Signs and Provisions
A.    Signs within the Downtown Specific Plan or located in any other specific plan areas shall comply with any additional requirements outlined within the plan itself and any applicable design guidelines.

B.     Non-commercial murals, non-commercial large graphic designs, and statuary shall be subject to review by the director for the sole purpose of ensuring that such displays will not pose a hazard to public health, safety or welfare.

C.     No window or contiguous window panes shall be covered by paper or painting signs that exceed 20% of the total area of that window; however, windows may be covered up to 50% during the month of December. (3334-6/97, 3360-12/97, 3826-4/09)

 

233.24 Nonconforming Signs
A.    Continuation of Use. A nonconforming sign may be maintained on site after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title, provided that the nonconforming sign is not:

1.     Changed to another nonconforming sign; or

2.     Structurally altered so as to extend its useful life; or

3.     Expanded or altered as defined in Section 233.28, except that a change of sign panel/face may be permitted provided the items of information on the sign (i.e., business name) remain the same; or

4.     Reestablished after discontinuance for 90 days or more; or

5.     Reestablished after damage or destruction of more than 50% of the sign value at the time of such damage or destruction.

B.     Signs replaced or requested to be modified at the owner’s initiative shall comply with all current provisions of this chapter unless the director approves a sign code exception, a limited sign permit or Planned Sign Program. (3334-6/97, 3360-12/97, 3826-4/09)

 

233.26 Code Compliance
A.    Signs shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter, the Uniform Building Code and National Electric Code, as adopted by the City.

B.     Any sign by design, location or configuration that violates this chapter or creates a pedestrian or vehicle hazard is deemed to be a public nuisance and subject to enforcement under this Code and/or the Huntington Beach Municipal Code.

C.     Penalty. No person, firm, corporation or other legal entity shall maintain, place, erect, or permit any sign to be displayed in violation of this chapter. Violations are a misdemeanor and are punishable as provided in Chapter 249, Enforcement, of the Huntington Beach Zoning and Subdivision Code. (3334-6/97, 3360-12/97, 3826-4/09)

 

233.28 Definitions
The following definitions shall apply to the provisions in this chapter. General definitions are contained in Chapter 203.

Abandoned Sign. A sign which no longer directs, advertises or identifies a legal business establishment, product or activity on the premises where such sign is displayed.

Alteration. Any change of copy, sign face, color, size, shape, illumination, position, location, construction, or supporting structure of any sign.

Animated Sign. Any sign which is designed to give a message through a sequence of progressive changes of parts or lights or degree of lighting.

Area of Sign.

1.     The area included within the outer dimensions of a sign (excluding structural supports).

2.     For freestanding signs, sign area shall be calculated on one face of the sign, provided a sign face on a double-sided sign is not separated from the opposite side of the sign by more than 12 inches at any point.

3.     For illuminated awning or canopy signs, sign area shall be calculated around the sign copy only.

4.     For signs without a border or frame (channel or skeleton letters), the area shall be within a rectangle or eight continuous straight lines (with right angles) formed around the extreme outer limits of the sign message, including all figures and any background or color which is an integral part of the sign.

 

 

SIGN AREA

 

SIGN

 

 

 

 

 

AREA

 

 

Awning. A shelter supported entirely from the exterior wall of a building and composed of non-rigid materials except for the supporting framework.

Awning Sign. A sign painted on, printed on, or attached flat against the surface of an awning.

Banner Sign. A temporary sign composed of fabric or flexible material with no enclosing frame.

Bonus Sign. An internally illuminated freestanding sign designed with opaque sign faces/panels, and illumination for items of information only.

Building Frontage. The linear extent of a building or business which has frontage on either a street or parking area. Only one side of the building facing the street or parking area shall be used to determine the maximum sign area.

Business Identification Sign. A sign which serves to identify only the name and address of the premises, business, building or portion of building upon which it is located and includes no other advertising such as product lists, phone numbers and hours of operation. Logos may also be permitted.

Canopy. A permanent roof-like structure which extends along and projects beyond the wall of a building, or is freestanding as common in service stations, and is generally designed and constructed to provide protection from the weather.

Changeable Copy Sign. A sign or portion thereof with characters, letters or illustrations that can be changed manually or electrically without altering the face or surface of the sign.

Channel Letters. Individual letters or figures, illuminated or non-illuminated, affixed to a building or freestanding sign structure.

Construction Sign. A temporary sign identifying the persons, firms or businesses directly connected with a construction or development project and may include the name of the future site occupant.

Directional Sign. An on-premises incidental sign designed to guide or direct pedestrian or vehicular traffic.

Electronic Readerboard. A changeable message sign consisting of a matrix of lamps which are computer controlled.

Exposed Neon. Neon tubing used for lighting in signs and other building identification such as raceways and accent lighting.

Exposed Raceway. Visible tube or box behind a wall sign used to house electrical wiring for the wall sign.

Flashing Sign. An illuminated sign which contains an intermittent or sequential flashing light source or any other such means to attract attention. This definition is not intended to include “changeable copy signs” or “animated signs.”

Freestanding Sign. A sign permanently attached to the ground and which does not have a building as its primary structural support. This includes ground signs, pole signs and monument signs.

Grand Opening. A promotional activity not exceeding 90 calendar days used by newly established businesses to inform the public of their location and services.

Ground Sign. See Freestanding Sign.

Illegal Sign. A sign which was erected without obtaining a permit as required by this chapter, that does not meet the requirements of the ordinance codified in this title, or has not received legal nonconforming status.

Incidental Sign. A small sign pertaining to goods, products, services or facilities which are available on the premises where the sign occurs and intended primarily for the convenience of the public.

Indirect Illumination. A light cast on the surface of a sign from an exterior source.

Industrial Center. Any site containing three or more industrial activities.

Integrated Development. A development or site comprised of one or more parcels served by common accessways, driveways, parking and landscaping.

Interior Illumination. Any sign face which is artificially lit from the inside.

Item of Information. Each word, design, symbol, or figure.

Limited Sign Permit. A permit approved by the director that permits a temporary sign used to advertise a short-term special activity or sale, i.e., grand opening, under new ownership, fall sale, etc., and maintenance or modification to the face or copy of a nonconforming sign to extend a use of the sign for a time period deemed appropriate by the director, but not to exceed two years.

Logo. A trademark or company name symbol.

Mansard. A sloped roof or roof-like facade.

Marquee. See Canopy.

Monument Sign. A freestanding sign with a solid base.

Moving Sign. Any sign or device which has any visible moving part, visible revolving part, or visible mechanical movement.

Name Plate Sign. An attached sign which designates the names and/or address of a business, and/or the words “entrance” or “exit.”

Non-commercial Sign. A sign that does not have a message that is commercial in nature, such as, but not limited to, signs that are political in nature, social issues, religious messages, beliefs, candidates, or other non-commercial content. Non-commercial signs do not include:

a.     Signs that promote the sale, lease or exchange of goods, services, or property.

b.     Signs that identify or attract attention to any place which sells, leases, or exchanges goods, services or property.

c.     Signs that identify or attract attention to any club, nonprofit facility, governmental office or facility, or other such place where a person, group of persons, or organization is engaged in any activity involving interaction with the general public or a significant portion thereof, whether for income purposes or not.

“Non-commercial Sign” does not include Directional Signs or Construction Signs as defined in this Section.

Nonconforming Sign. A sign which was erected legally but does not comply with provisions of the current sign ordinance.

Off-Site Sign. Any sign which advertises goods, products, services or facilities not sold, produced, manufactured or furnished on the premises on which the sign is located. These signs are also known as outdoor advertising, billboards, and poster panels.

On-Site Sign. A sign which pertains to the use(s) of the site on which it is located.

Open House Sign. A sign which identifies a building for sale or lease which is open and available for inspection.

Planned Sign Program. A required component for certain sign permits that incorporates coordinated and quality sign design elements and is reviewed and approved by the director.

Point of Purchase Display. Advertising of a retail item accompanying its display, e.g., an advertisement on a product dispenser.

Pole Sign. See Freestanding Sign.

Portable Sign. Any sign not permanently attached to the ground or a building.

Projecting Sign. A sign which is attached to and projects from the wall of the building more than 18 inches and which has its display surface perpendicular to such wall, to the structure to which it is attached.

Promotional Activity Sign. A temporary sign used to advertise a short-term special activity or sale, i.e., grand opening, under new ownership, fall sale, etc.

Public Access Signage. Signage that directs the general public to the coast or sea and/or public amenities available for general public use.

Public right-of-way shall mean the area across, along, beneath, in, on, over, under, upon, and within the dedicated public alleys, boulevards, courts, lanes, roads, sidewalks, streets, and ways within the City, as they now exist or hereafter will exist.

Public Service Information Sign. Any sign intended primarily to promote items of general interest to the community such as time, temperature, date, atmospheric conditions, news or traffic control, etc.

Real Estate Sign. Any temporary sign indicating that the premises on which the sign is located is for sale, lease or rent.

Roof Sign. An attached sign constructed upon or over a roof, or placed so as to extend above the visible roofline; or a freestanding sign which is greater in height than the building it serves to identify.

Rotating Sign. Any sign or portion thereof which physically revolves about an axis.

Sign. Any medium for visual communication, including its structure and component parts, which is used or intended to be used to attract attention.

Sign Code Exception. A deviation to some of the specifications set forth in this chapter that is approved by the director.

Sign Copy. Any words, letters, numbers, figures, designs or other symbolic representation incorporated into a sign for the purpose of attracting attention.

Sign Height. Measurement from the adjacent sidewalk or curb to the highest portion of the sign, including architectural elements.

Site. One or more parcels of land identified by the assessor’s records where an integrated building development has been approved or proposed. The site shall include all parcels of land contained within or a part of the development application.

Site Frontage. The length of a lot or parcel of land along or fronting a street.

Special Events Sign. A temporary sign advertising or pertaining to any civic, patriotic, or special event of a general public interest taking place within the City.

Subdivision Directional Sign. A sign providing direction to a land development project pursuant to this chapter.

Supergraphic. A painted design which covers an area greater than 10% of a wall, building facade, or other structure.

Temporary Sign. A sign which is installed for a limited time and is not constructed or intended for long-term use.

Temporary Window Sign. A sign painted or constructed of paper or other lightweight material and affixed to the interior or exterior side of a window or glass area on a building for a limited time.

Wall Sign. Any sign which is attached or erected on the exterior, posted, or painted or suspended from or otherwise affixed to a wall of a building including the parapet, with the display surface of the sign parallel to the building wall, and which does not project more than 18 inches from the building, or project above the height of the wall or parapet.

Window Sign. A sign in which the name, address, phone number, or hours of operation are applied directly to the window of a business, or a sign visible through the window from the street.

 



 



(3334-6/97, 3360-12/97, 3826-4/09, 4047-5/15)

 

233.30 Message Substitution
The owner of any sign which is otherwise allowed by this Chapter may substitute non-commercial copy in lieu of any other commercial or non-commercial copy. The purpose of this provision is to prevent any inadvertent favoring of commercial speech over non-commercial speech, or favoring any particular non-commercial message over any other non-commercial message. (4047-5/15)

 

Chapter 234 MOBILEHOME PARK CONVERSIONS
234.02 Applicability
A.    All findings required for removal of the MHP overlay zone shall also be applied to requests for rezoning existing RMP districts to different zoning districts, and for any change of use as hereinafter defined.

B.     All findings required for removal of the MHP overlay, rezoning from RMP or change in use shall be required for all property upon which a mobile home park then exists, or upon which a mobile home park existed at any time within the preceding five years.

 

234.04 Definitions
Words and phrases whenever used in this chapter shall be construed as defined herein unless from the context a different meaning is intended and more particularly directed to the use of such words and phrases.

Affordable Unit. A unit that is sold to and occupied by a low or moderate income household. Affordable unit shall also mean a rental unit for which the monthly payment does not exceed 25% of the household’s gross income for low income households or 30% of the household’s gross income for moderate income households.

Applicant. The person, firm, corporation, partnership, or other entity having leasehold interest or fee ownership in the operation of a mobile home park.

Change of Use. Use of the park for a purpose other than the rental or the holding out for rent of two or more mobile home sites to accommodate mobile homes used for human habitation, and shall not mean the adoption, amendment, or repeal of a park rule or regulation. “Change of use” may affect an entire park or any portion thereof, and such “change of use” shall include, but is not limited to, a change of a park or any portion thereof to a condominium, stock cooperative, planned unit development, commercial use, industrial use, or vacant land.

Eligible Owner. Any mobile home owner owning a mobile home in a park at the time of issuance of the notice of intent to change use, but shall not include any mobile home owner who is renting his/her unit to another party at such time.

Manufactured Home. Shall mean the same as mobile home as used in this chapter.

Market Rate Unit. A residential unit that is sold on the open market without constraints imposed on the sales price, rental rate, or buyer qualifications.

Mobile Home. A structure designed for human habitation and for being moved on a street or highway under permit pursuant to the California Vehicle Code Section 35790. Mobile home does not include a recreational vehicle, as defined in the California Civil Code Section 799.24, or a commercial coach, as defined in Health and Safety Code Section 18218.

Mobile Home Park. An area of land where two or more mobile home sites are rented, or held out for rent, to accommodate mobile homes used for human habitation. Mobile home park shall not include a mobile home subdivision of stock cooperative.

Mobile Home Space. Any area, tract of land, site, lot, pad or portion of a mobile home park designated or used for the occupancy of one mobile home.

Notice of Intent to Change Use. Notification as required by California Civil Code Section 798.56(g)(2).

Senior Citizen Unit. A residential unit which meets the standards for an affordable unit which is situated in a project that is designed to accommodate senior citizens through special financing programs and/or modified development standards. (3595-1/03, 3689-12/04)

 

234.06 Removal of MHP Overlay or RMP Zone or Change of Use
The City Council shall not approve a zone change for any parcel when such change would have the effect of removing the MHP or RMP designation from that property, or approve a change of use unless the following findings have been made:

A.    That all applicable requirements as set forth in California Government Code Section 66427.4, or 65863.7, whichever is applicable, have been completed.

B.     That the proposed zoning is consistent with the General Plan of the City of Huntington Beach and all elements thereof; and for projects located within the coastal zone that the proposed zoning is consistent with the Land Use Plan portion of the Local Coastal Program.

C.     That the proposed change of land use will not have an adverse effect upon the goals and policies for provision of adequate housing for all economic segments of the community, as set forth in the Housing Element of the Huntington Beach General Plan.

D.    That the property which is the subject of the zone change would be more appropriately developed in accordance with uses permitted by the underlying zoning, or proposed zoning.

E.     That a notice of intent to change the use of a mobile home park and relocate mobile home owners was delivered to such owners and to the Department of Community Development at least 18 months prior to the date the mobile home owner is required to vacate the premises.

F.     The zone change shall not become effective unless a Local Coastal Program amendment is effectively certified by the Coastal Commission. (3334-6/97, 3595-1/03)

 

234.08 Mitigation of Adverse Impacts and Reasonable Costs of Relocation—Relocation Assistance Plan
A.    Consistent with California Government Code Section 65863.7(e), the applicant shall take steps to mitigate the adverse impact of the conversion, closure or cessation of use on the ability of displaced mobile home park residents to find adequate housing in a mobile home park. These required steps shall not exceed the reasonable cost of relocation as detailed in paragraph 1 of this subsection.

1.     Relocation Costs. All eligible mobile home owners shall be entitled to receive the cost of relocation. As used in this section, the reasonable costs of relocation shall include the cost of relocating displaced homeowners’ mobile/manufactured home, accessories and possessions to comparable mobile/manufactured home park within 20 miles of its existing location, including costs of disassembly, removal, transportation, and reinstallation of the mobile/manufactured home and accessories at the new site, and replacement or reconstruction of blocks, skirting, siding, porches, decks, awnings or earthquake bracing if necessitated by relocation; reasonable living expenses of displaced park residents from the date of actual displacement until the date of occupancy at the new site; payment of any security deposit required at the new site; and the difference between the rent paid in the existing park and any higher rent at the new site for the first 12 months of the relocated tenancy.

2.     Mobile Home Purchase. If the mobile home cannot be relocated to a comparable mobile/manufactured home park within 20 miles of its existing location, and the homeowner has elected to sell his or her mobile/manufactured home, the reasonable costs of relocation shall include the cost of purchasing the mobile/manufactured home of a displaced homeowner, including any optional equipment and/or tag-a-longs and expando rooms at its in-place value. Such value shall be determined after consideration of relevant factors, including the value of the mobile/manufactured home in its current location, assuming the continuation of the mobile/manufactured home park in a safe, sanitary and well maintained condition and not considering the effect of the change of use on the value of the mobile/manufactured home, but at no time shall the value of the mobile/manufactured home be less than the replacement cost of a new home of similar size and square footage.

B.     Extensions of Time—In-Park Relocation.

1.     The applicant may grant one six-month extension to the length of time given to the mobile home owners in the notice of intent to change use by notifying the mobile home owners of such extension at least four months prior to the date specified in such notice. The extension shall be granted for no more and no less than six months.

2.     An applicant may, with the consent of the mobile home owner, transfer a mobile home unit to another space in the park. Such transfer shall not constitute permanent relocation, and the cost of all such moves shall be borne by the applicant, including reasonable living expenses of the residents from the date of actual displacement until the date of occupancy at the new site. All damages to the home incurred during the relocation shall be immediately repaired or replaced by the applicant.

C.     In order to facilitate the intentions of the mobile home owners and an applicant for a change of use with regard to a change of use, the parties may agree to mutually satisfactory relocation assistance. To be valid, such an agreement shall be in writing, shall include a provision stating that the mobile home owner is aware of the provisions of this chapter, shall include a copy of this chapter as an attachment, shall include a provision in at least 10-point type which clearly states the right to seek and the importance of obtaining an attorney’s advice prior to signing the agreement, and shall be drafted in form and content otherwise required by applicable state law. No mobile home owner signing a relocation assistance agreement provided for in this subsection may contest the adequacy of the conversion impact report at the hearing on such report. Any mobile home owner signing such an agreement may rescind it in writing within 10 days of signing it. Any such agreement which is procured by fraud, misrepresentation, coercion or duress, of any kind, shall be void and unenforceable.

D.    No benefits shall be provided to any person who is renting a mobile home from the park owner (who owns the mobile home) where such tenant shall have executed a written agreement with such park owner waiving his or her rights to any such benefits. No such waiver shall be valid, unless it contains the text of this section, and unless such tenant shall have executed a written acknowledgment that he or she has read and understands his or her rights pursuant to this chapter and knowingly agrees to waive them.

E.     No waiver by an eligible mobile home owner of any of his/her rights pursuant to this section shall be valid or effective for any purpose except with regard to a relocation assistance agreement as provided in subsection C of this section.

F.     Alternative Housing. If the mobile home owner cannot be relocated in accordance with the procedures contained herein, the applicant has the option of making available suitable, and acceptable, alternative housing, together with compensation, to such mobile home owner.

Where alternative housing is proposed, it shall be available in the following categories:

1.     Senior citizen housing;

2.     Affordable housing; and

3.     Market rate housing.

G.    Compensation Appeals. Appeals from the amount of compensation to be given a mobile home owner shall be filed with the applicant within 30 days after the mobile home owner has notice of the amount he/she is to receive. The applicant shall acknowledge any appeal within 30 days, and if an agreement cannot be reached, the matter shall be referred to a professional arbitrator.

H.    Purchase Rights. The mobile home owners shall receive written guarantee of first-right-of-refusal to purchase units if the development which replaces the mobile home park is to be residential in whole or in part.

I.      Miscellaneous. That the applicant has complied with all applicable City ordinances and state regulations in effect at the time the relocation assistance plan was approved.

That the applicant has complied with the conditions of approval, including the following items:

1.     Mobile home owners will not be forced to relocate prior to the end of their leases.

2.     Mobile home owners have been given the right to terminate their leases upon approval of the relocation assistance plan.

3.     Demolition or construction will not occur until the relocation assistance plan is approved and the 18-month notification period has expired. (3689-12/04)

 

234.09 Application for Exemption from Relocation Assistance Obligations
A.    Any person who files an application for change of use of a mobile home park may, simultaneous with such application, file an application for total or partial exemption from the obligation to provide relocation assistance.

B.     If such application is filed, notice of such application, with the information contained therein, and distribution thereof to the owners and residents of the mobile home park shall be provided with the application for change of use.

C.     Any such application shall state that it is made on either or both of the following bases:

1.     That provision for relocation assistance would eliminate substantially all reasonable use or economic value of the property. Such basis may only be established if it is demonstrated that the imposition of such obligations would eliminate the reasonable use or economic value of the property for alternate uses, and that continued use of the property as a mobile home park would eliminate substantially all reasonable use or economic value of the property for reasons not caused or contributed by the park owner or applicant.

2.     That a court of competent jurisdiction has determined in connection with a proceeding in bankruptcy that the closure or cessation of use of said property as a mobile home park is necessary, and that such court has taken further action which would prohibit or preclude payment of relocation assistance benefits, in whole or in part.

D.    Any such application made pursuant to subsection (C)(1) shall contain, at a minimum, the following information:

1.     Statements of profit and loss from the operations of the mobile home park for the most recent five-year period of the date of the application or request, certified by a certified public accountant. All such statements shall be maintained in confidence as permitted by the California Public Records Act.

2.     If the applicant contends that continued use of the property as a mobile home park necessitates repairs or improvements or both, that are not the result of the park owner or applicant’s negligent failure to properly maintain said property, and that the costs thereof makes continuation of the park economically infeasible, a statement made under penalty of perjury by a general contractor licensed as such pursuant to the laws of the State of California certifying that such contractor has thoroughly inspected the entire mobile home park; that such contractor has determined that certain repairs and improvements must be made to the park to maintain the park in decent, safe and sanitary condition, and that those certain repairs are not the result of the park owner or applicant’s negligent failure to properly maintain said property; the minimum period of time in which such improvements or repairs must be made; and itemized statement of such improvements and repairs; and the estimated cost thereof of repairs and improvements, if any, due to deferred maintenance separately identified. The applicant shall also submit a statement verified by a certified public accountant as to the necessary increase in rental rates of mobile home spaces within the park within the next five years necessary to pay for such repairs or improvements that are not the result of the park owner or applicant’s negligent failure to properly maintain said property. If the director requires an analysis of the information submitted by the general contractor, the director may procure services of another such licensed general contractor to provide such written analysis, and the cost thereof shall be billed to and payment therefor shall be required from the applicant.

3.     The estimated total cost of relocation assistance which would otherwise be required to be provided pursuant to this chapter, which shall be based upon documented surveys, included with the application, of the available mobile home spaces within 20 miles of the mobile home park, residents of the park who are willing to relocate and those who would elect to sell their mobile homes, and the value of the mobile homes in the park.

4.     An estimate of the value of the mobile home park by a qualified real estate appraiser if the park were permitted to be developed for the change of use proposed in the application for redevelopment of the park, and an estimate of the value of such park by such appraiser if use of the property as a mobile home park is continued.

5.     Such other information which the applicant believes to be pertinent, or which may be required by the director.

E.     Any such application filed pursuant to subsection (C)(2) of this section shall be accompanied by adequate documentation as to the title, case number, and court in which the bankruptcy proceeding was held, and copies of all pertinent judgments, orders, and decrees of such court. (3689-12/04)

 

234.10 Acceptance of Reports
The final form of the impact of conversion report and relocation assistance plan will be as approved by the Planning Commission. The reports, if acceptable, shall remain on file with the director for review by any interested persons. Each of the mobile home owners shall be given written notification within 10 days of approval of the relocation assistance plan.

 

234.12 Actions of Planning Commission
At the conclusion of its hearing, noticed as provided in this Code, the Planning Commission shall approve, conditionally approve, or deny said impact of conversion report and relocation assistance plan pursuant to the provisions of this article, and such decision shall be supported by a resolution of the Planning Commission, setting forth its findings.

 

234.14 Fees Required
Each impact report and relocation assistance plan submitted shall be accompanied by a fee established by resolution of the City Council.

 

Chapter 235 RESIDENTIAL CONDOMINIUM CONVERSIONS
235.02 Definitions
The following definitions shall apply to the provisions of this chapter except where the context indicates otherwise. General definitions are contained in Chapter 203.

Affordable Unit. A residential unit, sold to or occupied by a tenant earning up to 100% of Orange County’s gross median income, as determined by the County of Orange, and shall include any subsequent change in such income range, adopted by the Housing Agency of Orange County.

Applicant. The owner, developer, subdivider or authorized agent of a project.

Date of Approval. The date the Zoning Administrator, Planning Commission, or City Council on appeal, approves the conditional use permit and tentative subdivision or parcel map applications. However, if the project is located in appealable area of the coastal zone and includes action on a Coastal Development Permit, Section 248.30 shall apply.

Date of Conversion. The date a final map for a project was approved by the City Council or parcel map for a project was approved by the City Engineer.

Project. An existing apartment house, apartment complex, apartment hotel, hotel, multiple dwelling or group dwelling proposed for conversion to a condominium, community apartment, or stock cooperative.

Tenant. One or more persons. (3334-6/97, 3657-9/04)

 

235.04 Permits Required
A.    In addition to the applicable requirements and procedures set forth in Title 25, Subdivisions, conversions of existing rental housing to condominiums, community apartments, stock cooperatives and any other subdivision which is a conversion of existing rental housing shall be subject to the additional requirements of this chapter. Conversions shall be subject to conditional use permit approval by the Planning Commission pursuant to Chapter 241. Within the coastal zone, a Coastal Development Permit shall also be required.

B.     Exception for apartments and stock cooperatives with two to four units on a parcel that were sold as condominium units without approval of a conditional use permit and tentative parcel map prior to June 1, 2004: the provisions of Title 25, Subdivisions, and only Sections 235.02, 235.04, 235.06(B), 235.08(A) through (C), and 235.16 herein shall apply. A conditional use permit subject to approval by the Zoning Administrator shall be required. In addition, an inspection by a City of Huntington Beach Building and Safety Inspector shall be required to verify compliance with the minimum construction standards of Section 235.08(A) and to determine if there are any obvious health and safety code violations.

C.     Conversion of lower or moderate-income rental housing developed with federal, state or local assistance shall not be permitted. Within the coastal zone no visitor serving use, including hotel use, shall be converted to condominium, community apartment, stock cooperative, or time share. (3334-6/97, 3657-9/04)

 

235.06 Required Reports and Information
In addition to the conditional use permit, Coastal Development Permit (where applicable), and tentative map applications, the applicant shall submit the reports and/or information required by this section. The cost of all reports shall be paid by the applicant. The reports shall include information on what improvements, if any, shall be accomplished by the developer and when such improvements shall be completed. All improvements cited in the reports, whether required or voluntary, shall be considered conditions of approval.

A.    Physical Elements Report. A report on the physical elements of all structures and facilities shall be submitted, containing the following:

1.     A report by a California licensed structural engineer, civil engineer or architect, describing in detail the structural condition, any evidence of soils problems, code violations, useful life, and any apparent deferred maintenance of all elements of the property, including, but not limited to, foundations, electricity, plumbing, utilities, walls, ceilings, windows, frames, recreational facilities, sound transmissions of each building, mechanical equipment, parking facilities, and drainage facilities. Such report also shall describe the condition of refuse disposal facilities; swimming pools, saunas, and fountains; stone and brickwork; fireplaces; and exterior lighting. The level of compliance with the standards listed in Section 235.08(A) shall also be described in detail.

2.     A report by a California licensed mechanical contractor detailing the age, condition, size, and the cost of replacement for each appliance and mechanical equipment for heating and cooling. The report shall identify any defective or unsafe appliances and set forth the proposed corrective measures to be employed.

3.     A report by a California licensed structural termite and pest control specialist certifying whether or not all attached or detached structures are free of infestation and structural damage caused by pests and dry rot. The report shall describe what procedures would be necessary to eliminate infestation or damage, if present. Any infestation shall be remedied prior to sale.

4.     A report by a California licensed painting contractor verifying the condition of the painting throughout the project, including building interior and exterior surfaces and an estimate of the remaining physical life of the paint. A statement that new paint (minimum 20-year warranty) will be applied on all building interior and exterior surfaces may take the place of such report. Such statement shall include the brand name of the paint and the exterior colors to be used.

5.     A report by a California licensed roofing contractor verifying the condition of the roofs of all structures and an estimate of the remaining physical life of the roofs and the cost of replacement. A statement that new roof material will be applied may take the place of such report. Such statement shall include the specifications of the proposed roofing material.

B.     Covenants, Conditions and Restrictions. A declaration of the covenants, conditions, restrictions, and rules and regulations which would be applied on behalf of any and all owners of condominium units within the project shall be submitted. The declaration shall include, but not be limited to the conveyance of units; the assignment of parking and storage areas; and an agreement for common area maintenance, together with an estimate of any initial assessment fees anticipated for such maintenance, and an indication of appropriate responsibilities for the maintenance of all utility lines and services for each unit. The CCRs shall be approved as to form by the City Attorney and recorded in the office of the County Recorder.

C.     Conversion Plan. Specific information concerning the demographic and financial characteristics of the project shall be submitted, including, but not limited to, the following:

1.     The date of construction of all elements of the project, and the date and description of each major repair or renovation of any structure or structural element, since the date of construction. For purposes of this subsection, “major repair” shall mean any repair for which an expenditure of more than $5,000.00 was made.

2.     A statement of a major use of said project since construction.

3.     A statement regarding current ownership of all improvements and the underlying land.

4.     The square footage and number of rooms in each unit.

5.     The rental rate history for each type of unit for the previous two years.

6.     The monthly vacancy rate for each month during the preceding two years.

7.     A complete list of the number of tenants and tenant households in the project, including the following information:

a.     Households with persons 62 years or older;

b.     The family size of households, including a breakdown of households with children five years and younger; and between five and 18 years;

c.     Households with handicapped persons;

d.     The length of residence;

e.     The designation of low- and moderate-income households and whether any are receiving federal or state rent subsidies.

When the subdivider can demonstrate that demographic information is not available, this requirement may be modified by the director.

8.     The proposed price of each of the units.

9.     The proposed homeowners’ association budget, detailed to include fixed costs, operating costs, reserves, administration, and contingencies.

10.   A statement of intent as to the types of financing programs to be made available, including any incentive programs for existing residents.

11.   The method to be implemented to ensure availability of affordable units to tenants.

12.   Signed copies from each tenant of the notice of intent to convert, as specified in this chapter. The applicant shall submit evidence that a certified letter of notification was sent to each tenant for whom a signed copy of such notice is not submitted.

D.    Vacancy Rate Analysis. A citywide vacancy rate analysis for multiple-family rental units for the past 12 months shall be submitted.

E.     Acceptance of Reports. The final form of the physical structure elements report, conversion plan, and other documents shall be approved by the Planning Commission. The reports in their acceptable form shall remain on file with the department for review by any interested person. (3334-6/97, 3657-9/04)

 

235.08 Condominium Conversion Standards
A.    Minimum Construction Standards. The project shall be brought into compliance with the minimum construction standards as listed below unless the Building Official approves an alternate method of construction. Prior to recordation of the final map or parcel map, applicable building permits shall be obtained, constructed and receive final inspection approval for all issues identified in this section and for any health and safety code violations.

1.     For all structures built prior to February 1, 1985, draft stops shall be installed in attics to create horizontal areas that are 3,000 square feet or less. For all structures built after February 1, 1985, draft stops shall be in attics above and in line with the walls separating individual units.

2.     Each unit shall have access to the electrical branch circuits that serve the unit.

3.     Smoke detectors shall be installed and operating. All existing hard-wired units shall be in working order and the remaining detectors shall be located per currently adopted code and may be battery or hard-wired operated.

4.     Ground Fault Circuit Interrupter (GFCI) protection shall be provided where required by the currently adopted electric code.

B.     Compliance with Zoning Provisions. The project shall comply with the parking requirements of Chapter 231, and landscape improvements shall comply with Chapter 232. For apartments and stock cooperatives with two to four units on a parcel that were sold as condominium units without approval of a conditional use permit and tentative parcel map prior to June 1, 2004, a reduction in these development standards may be granted when an applicant agrees to pay an affordable housing in-lieu fee to off-set the loss of affordable rental housing stock. The fee shall be paid according to a resolution adopted by City Council.

C.     Refurbishing and Restoration. All main buildings, structures, fences, patio enclosures, carports, accessory buildings, sidewalks, driveways, landscaped areas, and additional elements as required by the Planning Commission (or Zoning Administrator for exempted units as defined in Section 235.04) shall be refurbished and restored as appropriate for a high standard of appearance, quality, and safety.

D.    Affordable Housing. Where a project consists of three units or more, the applicant shall agree to sell or rent at affordable prices 25% of the total units to low- and moderate-income households, with a minimum of 20% of the affordable units affordable to low-income households for a period of 60 years. If the units are to be made available for purchase, the maximum sales price of units intended for low- or moderate-income households shall not exceed 2.5 times the annual median income for such households as defined by the California Health and Safety Code, Section 50093. Resale controls shall be included as a deed restriction. If the units are to be for rent, the maximum rent allowed shall keep the units within the low- or moderate-income housing stock. (3657-9/04)

 

235.10 Tenant Benefits and Notification
A.    Notices of Intent. Applicants for condominium conversions shall give notice of intent to convert to existing tenants and prospective tenants as required by Sections 66452.8 and 66452.9 of the California Government Code. The notice of intent shall be posted on-site in at least one location readily visible to tenants.

B.     Notices of Public Hearing and Decisions.

1.     The department shall notify the residents of the public hearing not less than 10 days prior to the proposed hearing date on the application. The notice shall include notification of the tenant’s right to appear and be heard. The department shall notify the residents of the decision of the Planning Commission within 10 days and shall include a copy of all conditions imposed on the project. The list of names and addresses of the residents of each unit in the conversion project shall be current as of the day of submittal and shall be certified as such by the applicant. Service shall be by mail at the expense of the applicant.

2.     Final Map or Parcel Map Approval. The applicant shall give written notification to each tenant within 10 days of approval of the final map or parcel map. The applicant shall also provide notice of application for public report, as issued by the California State Department of Real Estate, which shall be available on request.

C.     Tenants’ Discounts. Any present tenant of any unit at the time of an application for conversion shall be given a nontransferable right of first refusal to purchase the unit occupied at a discount of the price offered to the general public. The amount of the discount shall be based on the longevity of each tenant, and shall be ratified by the applicant at the time of conversion.

D.    Vacation of Units. Each non-purchasing tenant, not in default under the obligations of the rental agreement or lease under which the subject unit is occupied, shall have not less than 120 days after the date of the tentative map approval by the City or until the expiration of the tenant’s lease to find substitute housing and to relocate. Tenants shall be permitted to terminate leases or tenancy with one month’s notice at any time after a conversion application.

E.     No Increase in Rent. A tenant’s rent shall not be increased within two months prior to a project application, nor shall the rent be increased for two years from the time of the filing of the project application or until relocation takes place. In addition, all non-purchasing tenants 62 years old or older and all non-purchasing medically-proven permanently disabled tenants shall receive a lifetime lease. Rents for such tenants shall not be increased for two years after the filing of the project application.

F.     Moving Expenses. The applicant shall provide moving expenses equal to three times the monthly rent to any tenant, in compliance with all the terms of the subject lease and/or financing, who relocates from the building to be converted after City approval of the use permit authorizing conversion of the units. When the tenant has given notice of his intent to move prior to City approval of the use permit, eligibility to receive moving expenses shall be forfeited.

G.    Relocation Assistance. Relocation assistance shall be provided by the applicant to non-purchasing tenants for a minimum period of four months following the tentative map approval. Information on available rental units in the same general area with costs comparable to the preconverted apartments shall be provided by the applicant on a calendar quarterly basis. Copies of the list shall be posted on-site, dated, and provided to the department. The following non-purchasing tenants shall receive a minimum of 12 months’ relocation time, measured from the tentative map approval, to find replacement housing:

1.     Tenants with low or moderate incomes; and

2.     Tenants with minor children in school.

H.    Discrimination. No discrimination in the sale of any unit shall be based on race, color, creed, national origin, sex, or age, and a statement to this effect shall be included in the covenants, conditions, and restrictions. Projects created exclusively for the purpose of providing senior citizen housing shall be exempted from this requirement. (3657-9/04)

 

235.12 Effect of Proposed Conversions on the City’s Low- and Moderate-Income Housing Supply
In reviewing requests for the conversion of existing apartments to condominiums, the Planning Commission (or Zoning Administrator for exempted units as defined in Section 235.04) shall consider the following:

A.    Whether displacement of tenants, if the conversion is approved, would be detrimental to the health, safety, or general welfare of the community;

B.     The role the rental units play in the existing housing rental market and whether they serve low- and moderate-income households; and

C.     The need and demand for lower-cost home ownership opportunities which are increased by the conversion of apartments to condominiums. (3657-9/04)

 

235.14 Bonus for Including Low- and Moderate-Income Housing
Consistent with the requirements of Section 65915.5 of the California Government Code, the City shall offer a density bonus or other incentives of equivalent financial value to condominium conversions including low- or moderate-income housing units or lower-income household units. When an applicant for approval to convert apartments to a condominium project agrees to provide at least 33% of the total units of the proposed condominium project to persons of low or moderate income, as defined in Section 50093 of the California Health and Safety Code, or 15% of the total units to lower-income households, as defined in Section 50079.5 of the California Health and Safety Code, the Planning Commission shall either (1) grant a 25% density bonus or (2) provide other incentives of equivalent financial value. Any density bonus or other incentives of equivalent financial value provided under this section shall be governed by the requirements of Section 235.08.

A.    For purposes of this section, “density bonus” means an increase in units of 25% over the number of apartments permitted and provided within the existing structure or structures proposed for conversion. “Other incentives of equivalent financial value” shall not be construed to require the City to make any cash transfer payments or other monetary compensation to the applicant, but may include the reduction or waiver of any required fees for the condominium conversion standards prescribed in Section 235.08.

B.     No applications for a density bonus shall be accepted if the apartments proposed for conversion constitute a housing development for which a density bonus was provided under the provisions of Section 230.14. (3657-9/04)

 

235.16 Findings
The Planning Commission (or Zoning Administrator for exempted units as defined in Section 235.04) may approve an application for a condominium conversion if it finds that the proposed conversion meets the following requirements:

A.    That all the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act, this chapter, and other applicable provisions of this title are met; and

B.     That the proposed conversion is consistent with the General Plan and any applicable specific plan; and

C.     That the proposed conversion will conform to the provisions of this ordinance in effect at the time of the project approval, except as otherwise provided in this chapter; and

D.    That the overall design and physical condition of the condominium conversion achieves a high standard of appearance, quality, and safety; and

E.     That either (1) the proposed conversion will not displace a significant percentage of low- or moderate-income, permanently or totally disabled, or senior citizen tenants or delete a significant number of low- and moderate-income rental units from the City’s housing stock at a time when no equivalent housing is readily available in the Huntington Beach area, or (2) the applicant agrees to pay an affordable housing in-lieu fee pursuant to Section 235.08(B); and

F.     That the dwelling units to be converted have been constructed and used as rental units for at least five years prior to the application for conversion; and

G.    That the applicant has not engaged in coercive, retaliatory action regarding tenants after the submittal of the first application for City review through the date of approval; and

H.    That either (1) the project is not located within the coastal zone, or (2) the project is located within the coastal zone and the existing use to be converted is not a visitor serving use (including hotels). (3334-6/97, 3657-9/04)

 

Chapter 236 NONCONFORMING USES AND STRUCTURES
236.02 General Provisions
A.    A nonconforming structure or use shall not be enlarged, increased or intensified except as provided in this chapter. If any such use ceases, the subsequent use of such land, structure or building site shall be in conformance with the regulations specified by this Code.

B.     A nonconforming use shall not be resumed, reestablished, or reopened after it has been abandoned, discontinued or changed to a conforming use.

C.     A nonconforming use shall be deemed to be discontinued or abandoned when such use has ceased to operate or to exist for a period of six months.

D.    A nonconforming use which is not housed in any structure, but occupies a lot or portion of a lot, shall not be enlarged or extended to any other portion of the lot or any other lot not so occupied at the time the use became classified as nonconforming.

E.     A nonconforming use occupying either a conforming structure or nonconforming structure or portion thereof shall not be extended to any portion of the structure not so occupied at the time the use became nonconforming. (3254-11/94)

 

236.04 Destruction of a Nonconforming Structure or Use
These provisions shall govern reconstruction of the nonconforming structures and/or uses listed below after such structure or use is destroyed by fire, explosion, act of nature or act of the public enemy by the percentage of value specified.

A.    Nonconforming structures and nonconforming uses destroyed 50% or less of the value prior to damage may be completely rebuilt.

B.     Nonconforming residential uses consisting of 10 or less units destroyed more than 50% of the value may be completely rebuilt.

C.     Nonconforming residential uses consisting of more than 10 units destroyed more than 50% of the value may be completely rebuilt subject to conditional use permit approval by the Planning Commission provided current requirements for setback and parking are met. (3254-11/94)

 

236.06 Alterations to a Nonconforming Structure or Use
A.    Interior alterations and/or repairs may be made which do not enlarge the square footage or increase the height of a nonconforming use. Reroofing for health and safety purposes may also be permitted.

B.     A structure for a nonconforming use shall not be enlarged or altered on the exterior in any manner unless:

1.     All aspects of the existing structure and the proposed addition are made to conform to applicable provisions of this Code, or

2.     The director permits such alteration subject to neighborhood notification pursuant to Chapter 241 and the following findings:

a.     That the alteration is necessary to secure added safety or reduce the fire hazard or to improve the aesthetic appearance of the structure’s architecture by bringing the design into greater conformance with the surrounding neighborhood.

b.     That the alteration or addition will not increase the number of stories.

c.     That the alterations will not cause the floor area to exceed more than 10% of the floor area the structure contained at the time the use became nonconforming.

C.     Nonconforming structures may be altered or enlarged provided that the alteration or enlargement is in conformance with applicable provisions of Titles 21 and 22.

D.    Additions to nonconforming structures proposed to be constructed at the existing nonconforming yard setbacks shall be subject to director approval and neighborhood notification pursuant to Chapter 241.

E.     The area of enlargement to a nonconforming structure in any five-year period shall not exceed 50% of the area of the structure as it exists on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. (3254-10/94, 3528A-2/02, 3679-12/04)

 

236.08 Sex-Oriented Businesses
A.    Any sex-oriented business lawfully operating on the effective date of Ordinance No. 3378 that is in violation of Section 212.04 of this Code shall be deemed a nonconforming use. A nonconforming use will be permitted to continue for a period of three years with possible one-year extensions (maximum extensions of five years) to be granted by the Planning Commission only upon a convincing showing by the applicant of extreme financial hardship which is defined as the recovery of the initial financial investment in the nonconforming use, unless sooner terminated for any reason or voluntarily discontinued for a period of 30 days or more. Such nonconforming uses shall not be increased, enlarged, extended or altered except that the use may be changed to a conforming use. If two or more sex-oriented businesses are within 750 feet of one another and otherwise in a permissible location, the sex-oriented business which was first established and continually operating at the particular location is the conforming use and the later established business(es) is nonconforming.

B.     A sex-oriented business lawfully operating as conforming use is not rendered a nonconforming use by the location, subsequent to the grant of a sex-oriented business zoning permit, of a building used for religious assembly, school, park and recreational facility or any property zoned RL, RM, RMH, RH, RMP, and any properties with equivalent designations under any specific plan within 500 feet of the sex-oriented business.

C.     Any application for a building permit to operate a sex-oriented business in a location that is in violation of Section 212.04 that is filed prior to, but approved after the effective date of Ordinance No. 3378 shall be deemed a nonconforming use pursuant to subsection A of this section. Any such building permit shall be in effect subject to the applicable zoning regulations in effect prior to the effective date of Ordinance No. 3378. (3378-2/98)

Title 24 ZONING CODE—ADMINISTRATION
Chapter 240 ZONING APPROVAL—ENVIRONMENTAL REVIEW—FEES AND DEPOSITS
240.02 Zoning Approval
To ensure that each new or expanded use of a site and each new, expanded, reconstructed or structurally altered structure complies with Titles 20 through 23, zoning approval shall be required prior to issuance of a building, grading, coastal development or demolition permit, certificate of occupancy, business license, or utility service connection. If any grading or scraping is proposed as part of a project, a survey of existing topography on the site and adjacent land within five feet of the site boundaries and any proposed changes in topography shall be submitted to the director for review and approval prior to issuance of a building permit, grading permit, or demolition permit. The contours of the land shall be shown at intervals of not more than five feet. Grading or stockpiling which involves 25,000 cubic yards or more of import or export shall be referred to the Planning Commission for review and approval prior to issuance of the grading or stockpile permit. (3334-6/97)

 

240.04 Environmental Review
A.    Purpose. The purpose of this section is to implement the California Environmental Quality Act of 1970 (CEQA). This section shall apply to all permits or entitlements, not otherwise exempt, requiring discretionary action by the City. The City Council shall by resolution adopt policies, objectives, criteria, and procedures regulating environmental evaluation of public and private projects. This section and the provisions adopted by resolution provide the basic principles, objectives, criteria, procedures, and definitions to ensure consistent implementation of the California Environmental Quality Act.

B.     Establishment of Environmental Assessment Committee. There is hereby established an Environmental Assessment Committee consisting of the Director of Community Development, the Director of Public Works, and the City Attorney, or a designated representative of each. A quorum shall require at least two members.

C.     The Environmental Assessment Committee shall have responsibility for evaluating the environmental impact of all discretionary projects, determine the appropriate environmental documentation required for compliance with CEQA and make recommendations to the discretionary body to adopt or deny a negative declaration or environmental impact report, consistent with state and local law.

D.    Administration. The director shall be responsible for:

1.     Preparing and processing all environmental documents necessary to comply with CEQA, the guidelines of the California State Resources Agency as authorized under the Public Resources Code Section 21083, and such additional provisions as may be adopted by the City of Huntington Beach; and

2.     Contracting for private, professional consultation for preparation of environmental impact reports.

E.     Environmental Determination. Prior to any project approval, the discretionary body shall first act upon the negative declaration or the environmental impact report (EIR). The discretionary body acting on the project may adopt the negative declaration or may reject it and require an environmental impact report. The discretionary body may certify the environmental impact report or reject it, if deemed incomplete.

F.     Mitigation Measures. Any feasible change or alteration to the project which avoids or substantially lessens the significant environmental impacts identified in the negative declaration or final EIR shall be incorporated as a condition of approval imposed on the project. The condition of approval shall also describe the time period and the manner in which the mitigation measure must be satisfied.

G.    Monitoring and Reporting Program. The City requires a reporting or monitoring program be prepared to ensure compliance of mitigation measures during project implementation. The project applicant shall be responsible for ensuring completion of the program and shall submit to the City reports indicating the status of compliance. The City may obtain or require an independent analysis of any completed reports submitted as required by a mitigation measure. The cost of the analysis shall be paid by the project applicant.

Prior to final inspection the monitoring program report shall be completed and accepted by the City. A separate report may be required for each phase of a project constructed in phases.

H.    Appeal. Any decision of the committee may be appealed to the discretionary body which has original jurisdiction over approval of the project as provided in this Code. The appeal shall be heard prior to the discretionary body’s action on the project.

 

240.06 Fees and Deposits
All persons submitting applications for any permits, certificates, development agreements, map approvals, or zoning map or text amendments, or any other approvals as required by this ordinance code, or filing appeals, shall pay all fees and/or deposits as provided by the City Council’s resolution or resolutions establishing applicable fees and charges.

 

Chapter 241 CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS AND VARIANCES—TEMPORARY USE PERMITS—WAIVER OF DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
241.02 Procedures Established
This chapter establishes procedures for approval, conditional approval, or disapproval of applications for conditional use permits, and variances, temporary use permits, and waivers of development standards, and neighborhood notification.

A.    Conditional use permits are required for use classifications typically having unusual site development features or operating characteristics requiring special consideration so that they may be designed, located, and operated compatibly with uses on adjoining properties and in the surrounding area.

B.     Variances may be granted to resolve practical difficulties or unnecessary physical hardships that may result from the size, shape, or dimensions of a site or the location of existing structures thereon; from geographic, topographic, or other physical conditions on the site or in the immediate vicinity; or from street locations or traffic conditions in the immediate vicinity of the site.

Variances may be granted with respect to fences, walls, landscaping, screening, site area, site dimensions, yards, height of structures, distances between structures, open space, off-street parking and off-street loading, and performance standards.

C.     Temporary use permits may be granted for temporary use classifications and for other uses of temporary nature.

D.    Waivers of certain development standards may be granted to improve project design, subject to limitations.

E.     Neighborhood notification is a procedure that shall notify property owners and tenants within a 300-foot radius when no entitlement is required. (3712-6/05)

 

241.04 Authority of Planning Commission and Zoning Administrator
The Planning Commission or the Zoning Administrator, as the case may be, shall approve or conditionally approve applications for conditional use permits or variances upon finding that the proposed conditional use permit or variance is consistent with the General Plan, and all applicable requirements of the Municipal Code, consistent with the requirements of Section 241.10. The Planning Commission shall act on all variances except the Zoning Administrator may act on variances not exceeding 20% deviation from site coverage, separation between buildings, height, setback, parking, and landscape requirements. (3334-6/97, 3410-3/99, 3712-6/05)

 

241.06 Initiation
Applications for conditional use permits and variances shall be initiated by submitting an application and necessary accompanying data as prescribed by the director and the required fee.

 

241.08 Notice and Public Hearing
A.    Public Hearing and Notice Required. The Planning Commission or Zoning Administrator shall hold a duly-noticed public hearing on an application for a conditional use permit or variance consistent with the requirements of Chapter 248.

B.     Multiple Applications. When applications for multiple conditional use permits or variances on a single site are filed at the same time, the director may schedule a combined public hearing.

 

241.10 Required Findings
An application for a conditional use permit or variance may be approved or conditionally approved if, on the basis of the application, plans, materials, and testimony submitted, the Planning Commission or Zoning Administrator finds that:

A.    For All Conditional Use Permits.

1.     The establishment, maintenance and operation of the use will not be detrimental to the general welfare of persons working or residing in the vicinity nor detrimental to the value of the property and improvements in the neighborhood.

2.     The granting of the conditional use permit will not adversely affect the General Plan.

3.     The proposed use will comply with the provisions of the base district and other applicable provisions in Titles 20 through 25 and any specific condition required for the proposed use in the district in which it would be located.

B.     For Variances.

1.     The granting of a variance will not constitute a grant of special privilege inconsistent with limitations upon other properties in the vicinity and under an identical zone classification.

2.     Because of special circumstances applicable to the subject property, including size, shape, topography, location or surroundings, the strict application of the zoning ordinance is found to deprive the subject property of privileges enjoyed by other properties in the vicinity and under identical zone classification.

3.     The granting of a variance is necessary to preserve the enjoyment of one or more substantial property rights.

4.     The granting of the variance will not be materially detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to property in the same zone classification and is consistent with the General Plan.

C.     Mandatory Denial. Failure to make all the required findings under subsection A or B of this section shall require denial of the application.

 

241.12 Conditions of Approval
In approving a conditional use permit or variance, conditions may be imposed as necessary to:

A.    Make it consistent with the General Plan;

B.     Protect the public health, safety, and general welfare; or

C.     Ensure operation and maintenance of the use in a manner compatible with existing and potential uses on adjoining properties or in the surrounding area.

 

241.14 Effective Date—Appeals
A conditional use permit or variance shall become effective 10 days after action by the Planning Commission or Zoning Administrator, unless appealed in accord with Chapter 248.

 

241.16 Time Limit—Transferability—Discontinuance—Revocation
A.    Time Limit. A conditional use permit or variance shall become null and void one year after its date of approval or at an alternative time specified as a condition of approval after its date of approval unless:

1.     Construction has commenced or a certificate of occupancy has been issued, whichever comes first; or

2.     The use is established; or

3.     The conditional use permit or variance is extended.

B.     Transferability. The validity of a conditional use permit shall not be affected by changes in ownership or proprietorship provided that the new owner or proprietor applies to the director for a transfer. No notice or public hearing on a transfer shall be required.

C.     Discontinuance. A conditional use permit shall lapse if the exercise of rights granted by it is discontinued for 12 consecutive months.

D.    Revocation. A conditional use permit that is exercised in violation of a condition of approval or a provision of this ordinance may be revoked, as provided in Section 249.06.

E.     Extension of Time. A conditional use permit or variance may be extended by the director for a one-year period without notice or public hearing, if the findings required by Section 241.10 remain valid.

 

241.18 Changed Plans—New Application
A.    Changed Plans. A request for changes in conditions of approval of a conditional use permit or variance, or a change to development plans that would affect a condition of approval shall be treated as a new application. A request for changes to plans which will not affect a condition of approval may be approved by the director if the change is not substantial, use of property remains the same, the revision results in an improved development, and the density remains the same. Notice of the director’s approval shall be posted and distributed to the Planning Commission and the City Council within 48 hours of such decision.

B.     New Application. If an application for a conditional use permit or variance is disapproved, no new application for the same, or substantially the same, conditional use permit or variance shall be filed within one year of the date of denial of the initial application, unless the denial is made without prejudice.

 

241.20 Temporary Use Permits
A temporary use permit authorizing certain temporary use classifications, as defined in Chapter 204 and as listed in the land-use controls for the base districts in which the use will be located, and use of manufactured homes for temporary construction offices, shall be subject to the following provisions:

A.    Application and Fee. A completed application form and the required fee shall be submitted to the director. The director may request any other plans and materials necessary to assess the potential impacts of the proposed temporary use.

B.     Director. The director shall act on temporary uses held for four or fewer consecutive days that do not include live entertainment. The director shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny a complete application within a reasonable time. No notice or public hearing shall be required for uses which are held for four or fewer consecutive days. Such uses shall be approved with a temporary activity permit.

C.     Duties of the Zoning Administrator. The Zoning Administrator shall act on temporary uses held for more than four days or that include live entertainment. The Zoning Administrator shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny a complete application within a reasonable time.

D.    Required Findings. The application shall be approved as submitted, or in modified form, if the Director or Zoning Administrator finds:

1.     That the proposed temporary use will be located, operated and maintained in a manner consistent with the policies of the General Plan, and if located within the coastal zone, consistent with the policies of the Local Coastal Program, and the provisions of this chapter; and

2.     That approval of the application will not be detrimental to property or improvements in the surrounding area or to the public health, safety or general welfare.

E.     Conditions of Approval. In approving a temporary use permit, the Director or the Zoning Administrator may impose reasonable conditions necessary to:

1.     Be consistent with the General Plan and in the coastal zone to be consistent with the Local Coastal Program;

2.     Protect the public health, safety, and general welfare; or

3.     Ensure operation and maintenance of the temporary use in a manner compatible with existing uses on adjoining properties and in the surrounding area.

F.     Bond for Temporary Uses. A $500.00 cash bond shall be required to guarantee removal of any structure, clean up of site upon termination of the temporary use, and to guarantee maintenance of the property. A $1,000.00 cash bond shall be required for a subdivision sales office and each model home to guarantee compliance with all provisions of Titles 17 and 20 through 25.

G.    Effective Date—Duration—Appeals. An approved temporary (conditional) use permit shall be effective 10 days after the date of its approval, unless appealed in accord with Chapter 248. The permit shall be valid for a specified time period not to exceed 30 days unless a longer period is granted by the Zoning Administrator. A temporary use permit shall lapse if not used within the dates approved and may be revoked by the Zoning Administrator effective immediately upon verbal or written notice for violation of the terms of the permit. Verbal notice shall be confirmed by written notice mailed to the permit holder within 48 hours. The Zoning Administrator may approve changes in a temporary use permit. (3528B-2/02, 3712-6/05)

 

241.22 Waiver of Development Standards
A.    Standards Which Can Be Waived. The director may waive development standards for setbacks, open space, separation between buildings, height of buildings or fences, site coverage and landscaping without a conditional use permit or a variance, only if he or she finds that such a waiver improves project design and does not exceed 10% deviation. No other standards shall be subject to this waiver provision.

B.     Time Limit. A waiver shall become null and void six months after date of approval.

C.     Extensions. A waiver shall not be extended for more than one year unless the applicant demonstrates that no circumstances relevant to the approval of the waiver, including other development in the neighborhood, have changed from the time of approval.

D.    Limitations. A waiver may not be granted if the waiver would in any way degrade the environment or result in any changes to classification of land use or density. Also, projects not otherwise subject to discretionary review (i.e., conditional use permit, variance, Coastal Development Permit, or subdivision approval) may not apply for waiver.

E.     Decisions and Appeals. The director’s decision may be appealed in accord with Chapter 248. The director’s decision shall be distributed to the City Council, Planning Commission, and Zoning Administrator within 48 hours of such decision. (3528B-2/02, 3712-6/05)

 

241.24 Neighborhood Notification
When no entitlement is required and the use requires such notification as stated in the Zoning and Subdivision Ordinance or Downtown Specific Plan, the review and approval process shall include an Administrative Permit and notification to property owners and tenants within a 300-foot radius of the subject property.

Notification requirements are as follows:

A.    Notification. Ten working days prior to submittal for a building permit or certificate of occupancy or approval for initial establishment of the use, the applicant shall notice property owners and tenants by first class mail.

B.     Notice of application shall include the following:

1.     Name of applicant.

2.     Location of planned development or use, including address (map is optional).

3.     Complete description of the proposed development or use such that there is full disclosure in the notice.

4.     The Community Development Department phone number and address of City Hall where plans may be reviewed.

5.     The date by which any comments must be received in writing by the Community Development Department and City appeal procedures.

6.     The Community Development Department shall receive entire list including name and address of those receiving the mailing.

C.     Notice of Action. The director’s decision shall be made in writing with information regarding the appeal process and sent to the applicant and the City Council on the next business day and posted on the City’s website.

D.    Appeals. The director’s decision may be appealed in accord with Chapter 248. (3712-6/05, 4098-10/16)

 

Chapter 244 DESIGN REVIEW
244.02 Applicability
Design review is required for all projects pursuant to any other provision of this Zoning and Subdivision Ordinance and for all projects located within redevelopment areas, specific plans as applicable, areas designated by the City Council, City facilities or projects abutting or adjoining City facilities, projects in or abutting or adjoining OS-PR and OS-S districts, and General Plan primary and secondary entry nodes. (3529-2/02, 3680-12/04, 3873-3/10)

 

244.04 Duties of the Design Review Board
The Design Review Board shall assist the director, Planning Commission and Zoning Administrator in reviewing development plans and architectural drawings within designated geographic areas of the City and to undertake such other review and approval as provided by this Code.

A.    Organization. The Board shall consist of five members interviewed by Council liaisons and approved by the City Council.

1.     No person is eligible for membership on the Board unless that person is a resident of the City at the time of appointment to the Board. If during a term of office, a member moves his or her place of residence outside of the City limits, his or her office shall immediately become vacant.

2.     One current Planning Commissioner chosen by the Planning Commission. An alternate Commissioner may be designated by the Planning Commission.

3.     At least four of the five members shall have training, education or work experience in design-related fields including, but not limited to, architecture, landscaping, art, urban/environmental design and aesthetics.

4.     One current member of the Historic Resources Board chosen by the Historic Resources Board. An alternate may be designated by the Historic Resources Board.

5.     The City Council may designate alternate members as it deems necessary so long as the alternate members meet all membership requirements.

B.     Terms of Office.

1.     At-Large Members. The term of office for at-large members shall be four years from the date of appointment by the City Council. No at-large member shall serve more than two consecutive terms. At-large members serve until their respective successors are appointed and qualified. An at-large member may be removed prior to the expiration of his or her term by a motion adopted by the City Council.

2.     Planning Commission Member. The term of the Planning Commission member shall expire when such member ceases to be a member of the Planning Commission. A Planning Commission member may be removed prior to the expiration of his or her term by a motion adopted by the Planning Commission. Members may serve until their respective successors are appointed and qualified.

3.     Historic Resources Board Member. The term of the Historic Resources Board member shall expire when such member ceases to be a member of the Historic Resources Board. A Historic Resources Board member may be removed prior to the expiration of his or her term by a motion adopted by the Historic Resources Board. Members may serve until their respective successors are appointed and qualified.

C.     Powers and Duties. It shall be the duty of the Board to review sketches, layouts, site plans, structural plans, signs, and architectural drawings in connection with any matter before the Board. The Board shall have authority to confer with the applicant or property owner concerning modifications of the proposal, or conditions necessary to approval, and may approve, disapprove, or conditionally approve the proposal. The Board may recommend any matter before them to the discretionary body for consideration of the project. (3873-3/10)

 

244.06 Scope of Review
A.    In making its determination, the Board shall review and consider:

1.     The arrangement and relationship of proposed structures and signs to one another and to other developments in the vicinity;

2.     Whether that relationship is harmonious and based on good standards of architectural design;

3.     The compatibility in scale and aesthetic treatment of proposed structures with public district areas;

4.     The adequacy of proposed landscaping;

5.     Elements of design affecting the performance characteristics of the proposed development; and

6.     Whether energy conservation measures have been proposed and the adequacy of such measures, including, but not limited to, the use of active and passive solar energy systems.

B.     The Board may impose and/or recommend any conditions deemed reasonable and necessary to the approval of the proposed development plan. (3873-3/10)

 

244.08 Required Plans and Materials
Plans and materials to fully describe and explain the proposed development shall be submitted as required by the application form or by the director, as deemed necessary.

 

244.09 Time Limit—Transferability—Discontinuance
A Design Review Board recommendation shall become null and void one year after its date of Director approval. If the initial application is in association with another discretionary permit said permit shall become null and void one year after the final action of the hearing body. (3680-12/04, 3873-3/10)

 

Chapter 245 COASTAL DEVELOPMENT PERMIT
245.02 Specific Purpose
The purpose of the Coastal Development Permit (CDP) is to implement the California Coastal Act of 1976 (Division 20 of the Public Resources Code) as amended, in accordance with the City’s Local Coastal Program. The provisions of this chapter shall apply in the Coastal Zone, as defined by the Coastal Act.

 

245.04 Definitions
The following definitions shall apply to any project within the Coastal Zone. In case of conflicts with other provisions of the code, the definitions in this section shall prevail for any development requiring a CDP.

Aggrieved Person. Any person who, in person or through a representative, appeared at a public hearing or by other appropriate means prior to action on a Coastal Development Permit, informed the City of his or her concerns about an application for such permit, or who, for good cause, was unable to do either, and who objects to the action taken on such permit and wishes to appeal such action to a higher authority.

Appealable Area. That area between the sea and the first public road paralleling the sea or within 300 feet of the inland extent of any beach or the mean high tide line of the sea where there is no beach, whichever is greater, tidelands, submerged lands, public trust lands, that area within 300 feet of the top of any coastal bluff, and that area within 100 feet of any wetland, estuary or stream.

Appealable Development. Approval of any proposed development within an “appealable area” and approval or denial of any development which constitutes a “major public works project” or a “major energy facility.” Appealable development may be appealed to the California Coastal Commission in accord with the regulations adopted by the Commission.

Applicant. The person, partnership, corporation, or state or local government agency applying for a Coastal Development Permit.

Approving Authority. The director, Zoning Administrator, Planning Commission, City Council, or the California Coastal Commission whichever approves a Coastal Development Permit.

Categorical Exclusion. An exception from the requirements of a Coastal Development Permit as identified in the Certified Coastal Land Use Plan and Public Resources Code Sections 30610(e) and 30610.5.

Coastal Commission. The California Coastal Commission.

Coastal Development Permit (CDP). A permit issued by the City or the California Coastal Commission in accord with the provisions of this chapter. A Coastal Development Permit includes all application materials, plans and conditions on which the approval is based.

Coastal Zone. That portion of the coastal zone, as established by the California Coastal Act of 1976 and as it may subsequently be amended, which lies within the City, as indicated on a map on record with the Department of Community Development.

Development. The placement or erection of any solid material or structure on land, in or under water; discharge or disposal of any materials; grading, removing, dredging, mining, or extraction of any materials; change in the density or intensity of use of land, including, but not limited to, subdivision pursuant to Section 66410 of the Government Code, and any other division of land, including lot splits, except where the land division is brought about in connection with the purchase of such land by a public agency for public recreation use; and change in the intensity of use of water, or of access thereto; construction, reconstruction, demolition, or alteration of the size of any structure, including any facility of any private, public, or municipal utility; and the removal or harvesting of major vegetation.

Exclusion Areas. The geographic area of the coastal zone of the City except for tide and submerged lands, beaches and lots immediately adjacent to the inland extent of any beach, or of the mean high tide line of the sea where there is no beach, in a wetland, estuary, stream, river or within 100 feet of such areas, or any areas defined as “environmentally sensitive habitats” or their buffers by the certified land use plan and so designated on the land use plan maps, or on slopes greater than 20%, and all areas within 300 feet of the top of the seaward face of any coastal bluff, and all lands and waters subject or potentially subject to the public trust.

Local Coastal Program (LCP). The City’s land-use plans, zoning ordinance, zoning map, and implementing actions certified by the Coastal Commission pursuant to the Coastal Act and adopted by the City Council for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of the Coastal Act.

Major Energy Facility. Any energy facility as defined by Public Resources Code Section 30107 and California Code of Regulations Section 13012.

Major Public Works Project. Any public works project as defined by California Code of Regulations Section 13012.

Public Works. Public facilities and infrastructure, including:

1.     All production, storage, transmission, and recovery facilities for utilities subject to the jurisdiction of the California Public Utilities Commission, except for energy facilities;

2.     All public transportation facilities, including streets, roads, highways, mass transit facilities and stations and bridges, public parking lots and structures, ports, harbors, airports, railroads, and other related facilities;

3.     All publicly financed recreational facilities.

4.     All community college facilities.

 

245.06 Permit Required
A.    Any person, partnership, or corporation, or state or local government agency wishing to undertake development in the coastal zone shall obtain a Coastal Development Permit in accord with the provisions of this chapter, unless exempt or categorically excluded. Such permit must be issued prior to the start of development and shall be required in addition to any other permits or approvals required by the City.

B.     All development within the coastal zone requires a Coastal Development Permit unless specifically exempted or excluded. After certification of the LCP, the City shall issue all Coastal Development Permits for development not located within the Coastal Commission’s original permit jurisdiction. The Coastal Commission’s original permit jurisdiction includes all tidelands, submerged lands, or public trust lands whether filled or unfilled unless the Coastal Commission has delegated original permit jurisdiction to the City for areas potentially subject to the public trust but which are determined by the Coastal Commission to be filled, developed, and committed to urban use pursuant to Section 30613 of the Coastal Act. Development located in the Coastal Commission’s original permit jurisdiction requires approval of a Coastal Development Permit issued by the Coastal Commission in accordance with the procedure as specified by the California Coastal Act.

1.     Coastal Permit Issued by the Coastal Commission. Developments on tidelands, submerged lands, or navigable waterways require a permit issued by the California Coastal Commission in accordance with the procedure as specified by the California Coastal Act.

2.     Coastal Permits Issued by the City. All development requires a Coastal Development Permit unless specifically exempted or excluded. After certification of the LCP, the City shall issue all Coastal Development Permits for development not located within the Coastal Commission’s original permit jurisdiction.

 

245.07 Emergency Coastal Development Permit
In the event of a verified emergency, temporary emergency authorization to proceed with remedial measures may be given by the Director of Community Development or his/her designee until such time as a full Coastal Development Permit application shall be filed.

A.    Application. Application shall be made to the Director of Community Development by letter if time allows, or in person or by telephone, if time does not allow. The information, to be reported at the time of the emergency or within three days after the emergency, shall include the following:

1.     Nature of the emergency;

2.     Cause of the emergency insofar as this can be established;

3.     Location of the emergency;

4.     The remedial, protective, or preventive work required to deal with the emergency;

5.     The circumstances during the emergency that appeared to justify the cause(s) of action taken, including the probable consequences of failing to take action.

B.     Limitations. The Director of Community Development shall not grant an emergency Coastal Development Permit for any development that falls within an area in which the Coastal Commission retains direct permit review authority, or for any development that is appealable to the Coastal Commission. In such areas and for such developments, a request for an emergency authorization must be made to the Coastal Commission.

In addition, a waiver for a coastal development emergency permit may be obtained from the Coastal Commission executive director for development that is required to protect life or public property in accordance with Section 30611 of the Coastal Act.

C.     Noticing. The Director of Community Development shall provide notice of the proposed emergency action. The extent and type of the notice shall be determined on the basis of the nature of the emergency. If the nature of the emergency does not allow sufficient time for public notice to be given before the emergency work begins, the Director of Community Development shall provide public notice of the action taken, or being taken, as soon as is practical. Public notice of the nature of the emergency and the remedial actions to be taken shall be posted on the site in a conspicuous place and mailed to all persons the Director of Community Development has reason to know would be interested in such action and to the Coastal Commission.

D.    Findings and Conditions. The Director of Community Development may grant an emergency Coastal Development Permit upon reasonable terms and conditions, which shall include an expiration date and the necessity for a regular permit application later, if the Director of Community Development finds that:

1.     An emergency exists that requires action more quickly than permitted by the procedures for a Coastal Development Permit and the work can and will be completed within 30 days unless otherwise specified by the terms of the permit;

2.     Public comment on the proposed emergency action has been reviewed, if time allows;

3.     The work proposed would be consistent with the requirements of the certified Local Coastal Program.

E.     Expiration of Emergency Permit. An emergency permit shall be valid for 60 days from the date of issuance by the Director of Community Development. Prior to expiration of the emergency permit, the permittee must submit a regular Coastal Development Permit application for the development even if only to remove the development undertaken pursuant to the emergency permit and restore the site to its previous condition.

F.     Report to City Council and Coastal Commission. The Director of Community Development shall report in writing and orally, the granting of an emergency permit to the City Council at its next scheduled meeting, and to the Coastal Commission. The report shall include a description of the nature of the emergency, the development involved, and the person or entity undertaking the development. Copies of the report shall be available at the meeting and shall be mailed to the Coastal Commission and to all persons requesting such notification of local coastal development decisions. (3334-6/97)

 

245.08 Exemptions
The following categories of development are exempt from the requirements of this chapter.

A.    Existing Structures. Maintenance and alteration of, or addition to, existing structures provided the project does not involve any of the following:

1.     Location in an appealable area with an increase of 10% or more of the internal floor area or an increase in height of 10% or more.

2.     Location on a beach, wetland, sand dune, stream or lake, or seaward of the mean high tide line, or where the development would encroach within 50 feet of the edge of a coastal bluff.

3.     Change in the intensity of the use of the structure.

4.     Conversion of multi-family residential or visitor serving commercial use to condominium or stock cooperative.

5.     Any significant alteration of land forms including removal or placement of vegetation, on a beach, wetland or sand dune, or within 50 feet of the edge of the coastal bluff.

6.     Any addition to a structure where the Coastal Development Permit issued for the original structure by the City or Coastal Commission indicated that any future additions would require a Coastal Development Permit.

B.     Dredging of Navigation Channels. Maintenance dredging of existing navigation channels or moving dredged material from such channels to a disposal area outside the coastal zone pursuant to a permit from the United States Army Corps of Engineers is exempt.

C.     Maintenance and Repair of Shoreline Protective Works. Repair or maintenance of shoreline protective works that do not result in an addition to, or enlargement or expansion of, the object of such repair or maintenance activity is exempt, except the following which are not exempt:

1.     Repair or maintenance of a sea wall revetment, bluff retaining wall, breakwater, groin, culvert, outfall or similar shoreline work which involves:

a.     Substantial alteration of the foundation including pilings and other surface and subsurface structures.

b.     The placement, whether temporary or permanent, of rip-rap, or artificial berms of sand, or any other form of solid material, on a beach or in coastal waters, streams, wetlands, estuaries, or on shoreline protective works.

c.     The replacement of 20% or more of the materials of an existing structure with materials of a different kind.

d.     The presence, whether temporary or permanent, of mechanized construction equipment or construction materials on any sand area or bluff or within 20 feet of coastal waters or streams.

2.     The replacement of 50% or more of a sea wall revetment, bluff retaining wall, breakwater, groin or similar protective work under one ownership, unless destroyed by natural disaster.

3.     Any method of routine maintenance dredging that involves the dredging of 100,000 cubic yards or more within a 12-month period; or in the placement of dredge spoils of any quantity within an environmentally sensitive habitat area, or any sand area, within 50 feet of the edge of a coastal bluff or environmentally sensitive habitat area, or within 20 feet of coastal waters or streams; or the removal, sale, or disposal of dredge spoils of any quantity that would be suitable for beach nourishment in an area the Coastal Commission has declared by resolution to have a critically short sand supply that must be maintained for protection of structures, coastal access or public recreational use.

4.     Any repair or maintenance to facilities or structures or work located in an environmentally sensitive habitat area, any sand area, within 50 feet of the edge of a coastal bluff or environmentally sensitive habitat area; or within 20 feet of any coastal waters and streams that include:

a.     The placement or removal, whether temporary or permanent, of rip-rap, rocks, sand or other beach materials or any other forms of solid materials.

b.     The presence, whether temporary or permanent, of mechanized equipment or construction materials.

D.    Utility Connections. The installation, testing, and placement in service or the replacement of any necessary utility connection between an existing service facility and any development approved pursuant to this chapter is exempt. The director, where necessary, may impose reasonable conditions to mitigate any adverse impacts on coastal resources including but not limited to scenic resources.

E.     Replacement of Destroyed Structures. The replacement of any structure, other than a public works facility, destroyed by natural disaster is exempt, provided such replacement structure conforms to applicable current zoning regulations, is designed and intended for the same use as the destroyed structure, does not exceed the floor area, height or bulk of the destroyed structure by more than 10%, and is sited in the same location on the same building site as the destroyed structure.

As used in this section:

“Bulk” means total interior cubic volume as measured from the exterior surface of the structure.

“Disaster” means any situation in which the force or forces which destroyed the structure to be replaced were beyond the control of its owner.

“Structure” includes landscaping and any erosion control structure or device which is similar to that which existed prior to the occurrence of the disaster.

F.     Ongoing Repair and Maintenance by Public Agencies and Utilities. Ongoing routine repair and maintenance activities of public agencies and public utilities as described in “Repair, Maintenance and Utility Hook-Up Exclusions from Permit Requirements” adopted by the California Coastal Commission on September 5, 1978, are exempt; provided no new roads are constructed, grading or clearing an undisturbed area does not exceed 500 square feet, no trees exceeding 12 inches dbh are removed, or the height or bulk of an existing structure will not be altered.

G.    Minor Developments and Miscellaneous Activities. Because the following activities do not constitute development as defined in Section 245.04(J), they are exempt from Coastal Development Permit requirements.

1.     Revocation of permits in accordance with applicable provisions of this Code.

2.     Home occupation permits in conformance with applicable provisions of this Code.

3.     Leases.

 

H.    Temporary Events.

1.     A temporary event is an activity or use that constitutes development as defined in Section 245.04 (Development) of this chapter; and is an activity or function which does not exceed a two-week period on a continual basis, or does not exceed a consecutive four-month period on an intermittent basis; and involves the placement of non-permanent structures (including but not limited to bleachers, perimeter fencing, vendor tents/canopies, judging stands, trailers, portable toilets, sound/video equipment, stages, platforms, etc., which do not involve grading or landform alteration for installation); and/or exclusive use of a sandy beach, parkland, filled tidelands, water, streets or parking area which is otherwise open and available for general public use.

2.     Exclusive use means a use that precludes use in the area of the event for public recreation, beach access or access to coastal waters other than for or through the event itself. Sandy beach area includes publicly owned and privately owned sandy areas fronting on coastal waters, regardless of the existence of potential prescriptive rights or a public trust interest. Coastal resources include, but are not limited to, public access opportunities, visitor and recreational facilities, water-oriented activities, marine resources, biological resources, environmentally sensitive habitat areas, agricultural lands, and archaeological or paleontological resources.

3.     Except as provided in paragraph 4 of this subsection, the Director of Community Development shall exclude from Coastal Development Permit requirements all temporary events except those which meet all of the following criteria:

a.     It is held between Memorial Day weekend and Labor Day; and

b.     It occupies all or a portion of a sandy beach area; and

c.     It involves a charge for general public admission or seating where no fee is currently charged for use of the same area (not including booth or entry fees).

Only temporary events meeting all of the above criteria shall require Coastal Development Permit review; however, the Director of Community Development may also exclude from permit requirements temporary events meeting all of the above criteria when:

d.     The fee is for preferred seating only and more than 75% of the provided seating capacity is available free of charge for general public use; or

e.     The event is held on sandy beach area in a remote location with minimal demand for public use, and there is no potential for adverse effect on sensitive coastal resources; or

f.      The event is less than one day in duration; or

g.     The event has previously received a Coastal Development Permit and will be held in the same location, at a similar season, and for the same duration, with operating and environmental conditions substantially the same as those associated with the previously approved event.

4.     The Director of Community Development or the City Council through direction to the Director of Community Development, may determine that a temporary event shall be subject to Coastal Development Permit review, even if the criteria in paragraph 3 of this subsection are not met, if the director or City Council determines that unique or changing circumstances exist relative to a particular temporary event that have the potential for significant adverse impacts on coastal resources. Such circumstances may include the following:

a.     The event, either individually or together with other temporary events scheduled before or after the particular event, precludes the general public from use of a public recreational area for a significant period of time;

b.     The event and its associated activities or access requirements will either directly or indirectly impact environmentally sensitive habitat areas, rare or endangered species, significant scenic resources, or other coastal resources as described in paragraph 2 of this subsection;

c.     The event is scheduled between Memorial Day weekend and Labor Day and would restrict public use of roadways or parking areas or otherwise significantly impact public use or access to coastal waters;

d.     The event has historically required a Coastal Development Permit to address and monitor associated impacts to coastal resources. (3334-6/97)

 

245.10 Categorical Exclusions
Pursuant to Huntington Beach Categorical Exclusion Order E-84-2 approved by the California Coastal Commission on March 1, 1985, the following specific categories within specific geographical areas (exclusion areas) as shown on a map approved by the California Coastal Commission will not require a Coastal Development Permit. A current record of all permits issued for categorically excluded developments shall be available for public and Coastal Commission review and shall contain the name of applicant, location (street address and assessor’s parcel number of property on which development is proposed), and brief description of the development, date of application of other local permit(s), all terms and conditions of development imposed by the City in granting its approval, the site plan and vicinity map of the development.

Pursuant to California Code of Regulations Section 13243, any change to the categorical order requires action by the California Coastal Commission on the categorical exclusion. The categorical exclusion order cannot be modified through changes to the LCP alone. A request for amendment to a categorical exclusion order shall be processed pursuant to California Code of Regulations Sections 13241—13425.

A.    Permitted uses (excluding Section 245.08(A)) within RL, RM, RMH and RH districts which are consistent with the zoning provisions of this Code and do not require any discretionary review.

B.     Municipal improvement projects of less than $50,000 in cost and only where such projects would not alter vehicular capacity of public streets or intersections by more than 10% (except traffic control devices such as stop signs or lights), would not alter on- or off-street parking that would decrease the number of spaces, and would not alter circulation patterns that would impair beach access.

C.     Traffic control signing and minor roadway improvements including:

1.     Culvert replacement;

2.     Guardrails, retaining walls;

3.     Slope stabilization;

4.     Signs for traffic control and guidance, including roadway markings and pavement delineation;

5.     Drainage course maintenance and cleaning involving less than 50 cubic yards of excavations; and

6.     Parking meter installation and repair.

D.    Minor accessory structures in conformance with applicable provisions of this Code.

E.     Minor Development.

1.     Sign permits in conformance with applicable provisions of this Code.

2.     Temporary use permits in conformance with applicable provisions of this Code.

3.     Entertainment/specific event permits.

4.     Minor variances that do not pertain to heights and that do not negatively impact coastal access or view corridors.

5.     Grading which does not involve 100 cubic yards or more of material and brush or vegetation removal other than major vegetation of less than one-half acre of land.

6.     Fences and walls six feet or less in height except when such walls or fences will obstruct or otherwise limit public access to the beach or other facilities to which access is protected under the Coastal Act.

7.     Installation of irrigation lines.

8.     Buildings or structures, or additions thereto, having an aggregate value of $1,000.00 or less.

9.     The addition of a solar-collection system to existing buildings or structures which complies with provisions of Huntington Beach Municipal Code Title 17.

F.     Miscellaneous Activities.

1.     Installation testing, placement in service or the replacement of any necessary utility connection between an existing service facility and any development that has previously been granted a Coastal Development Permit.

2.     Actions listed as ministerial in the California Environmental Quality Act, including:

a.     Issuance of building permits;

b.     Issuance of building licenses;

c.     Approval of final subdivision maps; and

d.     Approval of individual utility service connections and disconnections. (3334-6/97)

 

245.12 Application Requirements
Applications for Coastal Development Permits shall be initiated by submitting an application and necessary accompanying data as prescribed by the director and the required fee.

 

245.14 Determination of Applicable Notice and Hearing Procedures
A.    At the time a CDP application is submitted, the director shall determine whether a development project is:

1.     Within an area where the Coastal Commission exercises original permit jurisdiction; or

2.     Categorically excluded; or

3.     Appealable to the Coastal Commission; or

4.     Non-appealable to the Coastal Commission.

B.     Within five days of submitting a CDP application, the applicant or any other person who does not agree with the director’s determination may challenge the determination. If any interested party does not agree with the director’s determination, the matter shall be forwarded to the City Council at the earliest available regularly scheduled meeting to determine whether the project is categorically excluded, non-appealable, or appealable. If such challenge is not resolved and the determination remains disputed, the City shall notify the Coastal Commission (CC) Executive Director by telephone of the dispute/question and shall request the CC Executive Director’s opinion. The CC Executive Director may either concur with the Council’s determination or forward the request to the Coastal Commission for a final determination.

 

245.16 Action on Coastal Development Permit
Action to approve, conditionally approve, or deny a Coastal Development Permit shall be taken by the Zoning Administrator, Planning Commission, or City Council, whichever has responsibility for final approval of other discretionary permits. If no other discretionary approval is required, the Zoning Administrator shall act on the Coastal Development Permit application.

 

245.18 Public Hearing and Comment
A public hearing shall be required prior to any action on a Coastal Development Permit. Any person may submit written comment to the director on an application for a Coastal Development Permit, or on a Coastal Development Permit appeal, at any time prior to the close of the public hearing.

 

245.20 Notice for Appealable Development
Notice of development appealable to the Coastal Commission shall be provided as follows:

A.    Contents of Notice.

1.     A statement that the development is within the appealable area of the coastal zone;

2.     The date of the filing of the application and the name of the applicant;

3.     The file number assigned to the application;

4.     A description of the development at its proposed location;

5.     The date, time, and place at which the application will be heard;

6.     A brief description of the general procedure concerning the conduct of hearing and local actions; and

7.     The system for local and Coastal Commission appeals, including any local fees required.

B.     Provision of Notice Prior to Public Hearing. Notice shall be mailed at least 10 days before the public hearing on the project to the following:

1.     Applicant;

2.     Owner of the property;

3.     All property owners and residents within 100 feet from the perimeter of the subject parcel;

4.     All persons who have, within the past calendar year, submitted a written request for notice of all coastal permit applications;

5.     The Coastal Commission; and

6.     Public agencies which, in the judgment of the director, have an interest in the project.

C.     Notice of Continued Public Hearings. If a decision of an appealable Coastal Development Permit is continued to a time that has not been stated in the initial notice or at the public hearing, notice of the continued hearing shall be provided in the manner prescribed by subsection B of this section.

D.    Notice of Decision. On or before the seventh day following final City action, notice of the decision, including findings for approval and conditions (if any) on the project proposal, shall be mailed to the following:

1.     The applicant;

2.     The owner of the subject parcel;

3.     All persons who have submitted a written request for notification of action on this specific permit; and

4.     The California Coastal Commission district office.

 

245.22 Notice for Non-Appealable Development
Notice of development non-appealable to the Coastal Commission shall be provided as follows:

A.    Contents of Notice.

1.     A statement that the development is within the non-appealable area of the coastal zone;

2.     The date of filing of the application and the name of the applicant;

3.     The file number assigned to the application;

4.     A description of the development and its proposed location;

5.     The date, time, and place at which the application will be heard; and

6.     A brief description of the general procedure concerning the conduct of hearing and actions.

B.     Provision of Notice. Notice of developments shall be given at least 10 calendar days before the first public hearing in the following manner:

1.     If the matter is heard by the Planning Commission, notice shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation;

2.     Notice by first-class mail to any person who has filed a written request for notification of such action;

3.     Notice by first-class mail to property owners within 300 feet of the projects;

4.     Notice by first-class mail to persons residing within 100 feet from the subject parcel;

5.     Notice by first-class mail to the Coastal Commission and any commission or board as provided by the Local Coastal Program; and

6.     Notice by first-class mail to the applicant and owner of the property.

 

245.23 Waiver of Public Hearing for Minor Development
A.    The City of Huntington Beach may waive the requirement for a public hearing on a Coastal Development Permit application for minor development only if both the following occur:

1.     Notice that a public hearing shall be held upon request by any person is provided to all persons who would otherwise be required to be notified of a public hearing as well as any other persons known to be interested in receiving notice.

2.     No request for public hearing is received by the local government within 15 working days from the date of sending the notice pursuant to paragraph 1 of this subsection.

B.     The notice provided pursuant to this subsection shall include a statement that failure by a person to request a public hearing may result in the loss of that person’s ability to appeal to the Coastal Commission any action taken by the City on a Coastal Development Permit application.

C.     For purposes of this section, “minor development” means a development which the City determines satisfies all of the following requirements:

1.     Is consistent with the certified Local Coastal Program.

2.     Requires no discretionary approvals other than a Coastal Development Permit.

3.     Has no adverse effect either individually or cumulatively on coastal resources or public access to the shoreline or along the coast. (3334-6/97)

 

245.24 Notice of City Action
A.    Finality of City Action. The City’s decision on an application for a development shall not be deemed complete until:

1.     The City’s decision on the application has been made and all required findings have been adopted, including specific factual findings supporting the legal conclusions that the proposed development is or is not in conformity with the certified Local Coastal Program and, where applicable, with the public access and recreation policies of Chapter 3 of the Coastal Act; and

2.     When all City rights of appeal have been exhausted as defined in the California Code of Regulations Section 13573 and Subsection D of Section 245.24.

B.     Notice of Final Action. Within seven calendar days of the City completing its review and meeting the requirements of subsection A of this section, the City shall notify by first class mail the Coastal Commission, and any persons who specifically requested notice of such action.

1.     If the City has failed to act on an application within the time limits set forth in Government Code Sections 65950—65957.1, thereby approving the development by operation of law, the person claiming a right to proceed pursuant to Government Code Sections 65950—65957.1, shall notify, in writing, the City and the Coastal Commission of his or her claim that the development has been approved by operation of law. Such notice shall specify the application which is claimed to be approved.

2.     When the City determines that the time limits established pursuant to Government Code Sections 65950—65957.1 have expired, the City shall, within seven calendar days of such determination, notify any person entitled to receive notice pursuant to Section 13571(a) of the California Code of Regulations that the application has been approved by operation of law pursuant to Government Code Sections 65950—65957.1 and the application may be appealed to the Coastal Commission pursuant to Section 13110 et seq. of the California Code of Regulations.

C.     Effective Date of City Action. The City’s final decision on an application for an appealable development shall become effective on the 11th working day after the Coastal Commission has received notice of the completed City action in accordance with subsection B of this section unless either of the following occur:

1.     An appeal is filed in accordance with this chapter;

2.     The notice of final City action does not meet the requirements of this chapter.

D.    Exhaustion of City Appeals.

1.     An appellant shall be deemed to have exhausted City appeals and shall be qualified as an aggrieved person where the appellant has pursued his or her appeal to the City appellate body (bodies) as required by the appeal procedures contained in Section 245.32; except that exhaustion of all City appeals shall not be required if any of the following occur:

a.     The City requires an appellant to appeal to more City appellate bodies than have been certified as appellate bodies for permits in the coastal zone, in the implementation section of the Local Coastal Program.

b.     An appellant was denied the right of the initial City appeal by a City ordinance which restricts the class of persons who may appeal a City decision.

c.     An appellant was denied the right of City appeal because City notice and hearing procedures for the development did not comply with the provisions of the chapter.

d.     The City charges an appeal fee for the filing or processing of appeals.

2.     Where a project is appealed by any two members of the Coastal Commission, there shall be no requirement of exhaustion of City appeals. Provided, however, that a City government may provide, by ordinance, that notice of commissioner appeals may be transmitted to the City’s appellate body (which considers appeals from the City body that rendered the final decision), and the appeal to the Commission may be suspended pending a decision on the merits by that City appellate body. If the decision of the City appellate body modifies or reverses the previous decision, the commissioners shall be required to file a new appeal from that decision. (3334-6/97)

 

245.26 Precedence of Local Coastal Program
Where the plans, policies, requirements or standards of the Local Coastal Program, as applied to any project in the CZ Overlay District, conflict with those of the underlying zoning district or other provisions of this chapter, the plans, policies, requirements or standards of the Local Coastal Program shall take precedence.

 

245.28 Conditions
Approval of a Coastal Development Permit shall be subject to conditions as necessary to ensure conformance with, and implementation of, the Local Coastal Program. Modification and resubmittal of project plans, drawings, and specifications may be required to ensure conformance with the Local Coastal Program.

 

245.30 Findings
A.    Required Findings. A CDP application may be approved or conditionally approved only after the approving authority has made the following specific factual findings supporting the legal conclusion:

1.     Local Coastal Plan. That the development project, as proposed or as modified by conditions of approval, conforms with the General Plan, including the Local Coastal Program;

2.     Zoning Provisions. That the project is consistent with the requirements of the CZ Overlay District, the base zoning district, as well as other applicable provisions of the Municipal Code;

3.     Adequate Services. That at the time of occupancy the proposed development can be provided with infrastructure in a manner that is consistent with the Local Coastal Program; and

4.     California Coastal Act. That the development conforms with the public access and public recreation policies of Chapter 3 of the California Coastal Act.

 

245.32 Appeals
Development pursuant to an approved Coastal Development Permit shall not commence until all applicable administrative appeal periods expire or, if appealed, until all administrative appeals, including those to the Coastal Commission, have been exhausted.

A.    Action by the Zoning Administrator or Planning Commission to approve, conditionally approve, or deny any Coastal Development Permit may be appealed on or before the 10th working day following such action. Action by the Zoning Administrator may be appealed to the Planning Commission. Action by the Planning Commission may be appealed to the City Council. Appeals may be made directly to the Coastal Commission pursuant to Sections 13111 and 13573 of the California Code of Regulations for appealable development.

B.     Action by the City Council on a Coastal Development Permit for appealable development may be appealed directly to the Coastal Commission pursuant to Sections 13111 and 13573 of the California Code of Regulations.

C.     An appeal pursuant to this chapter may be filed only by the applicant for the Coastal Development Permit in question, an aggrieved person, or any two members of the Coastal Commission.

D.    An appeal to the Planning Commission shall be filed with the Community Development Department. An appeal to the City Council shall be filed with the City Clerk. The appeal shall be accompanied by a fee set by resolution of the City Council and a statement of the grounds for the appeal.

E.     Notice of the local appeal shall be given as set forth in Section 245.20 or 245.22 and shall be processed in accordance with the provisions of Section 248.20.

F.     An appeal to the Coastal Commission shall be processed in accordance with the provisions of Sections 13110 through 13120 of the California Code of Regulations. (3334-7/96, 3517-12/01, 4099-10/16)

 

245.34 Application After Denial
Whenever a CDP request under the provisions of this section has been denied and such denial has become final, no new CDP application for the same or similar request may be accepted within one year of the denial date, unless the director finds that a sufficient change in circumstances has occurred to warrant a new CDP application.

 

245.36 Expiration of Coastal Development Permit
A Coastal Development Permit shall expire on the latest expiration date applicable to any other permit or approval required for the project, including any extension granted for other permits or approvals. Should the project not require City permits or approvals other than a Coastal Development Permit, the Coastal Development Permit shall expire one year from its date of approval if the project has not been commenced during that time.

 

245.38 Permit Amendment
Upon application by the permittee, a Coastal Development Permit may be amended by the approving authority. Application for and action on an amendment shall be accomplished in the same manner specified by this chapter for initial approval of the Coastal Development Permit. In addition, hearing notice shall be given to any person who the director has reason to know would be interested in the matter. Public hearing notice requirements for permit amendments shall be the same as required for public hearings for the permit applications. (3334-6/97)

 

Chapter 246 DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENTS
246.02 Purpose
In order to strengthen the public planning process, encourage private participation in comprehensive planning, and reduce the economic cost of development, the legislature of the State of California adopted Section 65864 et seq. of the Government Code, authorizing local governments to enter into development agreements with applicants for development projects. The objective of such an agreement is to provide assurances that, upon approval of the project, the applicant may proceed with the project in accord with existing policies, rules, and standards, subject to the conditions of approval, thus vesting certain development rights in the property. The purpose of this chapter is to establish procedures and requirements for consideration of development agreements by the City consistent with state law.

 

246.04 Application Requirements
A.    An applicant may propose that the City consider entering into a development agreement pursuant to Title 7, Chapter 4, Article 2.5 of the Government Code, commencing with Section 65864, by filing an application with the Department of Community Development. All agreement provisions are subject to modification or suspension as set forth in Title 7, Chapter 4, Article 2.5, of the Government Code, commencing with Section 65864.

B.     The application shall be accompanied by the following:

1.     A proposed agreement, which shall contain the following:

a.     A legal description of the property sought to be covered by the agreement;

b.     A statement of concurrence in the application by the owner if the applicant is not the fee owner;

c.     A description of the proposed uses, height and size of building(s), density or intensity of use, and provision for reservation or dedication of land for public purposes;

d.     A statement of terms and conditions relating to applicant financing of public facilities and required improvements;

e.     All proposed conditions, terms, restrictions, and requirements for subsequent City discretionary actions;

f.      A statement specifying which rights are intended to vest on the effective date of the agreement, and the timing and sequence of subsequent discretionary approvals and vesting of rights;

g.     The proposed time when construction would be commenced and completed for the entire project and any proposed phases; and

h.     The termination date for the agreement.

2.     Such other information as the director may require by policy or to satisfy other requirements of law.

3.     The required fee. (4100-10/16)

 

246.06 Department Review and Recommendations
Unless the project is categorically exempt, the Department shall, at the applicant’s expense and in accord with City procedures for implementations of CEQA, undertake environmental review of an application judged complete by the director. Upon completion of such review, the development agreement shall be transmitted together with the Department’s recommendations to the Planning Commission 30 days prior to the public hearing by the Planning Commission.

 

246.08 Public Hearing Required
A.    Upon receipt of a complete application, the results of the environmental review, and the recommendations of the Department, the Planning Commission shall schedule a public hearing to determine whether the proposal conforms to the General Plan and, if the site of the development agreement is located within the coastal zone, to the Local Coastal Program. The Planning Commission hearing shall be scheduled within six months following receipt of a complete application, unless the City and the applicant mutually agree to a later date.

B.     Notice of intention to consider the application shall be given as provided in Sections 65090 and 65091 of the Government Code. In addition, if the application is being processed together with the development project, notice of such intention shall be given as required for consideration of the development project. If the development project is located within the coastal zone, a Coastal Development Permit is required. If the site of the development agreement is in the coastal zone and the proposed development is inconsistent with the certified Local Coastal Program, the development agreement shall not become effective unless and until a Local Coastal Program amendment is approved and effectively certified by the Coastal Commission. (3334-6/97)

 

246.10 Planning Commission Action
After the public hearing is closed, the Commission shall determine whether the agreement is consistent with the General Plan, and if the site of the development agreement is located within the coastal zone, the Local Coastal Program, and, on the basis of such findings, shall recommend either approval, modification, or disapproval of the proposed development agreement. The Commission shall transmit its recommendation and the development agreement to the City Council within 30 days and 30 days prior to the public hearing by the City Council. (3334-6/97)

 

246.12 City Council Action
A.    Upon receipt of the application, the results of the environmental review, and the recommendations of the Department and the Planning Commission, the City Council shall schedule a public hearing on the application. Notice of intention to consider the application shall be given in the same manner as set forth in Section 246.08.

B.     If the application is being processed together with the development project, the public hearing on the application may be held concurrently with the hearing on the project.

C.     After the public hearing is closed, the City Council shall approve, modify, or disapprove the proposed development agreement. An agreement shall not be approved unless the City Council makes the following findings:

1.     After considering the Planning Commissions’ review that the agreement is consistent with the General Plan and with any specific plan, and if the site of the development agreement is located within the coastal zone, with the Local Coastal Program;

2.     That the agreement is consistent with all provisions of this ordinance, the Municipal Code, and the State Subdivision Map Act;

3.     That the agreement will not be detrimental to the health, safety and general welfare; and will not adversely affect the orderly development of property;

4.     That the City Council has considered the fiscal effect of the development agreement on the City and the effects on the housing needs of the region in which the City is situated and has balanced these needs against the public service needs of its residents and available fiscal and environmental resources.

D.    Any approval of a proposed agreement shall authorize the Mayor and the City Manager to sign the agreement on behalf of the City, and shall become effective after 30 days following the second reading, unless a referendum is filed within that time. (3334-6/97)

 

246.14 Annual Review
A.    All development agreements shall be reviewed by the director at least once every 12 months, unless the agreement provides for more frequent review, in which case the agreement shall prevail.

B.     The purpose of the review shall be to inquire into the good faith compliance of the applicant with the terms and conditions of the agreement and for any other purpose specified in the agreement.

C.     Prior to each review, the department shall prepare a report relative to all development that has occurred under the agreement subsequent to the last past review and any other matters the department wishes to bring to the director’s attention.

D.    If the department review determines that all terms and conditions of the agreement have been met, and the director concurs in writing, no further review shall be required.

E.     If the department report recommends modification or termination of the agreement, or if the director proposes to make such a recommendation to the City Council, he or she shall schedule a public hearing before the Planning Commission on the agreement if such modifications are major or involve land use changes. Notice of intention to modify or terminate the agreement shall be given in the same manner as set forth in Section 246.08. At such hearing the applicant shall have the burden of demonstrating his or her good faith compliance with the terms and conditions of the agreement. After closing the public hearing, the Planning Commission shall determine whether to recommend that the agreement be terminated or modified.

F.     Upon receipt of the director’s or Planning Commission’s recommendation, the City Council shall schedule a public hearing. Notice of intention to modify or terminate the agreement shall be given in the same manner as set forth in Section 246.08. If, after the public hearing is closed, the City Council finds and determines on the basis of substantial evidence that the applicant or its successor in interest has not complied in good faith with the terms and conditions of the agreement, the City Council may modify or terminate the agreement. Any modification or termination is subject to the provisions of Section 246.18 of this chapter.

 

246.16 Application of Existing Rules, Standards and Policies
Unless otherwise provided by the development agreement, rules, standards, and official policies applicable to development of the property subject to a development agreement, shall be those rules, standards, and official policies in force at the time of execution of the agreement. A development agreement shall not prevent the City, in subsequent actions applicable to the property, from applying new rules, standards, and policies which do not conflict with those rules, standards, and policies applicable to the property as set forth herein, nor shall a development agreement prevent the City from denying or conditionally approving any subsequent development project application on the basis of such existing or new rules, standards, and policies. No rights shall be deemed to vest in the applicant, or any other person, under any development agreement, except as expressly set forth in the development agreement.

 

246.18 Modification and Termination
Any development agreement may be amended, or canceled in whole or in part, by mutual consent of the applicant (or its successor in interest) and the City, or it may be modified or terminated pursuant to the provisions of Section 246.14. Notice of intention to take any such action shall be given in the manner provided by Section 246.08; provided, however, that the parties may set forth an alternative procedure in the agreement for processing insubstantial amendments. Any significant amendment shall be subject to the provisions of the Government Code, Section 65867.5. Any development agreement which is amended or modified shall be subject to those rules, standards, and official policies in force at the time of the execution of the agreement.

 

Chapter 247 AMENDMENTS
247.02 Initiation of Amendments
Amendments to the zoning provisions, standards or map may be initiated by motion of the City Council or Planning Commission, or any other person or agency. If property that is the subject of an application not initiated by the City is in more than one ownership, all the owners or their authorized agents shall join in filing the application.

 

247.04 Required Application Materials for Amendments Initiated by Others
A property owner, resident, or any other person may initiate a request for a zoning map or zoning text amendment by filing an application and necessary accompanying data, as prescribed by the director, and the required fee.

 

247.06 Public Hearing Scope and Notice
A.    Scope. The director shall set a date, time, and place for the public hearing and prepare a report to the Planning Commission on an application for a zoning amendment describing the area, standard or provision to be considered for change and, if warranted, proposing alternative amendments. The notice shall also state whether an amendment to the Local Coastal Program is required. The hearings will be held within 60 days after final environmental evaluation.

B.     Notice of Hearing. Notice shall be given in accord with Chapter 248. (3334-6/97)

 

247.08 Planning Commission Review and Recommendation
At the time and place set for the public hearing, the Planning Commission shall consider a report of the director and shall hear evidence for and against the proposed amendment. The Planning Commission may continue a public hearing to a definite date and time without additional notice. Following the public hearing, the Commission shall make specific findings as to whether the proposed amendment is consistent with the policies of the General Plan and the purposes of this chapter, and shall recommend approval, conditional approval, or disapproval of the proposal as submitted or in modified form.

 

247.10 Determination Before Making Recommendation on Change in Zoning District Classification or Zoning or Subdivision Provision or Standard
A.    Before the Planning Commission makes its recommendation on an application for a change of zoning district applicable to a specific site or a change in the text of a zoning or subdivision provision or standard, it shall determine whether or not:

1.     The change proposed is consistent with the objectives, policies, general land uses and programs specified in the General Plan and any applicable specific plan;

2.     In the case of a general land use provision, the change proposed is compatible with the uses authorized in, and the standards prescribed for, the zoning district for which it is proposed;

3.     A community need is demonstrated for the change proposed; and

4.     Its adoption will be in conformity with public convenience, general welfare and good zoning practice.

B.     Prior to a change in the Coastal Conservation District (CC) classification, the following findings shall be made:

1.     No wetlands exist on the subject parcel as determined by a site-specific topographic, vegetative, hydrologic and soils analysis of the subject parcel, prepared by a qualified wetland biologist or other qualified professional and reviewed and concurred in by the Department of Fish and Game; and

2.     That the proposed change in zoning district classification is in accordance with the policies, standards and provisions of the California Coastal Act; and

3.     That there is no feasible, less environmentally damaging alternative site for any proposed land use or development which may be allowed under California Public Resources Code Sections 30233(a)(1) and 30234.

Any such removal of the Coastal Conservation District classification shall constitute an amendment to the Implementation Plan and, if applicable, the Land Use Plan portion of the Local Coastal Program. Pursuant to Section 30514 of the Coastal Act, an amendment shall not take effect unless and until it has been effectively certified by the California Coastal Commission. (3334-6/97)

 

247.12 Result of Planning Commission Denial
A Planning Commission recommendation of denial of an application for a zoning map or text amendment shall terminate proceedings, unless appealed. Notice of such action shall be mailed to the applicant within five days of the Planning Commission’s decision.

 

247.14 City Council Action
A.    Hearing Date and Notice. Upon receipt of a Planning Commission recommendation for approval or conditional approval of an amendment to the zoning text or map, the City Clerk shall set a date and time for a public hearing on the proposed amendment. The hearing shall be held within a reasonable time of the date of filing of the Commission recommendation. The City Clerk shall give notice of such hearing in the manner prescribed as required by Chapter 248.

B.     Council Decision. Prior to adoption of an ordinance, the Council shall make findings that the proposed amendment is consistent with the policies of the General Plan and the notice and hearing provisions of Chapter 248.

 

247.16 Local Coastal Program Amendments
The City Council may amend all or part of the Local Coastal Program, but the amendment will not take effect until it has been effectively certified by the Coastal Commission. Any General Plan element or specific plan or ordinance of the City that is applicable to the same areas or matters affected by a Local Coastal Program amendment must be reviewed and amended as necessary to provide consistency with the remainder of the Local Coastal Program.

A.    An amendment to the Local Coastal Program may be initiated by one of the following:

1.     A resolution of intention initiated by the Planning Commission;

2.     A resolution of intention initiated by the City Council directing the Planning Commission to initiate an amendment;

3.     An application from a property owner or his/her authorized agent provided that such application involves the development or modification of property located within the area affected by such amendment.

B.     Planning Commission Action on Amendments.

1.     Upon receipt in proper form of a completed amendment application or duly adopted resolution of intention, and following any necessary investigation, a public hearing before the Planning Commission must be held and notice of such hearing given consistent with Section 13515 of the California Code of Regulations.

2.     The Planning Commission must make a written recommendation on the proposed amendment whether to approve, approve in modified form, or disapprove.

3.     Planning Commission action recommending that the proposed Local Coastal Program amendment be approved, approved in modified form or denied, must be considered for adoption by the City Council.

C.     City Council Action on Amendments. The recommendation of the Planning Commission must be acted upon by the City Council. A public hearing on the amendment shall be conducted after first giving notice of the hearing pursuant to Section 13515 of the California Code of Regulations. The City Council may approve, approve with modifications, or disapprove any amendment.

D.    City Council Submittal for Coastal Commission Action on Amendments. Any proposed amendment to the Local Coastal Program shall not take effect until it has been certified by the Coastal Commission. Any amendment approved by the City shall be submitted to the Coastal Commission in accordance with Sections 30512 and 30513 of the Public Resources Code. An amendment to this Local Coastal Program as certified by the California Coastal Commission shall not become effective after City Council adoption until the amendment is submitted pursuant to the requirements of Section 13551 et seq. of the California Code of Regulations and also certified by the California Coastal Commission pursuant to Chapter 6, Article 2 of the California Coastal Act.

E.     City Council Denial of Amendment Request.

1.     A denial by the City Council on an amendment request shall be final and no appeal to the Coastal Commission shall be allowed except as provided by subsection (E)(2) of this section;

2.     Pursuant to Section 30515 of the Coastal Act, any person or agency authorized to undertake a public works project or major energy facility development, who was denied a request to amend the Local Coastal Program, may file the request for amendment with the Coastal Commission.

F.     Fees. The City Council, by resolution, shall establish and from time to time amend a schedule of fees imposed for any amendment to the Local Coastal Program. (3334-6/97)

 

Chapter 248 NOTICES, HEARINGS, FINDINGS, DECISIONS AND APPEALS
248.02 Director’s Duty to Give Notice
Within 60 days after final environmental evaluation the director shall give the notice of public hearing required by law. The form of the notice shall contain:

A.    The date, time and place of the hearing;

B.     A general explanation of the matter to be considered, including a general description of the area affected;

C.     Other information which is required by statute or specific provision of this Code or which the director considers necessary or desirable.

 

248.04 Notice Requirements
 

 

Type of Action

Notice Requirement*

Reference to Notice Requirement

General Plan adoption or amendment

65090, 65091

65353

Zoning Ordinance

 

 

Planning Commission (Gen.)

65090

65853—65857

Planning Commission (Uses)

65090, 65091

65853—65957

City Council

65090

65853—65857

Variance, development agreement, special sign permit, revocation, modification or appeal

65091

65905

Conditional use permit

65091 with 500-foot notification radius

65905

Subdivision

65090, 65091

66451.3(a)

Home occupation revocation

65091

65905

*       References are to the Government Code

These notice requirements are declaratory of existing law. If state law prescribes a different notice requirement, notice shall be given in that manner. A reviewing body designated to hear a matter may direct that notice be given in a manner that exceeds the notice requirement prescribed by state law. Public notice requirements for Coastal Development Permits shall be as described in Section 245.20 or 245.22. (3334-6/97, 3691-1/05)

 

248.06 Rules Governing Conduct of Hearing—Opportunity to Be Heard and Burden of Proof
Public hearings shall comply with minimum procedural standards prescribed by Government Code Section 65804. Each person interested in a matter that is the subject of a public hearing shall be given an opportunity to be heard. In each case, the applicant has the burden of proof at the public hearing on the application and at the public hearing on the appeal.

 

248.08 Requirement that Findings Be Made Upon Grant of Application
A.    In each case where a reviewing body is designated to make a decision of an adjudicatory nature as the result of a proceeding in which a hearing is required by state law or this ordinance code to be given, the body shall make findings to support its decision.

B.     Subsection A of this section applies only to a determination made in the reviewing body’s adjudicatory capacity. It does not apply to an action of a legislative nature such as a recommendation for an adoption of a zoning or subdivision provision. The existence or non-existence of a determination in connection with a legislative action does not affect the validity of that action unless otherwise directed by state law.

 

248.10 Time and Manner of Decision
A.    Form. After hearing the evidence and considering the application, the reviewing body—i.e., the Zoning Administrator, Planning Commission, or City Council—shall make its decision. The decision shall be in the form of a written statement, minute order or resolution and shall be accompanied by reasons sufficient to inform as to the basis for the decision.

B.     Time. The reviewing body shall formulate its written findings within five calendar days after the decision.

C.     Notice of Decision. The director shall have notice of the decision mailed to the applicant at the address given in the application and to each person who requests in writing notice of the proceedings within five working days of the decision, excluding weekends and holidays. The director shall also have notice of the decision posted and distributed to the Planning Commission and City Council within 48 hours of such decision.

D.    Acceptance Is Applicant’s Agreement. The applicant’s acceptance of the decision is an agreement to comply with the decision and its terms and conditions.

 

248.12 Time Limit on Reapplication for Same Matter
If an application is denied and the decision is final, no person may file a new application for substantially the same request for a period of one year from the date the action of the City is final except as provided in Section 248.14 for denial “without prejudice.”

 

248.14 Denial Without Prejudice
If the application is denied “without prejudice,” the applicant may reapply for substantially the same request without complying with the time limit prescribed in Section 248.12.

 

248.16 Finality of Decision and Time for Appeal
A decision on a discretionary approval is not final until the time for appeal expires. The time for appeal from a decision by the Zoning Administrator, the Environmental Assessment Committee, Subdivision Committee, Design Review Board, or the Planning Commission shall be filed within 10 calendar days after the date of the decision. Appeals may not be processed on actions which must be heard by and receive final action by the City Council, except that Coastal Development Permits for development located in the appealable area of the coastal zone may be appealed to the Coastal Commission as described in Section 245.32. (3334-6/97)

 

248.18 Designation of Hearing Body on Appeal
The Planning Commission shall hear an appeal from the decision of the director, Zoning Administrator, Design Review Board, Environmental Assessment Committee, and Subdivision Committee. The City Council shall hear an appeal from the decision of the Planning Commission. The decision of the City Council is final, except that Coastal Development Permits for development located in the appealable area of the coastal zone may be appealed to the Coastal Commission. (3334-6/97)

 

248.20 Appeal of Decision
A.    Notice of Appeal. A person desiring to appeal a decision shall file a written notice of appeal with the director within the time required by Section 248.16 except an appeal to the Planning Commission’s decision shall be filed with the City Clerk. This section shall not apply to any action which must be heard by the City Council whether or not an appeal from the Planning Commission is filed.

B.     Form of Notice on Appeal. The notice of appeal shall contain the name and address of the person appealing the action, the decision appealed from and the grounds for the appeal. The director may provide the form of the notice of appeal. A defect in the form of the notice does not affect the validity or right to an appeal.

C.     Action on Appeal. The director or City Clerk shall set the matter for hearing before the reviewing body and shall give notice of the hearing on the appeal in the time and manner set forth in Sections 248.02 and 248.04.

D.    De Novo Hearing. The reviewing body shall hear the appeal as a new matter. The original applicant has the burden of proof. The reviewing body may act upon the application, either granting it, conditionally granting it or denying it, irrespective of the precise grounds or scope of the appeal. In addition to considering the testimony and evidence presented at the hearing on the appeal, the reviewing body shall consider all pertinent information from the file as a result of the previous hearings from which the appeal is taken.

E.     Decision on Appeal. The reviewing body may reverse or affirm in whole or in part, or may modify the order, requirement, decision, or determination that is being appealed.

 

248.22 Appeal of Failure to Act
An applicant may appeal the failure of the Zoning Administrator, Design Review Board, Environmental Assessment Committee, Subdivision Committee or Planning Commission to act on an application if the failure to act continues beyond a reasonable time and the time to act is not otherwise fixed by law. The appeal body shall consider all of the circumstances surrounding the application in determining what is a reasonable time.

 

248.24 Appeal of Decision Not Otherwise Provided For
A.    Any person may appeal a decision, requirement or determination made by the director in the administration of the zoning and subdivision ordinances not otherwise provided for in the individual titles of this Code. The Planning Commission shall hear the appeal in the first instance. The appeal shall be in writing, filed with the director and shall specifically set forth the decision appealed from and the grounds for the appeal. The notice of appeal shall be filed within 10 calendar days of the date of the action appealed.

B.     The notice of appeal shall be in the form provided by subsections A and B of Section 248.20. The director shall schedule the appeal for consideration by the Planning Commission within 30 calendar days and shall give the appellant 10 calendar days notice of the time and place of the hearing. The decision of the Planning Commission may be appealed to the City Council.

 

248.26 Fee for Appeal
The notice of appeal shall be accompanied by the fee fixed by resolution of the City Council.

 

248.28 Appeal by City Council Member or Planning Commissioner
A.    A City Council member or a Planning Commissioner may appeal a decision of the director, Design Review Board, Environmental Assessment Committee, Subdivision Committee, Planning Commission or Zoning Administrator. The appeal shall be processed in the same manner as an appeal by any other person but need not be accompanied by the fee prescribed for an appeal.

B.     The City Council member or Planning Commissioner appealing the decision is not disqualified by that action from participating in the appeal hearing and the deliberations nor from voting as a member of the reviewing body.

 

248.30 Effective Date of Decision
A decision on a discretionary approval becomes effective at the end of the appeal period. The decision of the City Council is final on the date of its decision, except that decisions on Coastal Development Permits for development located in the appealable area of the coastal zone, the effective date is the day after the Coastal Commission appeal period expires and no appeals were filed or the date upon which final action on the appeal occurs. (3334-6/97)

 

Chapter 249 ENFORCEMENT
249.02 Permits, Licenses, Certificates, and Approvals
Any permit, license, certificate, or approval granted in conflict with any provision of this Code shall be void. All uses for which permits are issued or approvals granted shall remain in compliance with the ordinance code and evidence of failure to remain in compliance shall be deemed grounds for permit revocation. The cost of issuing permits and of enforcing compliance with the requirements and conditions of zoning permits, conditional use permits, and other discretionary approvals may be recovered through charges or fees in connection with issuance of such permits, as established by resolution of the City Council. (3254-11/94)

 

249.04 Enforcement Responsibilities
The director shall enforce all provisions of this ordinance code and shall have responsibility for revocation of discretionary permits, as provided in Section 249.06. (3254-11/94)

 

249.06 Revocation of Discretionary Permits
A.    Duties of Director. Upon determination by the director that there are reasonable grounds for revocation of conditional use permits, variance, development plan approval, or other discretionary approval authorized by this Code, a revocation hearing shall be set before the original hearing body.

B.     Notice and Public Hearing. Notice shall be given in the same manner required for a public hearing to consider approval. If no notice is required for the permit, none shall be required for the revocation hearing.

C.     Hearing. The Planning Commission or Zoning Administrator shall hear testimony of City staff and the owner of the use or structure for which the permit was granted, if present. At a public hearing, the testimony of any other interested person shall also be heard. A public hearing may be continued to a specific date, time, and place without additional public notice.

D.    Required Findings. The Planning Commission or Zoning Administrator shall revoke the permit upon making one or more of the following findings:

1.     That the permit was issued on the basis of erroneous or misleading information or misrepresentation;

2.     That the terms or conditions of approval of the permit have been violated or that other laws or provisions have been violated;

3.     That there has been a discontinuance of the exercise of the entitlement granted by the permit for 12 consecutive months.

E.     Decision and Notice. Within 10 days of the conclusion of the hearing, the Planning Commission or Zoning Administrator shall render a decision and the director shall mail notice of the decision to the owner of the use or structure for which the permit was issued and to any other person who has filed a written request for such notice.

F.     Effective Date—Appeals. A decision to revoke a discretionary permit shall become final 10 days after the date of the decision, unless appealed.

G.    Rights Cumulative. The City’s right to revoke a discretionary permit, as provided in this section, shall be cumulative to any other remedy allowed by law. (3254-11/94)

 

249.08 Enforcement Penalties
Each violation of the zoning and subdivision ordinances may be alternatively enforced as follows. Each method set forth herein is not intended to be mutually exclusive and does not prevent concurrent or consecutive methods being used to achieve compliance against continuing violations. Each and every 24-hour period any such violations exist constitutes a separate offense.

A.    Misdemeanor Infraction.

1.     Any person violating any of the provisions or failing to comply with any of the mandatory requirements of Titles 20 through 25 of this Code may be prosecuted for a misdemeanor or an infraction. Written citations for misdemeanors may be issued by police officers or code enforcement officers.

2.     All citations issued under this chapter shall be delivered to the City Attorney who shall have the prosecutory discretion as to the filing of a misdemeanor complaint with the court as required by California Penal Code Section 853.6.

Any person convicted of a misdemeanor under the provisions of this chapter shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.00 or imprisonment for a term not to exceed six months, or both fine and imprisonment. Any person convicted of an infraction shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.00.

B.     Civil Action. The City Attorney at the request of the City Council may institute an action in any court of competent jurisdiction to restrain, enjoin or abate the condition(s) found to be in violation of the provisions of Titles 20 through 25 of this Code, as provided by law.

C.     Payment of any fine or penalty shall not relieve a person, firm, or corporation from the responsibility of correcting the condition consisting of the violation. (3254-11/94)

 

249.10 Abatement Procedure
A.    Notification of Violations. Whenever the director determines that any property within the City is being maintained contrary to the provisions of this ordinance code, the director shall give written notice (“notice to abate”) to the owner, sent by certified mail to his or her last known address, stating the section(s) or standards being violated. Such notice shall set forth a reasonable time limit, in no event less than seven days, for correcting the violation(s).

B.     Administrative Hearing to Correct Violations. In the event said owner shall fail, neglect or refuse to comply with the notice to abate, the director shall require the Zoning Administrator to conduct an administrative hearing to ascertain whether abatement should be required.

C.     Notice of Hearing. Notice of said hearing shall be mailed to the owner not less than 10 days before the time fixed for hearing. Failure of any person to receive notice shall not affect the validity of the abatement proceedings hereunder.

D.    Administrative Hearing. At the time stated in the notice, the Zoning Administrator shall hear and consider all relevant evidence, objections or protests and shall receive testimony relative to such alleged zoning violation and to the proposed eviction or relocation of an illegal use or the rehabilitation, repair, removal or demolition of illegal structures. Said hearing may be continued from time to time. If the Zoning Administrator finds that a zoning violation does exist and there is sufficient cause to evict or relocate an illegal use or rehabilitate, demolish, remove or repair an illegal structure, the Zoning Administrator shall prepare findings and an order specifying the nature of the violation, the method(s) of abatement and the time within which the work shall be commenced and completed. The order shall include reference to the right of appeal set forth in subsection F of this section. A copy of the findings and order shall be mailed to the property owner by certified mail. In addition, a copy of the findings and order shall be forthwith conspicuously posted on the property.

E.     Procedure—No Appeal. In the absence of any appeal, the illegal use shall be discontinued or property shall be rehabilitated, repaired, removed, or demolished in the manner and means specifically set forth in the order of abatement. In the event the owner fails to abate the violation as ordered, the Zoning Administrator shall cause the same to be abated by City employees or private contract. The costs shall be billed to the owner. The Zoning Administrator is expressly authorized to enter upon said property for such procedure.

F.     Appeal Procedure—Hearing by City Council. The owner may appeal the Zoning Administrator’s findings and order to the City Council by filing an appeal with the City Clerk within seven days of the date of the Zoning Administrator’s decision. The appeal shall contain:

1.     A specific identification of the subject property;

2.     The names and addresses of the appellants;

3.     A statement of appellant’s legal interest in the subject property;

4.     A statement in ordinary and concise language of the specific order or action protested and the grounds for appeal, together with all material facts in support thereof;

5.     The date and signature of all appellants; and

6.     The verification of at least one appellant as to the truth of the matters stated in the appeal.

As soon as practicable after receiving the appeal, the City Clerk shall set a date for the Council to hear the appeal, which date shall be not less than seven days nor more than 30 days from the date the appeal was filed. The City Clerk shall mail each appellant written notice of the time and the place of the hearing at least five days prior to the date of the hearing. Continuances of the hearing may be granted by the Council on request of the owner for good cause shown, or on the Council’s own motion.

G.    Decision by Council. Upon the conclusion of the hearing, the Council shall determine whether any use or structure on the property or any part thereof, as maintained, constitutes a zoning violation. If the Council so finds, the Council shall adopt a resolution declaring such a violation, setting forth its findings and ordering the abatement of the same by having the illegal use evicted or relocated or the illegal structure rehabilitated, repaired, removed, or demolished in the manner and means specifically set forth in the resolution. The resolution shall set forth the time within which such work shall be completed by the owner, in no event less than 30 days. The decision and order of the Council shall be final.

H.    Notice of Order to Abate. A copy of the resolution of the Council ordering the abatement of such violation shall be sent by certified mail to the property owner(s). Upon abatement in full by the owner, the proceedings hereunder shall terminate.

I.      Abatement by City. If such nuisance is not abated as ordered within the prescribed abatement period, the director shall cause the same to be abated by City employees or private contract. The director is expressly authorized to enter upon said property for such purposes. The cost, including incidental expenses, of abating the violation shall be billed to the owner and shall become due and payable 30 days thereafter. The term “incidental expenses” shall include, but not be limited to, personnel costs, both direct and indirect; costs incurred in documenting the violation; the actual expenses and costs of the City in the preparation of notices, specifications and contracts, and in inspecting the work; and the costs of printing and mailing required hereunder.

J.      Limitation of Filing Judicial Action. Any action appealing the Council’s decision and order shall be commenced within 30 days of the date of mailing the decision.

K.    Demolition. No illegal structure shall be found to be a zoning violation and ordered demolished unless the order is based on competent sworn testimony and it is found that in fairness and in justice there is no way other than demolition reasonable to correct such violation.

L.     Recorded Notice of Intent to Demolish Required. A copy of any order or resolution requiring abatement by demolition shall be recorded with the County Recorder. (3254-11/94)

 

249.12 Lien Procedure
A.    Record of Cost of Abatement. The director shall keep an account of the cost, including incidental expenses, of abating zoning violation on each separate lot or parcel of land where the work is done by the City and shall render an itemized report in writing to the City Council showing the cost of abatement, including the cost of eviction or relocation of illegal uses or rehabilitation, demolition, or repair of illegal structures, including any salvage value relating thereto; provided that before said report is submitted to the City Council, a copy of the same shall be posted for at least five days upon the lot or parcel where the violation occurs, together with a notice of the time when said report shall be heard by the City Council for confirmation. A copy of said report and notice shall be served upon the property owner(s) at least five days prior to submitting it to the City Council. Proof of posting and service shall be made by affidavit filed with the City Clerk.

B.     Assessment Lien.

1.     The total cost for abating a zoning violation, as so confirmed by the City Council, shall constitute a special assessment against the respective lot or parcel of land to which it relates, and upon recordation in the Office of the County Recorder of a notice of lien, as so made and confirmed, shall constitute a lien on said property for the amount of such assessment.

2.     After such confirmation and recordation, a certified copy of the Council’s decision shall be filed with the County Auditor-Controller on or before August 1st of each year, whereupon it shall be the duty of said Auditor-Controller to add the amounts of the respective assessments to the next regular tax bills levied against said respective lots and parcels of land for municipal purposes and thereafter said amount shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary municipal taxes are collected, and shall be subject to the same penalties and the same procedure and sale in case of delinquency as provided for ordinary municipal taxes. All laws applicable to the levy, collection and enforcement of municipal taxes shall be applicable to such special assessment.

3.     In the alternative, after recordation, such lien may be foreclosed by judicial or other sale in the manner and means provided by law. (3254-11/94)

Title 25 ZONING CODE—SUBDIVISIONS
Chapter 250 GENERAL PROVISIONS
250.02 Citation and Authority
This title is adopted pursuant to Chapter XI, Section 7 of the California Constitution and to supplement and implement the Subdivision Map Act, Section 66410 et seq. of the Government Code. This title may be cited as the Subdivision Ordinance of the City of Huntington Beach.

 

250.04 Consistency
A.    No land shall be subdivided and developed for any purpose that is inconsistent with the Huntington Beach General Plan, the Local Coastal Program for development within the coastal zone, or any applicable specific plan of the City or that is not permitted by Titles 20 through 24 or other applicable provisions of this Code.

B.     The type and intensity of land use as shown on the General Plan, and Local Coastal Program for land within the coastal zone, and any applicable specific plan shall determine, together with the requirements of the Subdivision Map Act and this title, the type of streets, roads, highways, utilities, and other public services that the subdivider shall provide. (3334-6/97)

 

250.06 Applicability
A.    The provisions set forth in this title shall apply to all or parts of subdivisions within the City and to the preparation of subdivision maps and to other maps provided for by the Subdivision Map Act and this title after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title. All subdivisions and any part thereof lying within the City shall be made and all subdivision maps shall be prepared and presented for approval as provided for in this chapter.

B.     All subdivisions and lot line adjustments located within the coastal zone that meet the definition of development as defined in Section 245.04 (Development) shall require approval of a Coastal Development Permit. (3334-6/97)

 

250.08 Exceptions
This chapter shall not apply to the items listed in Sections 66412, 66412.1, 66412.2 and 66412.5 of the Subdivision Map Act. However subject to the provisions of Section 66412(d) of the Subdivision Map Act, a lot line adjustment between two or more existing adjacent parcels, where the land taken from one parcel is added to an adjacent parcel, and where a greater number of parcels than originally existed is not thereby created, provided that, the lot line adjustment is approved pursuant to Section 250.16.

 

250.10 Definitions
For the purposes of this title, unless otherwise apparent from the context, certain words and phrases used in this title are defined in this section as set forth below. All definitions provided in Chapters 1.04 and 203 and Section 245.04 of the Municipal Code and all definitions provided in the Subdivision Map Act shall also be applicable to this title and said definitions are hereby incorporated by this reference as though fully set forth herein.

Access Rights. The right of abutting landowners or occupants to obtain access to an abutting public way.

Acreage. Any parcel of land which is not a lot, as defined in this chapter, and those areas where a legal subdivision has not been made previously, or where a legal subdivision has declared such parcel as acreage.

Block. The area of land within a subdivision, which area is entirely bounded by streets, highways or ways, except alleys, or the exterior boundary or boundaries of the subdivision.

Certificate of Compliance. A valid authorization, issued by the City, stating that the subdivision of creation complies with City subdivision laws applicable at the time of creation or stating that the subdivision complies with the Subdivision Map Act and this title.

City Engineer. The City Engineer of the City of Huntington Beach.

Collector Street. A street, intermediate in importance between a local street and an arterial highway, which has the purpose of collecting local traffic and carrying it to an arterial highway.

Conversion. The creation of separate ownership of existing real property together with a separate interest in space of residential, industrial or commercial buildings.

Cul-de-Sac. A local street, one end of which is closed and consisting of a circular turnaround.

Day. A calendar day unless otherwise specified.

Department. The Community Development Department of the City of Huntington Beach.

Department of Public Works. The Department of Public Works of the City of Huntington Beach.

Director. The Director of the Community Development Department of the City of Huntington Beach.

Easement. A grant of one or more property rights by the owner to the City, a public entity, public utility, or private party.

Final Map. A map showing a subdivision of five or more parcels, prepared in accordance with the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and this title and designed to be placed on record in the office of the Orange County Recorder.

Lot Line Adjustment. A minor shift or rotation of an existing lot line where a greater or lesser number of parcels than originally existed is not created.

Merger. The joining of two or more contiguous parcels of land under one ownership into one parcel.

Parcel. A unit or portion of a unit of improved or unimproved land.

Parcel Map. A map showing a subdivision of four or fewer parcels or a subdivision pursuant to the exceptions stated in Section 66426 of the Subdivision Map Act prepared in accordance with the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and this title and designed to be placed on record in the office of the Orange County Recorder.

Parkway. That area between the curb face and abutting property line.

Person. Any individual, firm, co-partnership, joint venture, organization, corporation, estate, trust, receiver, syndicate, this City, and any other public agency.

Private Street. Any street or accessway which is privately held, maintained and utilized as access to a development.

Remainder. That portion of an existing parcel which is not divided for the purpose of sale, lease, or financing nor part of the subdivision.

Scenic Easement. An easement dedicated to the City that protects a view from a specific location or locations to a specific visual resource by prohibiting or limiting development.

Service Road. A street adjacent to and providing access to an arterial highway.

Standard Engineering Specifications. Specifications for public improvements adopted by the Department of Public Works.

Standard Plans. Plans and engineering drawings for public improvements as adopted by the Department of Public Works.

Subdivision Committee. The Subdivision Committee of the City of Huntington Beach.

Subdivision Map Act. The provisions of Division 2, Subdivisions of the California Government Code, relating to subdivisions of land and real property commencing with Section 66410.

Tentative Map. A map made for the purpose of showing the design and improvements of a proposed subdivision and the existing conditions in and around it precedent to the approval of a final map. Tentative map shall include a tentative parcel map, prepared pursuant to the provisions of this title.

Usable Parcel Area. That portion of a parcel which does not exceed a slope of 10%. Any portion of the parcel exceeding 10% shall, for the purpose of this title, be considered slope and not usable parcel area.

Vesting Tentative Map. A tentative map for a residential subdivision that has, printed conspicuously on its face, the words “vesting tentative map” at the time it is filed with the City, and is processed in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 252 of this title. (3334-6/97)

 

250.12 Responsibilities
A.    City Attorney. The City Attorney’s responsibilities shall include approving as to form all subdivision improvement agreements; covenants, codes, and restrictions; security, liability agreements and insurance; and all governing documents for a community apartment project, condominium, stock cooperative, or conversion.

B.     City Council.

1.     The City Council shall have final jurisdiction in the approval of final maps and improvement agreements and the acceptance by the City of land and/or improvements as may be proposed for dedication to the City for subdivisions of five or more parcels.

2.     The City Council shall act as the appeal board for hearing appeals of all subdivision maps acted upon by the Planning Commission.

C.     Planning Commission. The Planning Commission’s responsibilities shall include approving, conditionally approving, or denying the application for tentative map approval of subdivisions of 10 or more parcels. The Planning Commission shall act as the appeal board for hearing appeals of tentative parcel maps and tentative maps for subdivisions of nine or fewer parcels.

D.    Zoning Administrator. The Zoning Administrator’s responsibilities shall include the processing and approval, conditional approval or denial of tentative map approval of subdivisions of nine or less parcels, tentative parcel maps and waivers of parcel map requirements, mergers and certificates of compliance.

E.     City Engineer. The City Engineer’s responsibilities shall include:

1.     Establishing design and construction details, standards and specifications.

2.     Determining if proposed subdivision improvements comply with the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and this title.

3.     The processing and certification of final maps, reversion to acreage maps, and amended maps and the processing and approval of subdivision improvement plans.

4.     Examining and certifying that final maps are in substantial compliance with the approved tentative map.

5.     Final jurisdiction in the approval of parcel maps and certification of lot line adjustments.

6.     The inspection and approval of subdivision public improvements.

7.     The acceptance of dedications and public improvements for subdivisions by parcel map, and off-site dedications lying outside a subdivision boundary which require a separate grant deed.

8.     Collection of all required fees and deposits associated with final maps and parcel maps except park and recreation fees.

F.     Director. The director’s responsibilities shall include the processing of tentative maps and lot line adjustments.

1.     Determinations of violations of the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act or this title.

2.     The management of the Department of Community Development in carrying out the responsibilities imposed upon it by this title. When necessary to carry out the director’s responsibilities hereunder, the director may designate and authorize a representative to act on his or her behalf.

3.     Collection of park and recreation fees and fees associated with tentative maps.

G.    Subdivision Committee. The Subdivision Committee’s responsibilities shall include examining and determining that tentative and vesting tentative maps comply with the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act, this title, the Local Coastal Program for maps located within the coastal zone, and the City’s General Plan, and recommending approval, disapproval, or conditional approval of tentative or vesting tentative maps to the Planning Commission or Zoning Administrator.

The Subdivision Committee shall consist of the following members or their authorized representatives:

1.     The director who shall serve as chairperson and secretary;

2.     The City Engineer;

3.     The Fire Chief; and

4.     Three members of the Planning Commission.

Representatives from other departments shall attend meetings when requested to do so by the Subdivision Committee.

H.    Coastal Commission. The Coastal Commission shall have appeal jurisdiction over Coastal Development Permits approved for all subdivisions and lot line adjustments located within the appealable area of the coastal zone that constitute development as defined in Section 245.04 (Development). (3334-6/97, 3681-12/04, 4101-10/16)

 

250.14 Map Requirements
A.    Tentative and Final Map. A tentative and final map shall be required for all subdivisions creating five or more parcels, five or more condominiums as defined in Section 783 of the Civic Code, a community apartment project containing five or more parcels, or for the conversion of a dwelling to a stock cooperative containing five or more dwelling units. Exceptions as stated in Section 66426 of the Subdivision Map Act shall comply with subsection B of this section.

B.     Tentative and Parcel Map. A tentative and parcel map shall be required for all divisions of land into four or fewer parcels and exceptions stated in Section 66426 of the Subdivision Map Act. However parcel maps shall not be required for:

1.     Subdivisions of a portion of the operating right-of-way of a railroad corporation, which are created by short-term leases terminable by either party on not more than 30 days’ notice in writing.

2.     Land conveyed to or from a governmental agency, public entity or public utility, or for land conveyed to a subsidiary of a public utility for conveyance to such public utility for rights-of-way, unless a showing is made by the Department in individual cases, upon substantial evidence, that public policy necessitates a parcel map. If a parcel map is not required, the dedication or offer must be indicated by a separate instrument.

3.     Lot line adjustments, provided:

a.     No additional parcels or building sites are created;

b.     The resulting parcels conform to Titles 20 through 24 of this Code;

c.     The lot line adjustment shall not sever any existing structure on either of the two parcels;

d.     The lot line adjustment shall not allow a greater number of dwelling units than allowed prior to the adjustment;

e.     The lot line adjustment is approved by the director or by the Planning Commission on appeal; and

f.      A plat map showing the lot line adjustment is prepared, approved, and filed in accord with the provisions of Section 253.24.

4.     Parcel maps waived by the Zoning Administrator as provided by Section 251.20.

5.     Subdivision of property with two to four apartment or stock cooperative units that were converted to and sold as condominium units without approval of a conditional use permit and tentative parcel map prior to June 1, 2004, provided:

a.     Sale of condominium units is evidenced by recorded documents;

b.     No dedications or improvements are required by the Zoning and Subdivision Ordinance;

c.     Covenants, conditions, and restrictions (CC&Rs) are recorded at the County of Orange;

d.     A plat map showing the condominium subdivision is prepared, approved by the City Engineer, and recorded at the County of Orange;

e.     A conditional use permit is approved pursuant to Section 235.04 and a Certificate of Compliance is issued by the director and recorded at the County of Orange.

C.     Designation of Remainder Parcel. When a subdivision includes a remainder parcel as provided in Section 66424.6 of the Subdivision Map Act, the remainder parcel shall be in conformance with Titles 20 through 24 and shall require a certificate of compliance as provided by Section 258.06. (3530-2/02, 3690-1/05)

 

250.16 Fees and Deposits
All persons submitting maps as required by this chapter shall pay all fees and/or deposits as provided by this title and by the City Council resolution establishing applicable fees and charges.

 

Chapter 251 TENTATIVE MAPS
251.02 General
A tentative map shall be required for all subdivisions as to which a final or parcel map are required by this title. The form and contents, submittal, and approval of tentative maps shall be governed by the provisions of this chapter. (3254-11/94)

 

251.04 Form and Contents
A.    The tentative map shall be prepared in a manner acceptable to the director and shall be prepared by a California registered civil engineer or California licensed land surveyor. It shall show lot lines, existing and proposed topography, existing and proposed public improvements, and such other information as may be required by the City Engineer. Sufficient data or calculations may be required by the City Engineer to show adequacy of existing or proposed infrastructure elements.

B.     The director may waive any of the tentative map requirements if circumstances justify a waiver or if the type of subdivision does not need to comply with these requirements as provided in Section 251.20. (3254-11/94)

 

251.06 Accompanying Data and Reports
A.    The tentative map shall be accompanied by the following data and reports:

1.     Environmental Review. An environmental assessment shall be submitted, unless exempt, to allow a determination to be made in accordance with the California Environmental Quality Act.

2.     Title Report. A preliminary title report, not more than six months old and acceptable to the Department showing the legal owners at the time of filing the tentative map.

3.     Geotechnical Reports. Three copies of a preliminary soils report and engineering geology report, unless this requirement is waived by the director.

4.     Other Reports. Any other data or reports deemed necessary by the Department.

B.     If the City Engineer has knowledge of, or the preliminary soils and geology reports indicate, the presence of soil or geologic conditions which, if corrective measures are not taken, would lead to structural defects, a soils and/or geologic investigation of each lot in the subdivision may be required by the director. Such soils and/or geologic investigation shall address the adequacy of the sites to be developed by the proposed grading and the effect of the soil or geologic conditions on the proposed development. The City may approve the subdivision, or portion thereof, where soils or geologic problems exist if the City determines that the recommended actions provide for acceptable procedures and design criteria for corrective measures. A condition of the issuance of any foundation permit will require that the approved recommended action be completed and certified as having been done in compliance with the report.

C.     When preliminary soils and/or geology reports are prepared, final reports shall be submitted prior to the acceptance of the improvements or the release of occupancy permits indicating the specific actions taken pursuant to the preliminary report recommendations. Such reports shall contain complete and sufficient field data to indicate full compliance with the preliminary report or subsequent progress report recommendations as they were applied to specific areas or improvements. If the report is found to be incomplete, inaccurate, or unsatisfactory, the director may require additional information or may reject the report.

D.    A preliminary soils and/or geology report may be waived by the director provided the director finds that, due to the knowledge the City has as to the soil and geologic conditions in the subdivision, no preliminary analysis is necessary. Such knowledge would include the nature, distribution, and strength of the existing soils, and the necessary grading procedures and design criteria for corrective measures, and the geology of the site and the effect of geologic conditions on the proposed development. (3254-11/94)

 

251.08 Hearings and Action
A.    Subdivision Committee. Whenever a property is to be subdivided into five or more parcels, the Subdivision Committee may hold a public hearing prior to reporting on the tentative map for said subdivision. Notice of the time and place thereof, including a general description of the subject matter shall be given at least 10 days before the hearing. Copies of said notice shall be mailed to the subdivider, engineer, and property owner of the property proposed for subdivision. Notice shall also be given to each local agency expected to provide water, sewage, streets, schools, or other essential facilities or services to the subdivision.

B.     Notice of Public Hearings. Upon receipt of an application that is accepted as complete, the Department shall set a date for a public hearing, provide notice as required by Chapter 248 and prepare a report with recommendations. A copy of the Department report shall be forwarded to the subdivider at least three working days prior to the public hearing.

C.     Planning Commission Action. The Planning Commission or Zoning Administrator as the case may be, shall approve, conditionally approve, or deny a tentative map within 50 days after the tentative map has been accepted. This time period shall commence after certification of the environmental impact report, adoption of the negative declaration, or determination that the project is exempt from the requirements of Division 13 (commencing with Section 21000) of the Public Resources Code.

D.    Factors to Be Considered. In reaching a decision upon the tentative map, the Planning Commission or Zoning Administrator shall consider the effect of that decision on the housing needs of the region and balance these needs against the public service needs of its residents and available fiscal and environmental resources.

E.     Approval. The tentative map may be approved or conditionally approved if the following findings are made:

1.     That the proposed map is consistent with the General Plan or any applicable specific plan, or other applicable provisions of this Code;

2.     That the site is physically suitable for the type and density of development;

3.     That the design of the subdivision or the proposed improvements will not cause serious health problems or substantial environmental damage or substantially and avoidably injure fish or wildlife or their habitat. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Planning Commission or Zoning Administrator may approve such a tentative map if an environmental impact report was prepared with respect to the project and a finding was made that specific economic, social or other considerations make infeasible the mitigation measures or project alternatives identified in the environmental impact report;

4.     That the design of the subdivision or the type of improvements will not conflict with easements, acquired by the public at large, for access through or use of, property within the proposed subdivision unless alternative easements, for access or for use, will be provided.

F.     Denial. The Planning Commission or Zoning Administrator shall deny approval of a tentative subdivision map if it determines that approval will result in any of the conditions as described in Government Code Section 66474. (3254-11/94)

 

251.10 Waiver of Time Limits for Zoning Administrator or Planning Commission Action
Any applicable time limits for acting on the tentative map may be extended by mutual consent of the subdivider and the Planning Commission or Zoning Administrator. A waiver of applicable time limits may be required to permit concurrent processing of related project approvals or environmental review on the same development project. (3254-11/94)

 

251.12 Appeals of Planning Commission or Zoning Administrator Action
The subdivider or any interested person adversely affected by action under Section 251.08 may, within 10 days after the decision, file an appeal under the provision of Chapter 248. (3254-11/94)

 

251.14 Expiration
The approval or conditional approval of a tentative map shall expire 24 months from its approval. The period of time may be lengthened if the project is subject to Section 66452.6(a), (b) and (c) of the Subdivision Map Act. (3254-11/94)

 

251.16 Extensions
A.    Request by Subdivider. The subdivider may request an extension of the expiration date of the approved or conditionally approved tentative map by written application to the Department. The application and any required fee shall be filed not less than 30 days before the map is to expire and shall state the reasons for requesting the extension.

B.     Action. The Department shall review the request, determine whether a public hearing is required based on changing conditions in the area, and submit the application for the extension, together with a report, to the Planning Commission or Zoning Administrator for approval, conditional approval, or denial at the next scheduled meeting. A copy of the Department’s report shall be forwarded to the subdivider prior to the Planning Commission meeting on the extension. After conducting a public hearing or reviewing the request, the Planning Commission or Zoning Administrator may approve or deny the requested extension.

C.     Time Limit of Extensions. The time at which the tentative map expires may be extended for a period of time of up to one year, with a maximum of three one-year extensions of time. The extensions of time shall commence with the expiration date of the approved or conditionally approved tentative map. The approved new date shall not extend more than five years beyond the date of initial approval.

D.    Appeal of Extension. The subdivider or any interested person adversely affected may appeal any action on an extension in accordance with Chapter 248, except that any such appeal shall be filed within 15 days after the action. (3254-11/94)

 

251.18 Amendments to Approved or Conditionally Approved Tentative Map
A.    Minor amendments to the approved or conditionally approved tentative map or conditions of approval may be approved by the Department upon application by the subdivider provided:

1.     No units, building sites, or structures are added;

2.     Changes are consistent with the intent and spirit of the original tentative map approval;

3.     There are no resulting violations of this Code.

B.     The amendment shall be indicated on the approved or conditionally approved tentative map and certified by the director. Amendments to the tentative map conditions of approval which, in the opinion of the Department, are not minor, shall be presented to the Planning Commission or Zoning Administrator for its approval. Processing shall be in accordance with the provisions for processing a tentative map as set forth in this chapter. Any approved amendment shall not alter the expiration date of the tentative map, but extensions may be granted under the provisions of Section 251.16. (3254-11/94)

 

251.20 Waiver of Parcel Map Requirements
A.    The Zoning Administrator may, at his or her discretion, waive the requirements for a parcel map for the following:

1.     Division of real property or interests therein created by eminent domain procedures, partition, or other civil judgments or decrees.

2.     Division of property resulting from conveyance of land or interest therein to or from the City, public entity or public utility for a public purpose, such as school sites, public building sites, or rights-of-way or easements for streets, sewers, utilities, drainage, etc.

3.     Division of property which has been merged pursuant to this title, the Subdivision Map Act or any prior ordinance of the City.

4.     A subdivision of four parcels or less wherein each resulting parcel contains a gross area of 40 acres or more.

5.     A subdivision of four parcels or less only for the purpose of leasing the parcels resulting from such subdivision.

6.     A consolidation of four or less contiguous parcels under the same ownership which were created under the provisions of this chapter and when consolidated contain less than five acres, abutting upon a maintained public street or highway and no dedications or improvements are required by this chapter or by the Zoning Administrator.

B.     The Zoning Administrator, in consultation with the City Engineer, shall make a finding that the proposed division of land complies with requirements as to: (1) area; (2) the City’s standard engineering specifications for improvement and design, floodwater drainage control, appropriate improved public roads, sanitary disposal facilities, water supply availability, and environmental protection; and (3) other requirements of the Subdivision Map Act and this Code.

C.     Upon the waiver of the parcel map requirement pursuant to this section, the Department shall file with the County Recorder a certificate of compliance for the land to be divided, and a plat map showing the division. The certificate shall include a certificate by the County Tax Collector in accordance with the Subdivision Map Act.

D.    A waiver by the Zoning Administrator may be conditioned to provide for payment by the subdivider of parkland dedication, drainage, and other fees by a method approved by the Zoning Administrator. (3254-11/94)

 

Chapter 252 VESTING TENTATIVE MAPS
252.02 Application
A.    Whenever a provision of the Subdivision Map Act, as implemented and supplemented by this title, requires the filing of a tentative map or tentative parcel map for a development, a vesting tentative map may instead be filed.

B.     If a subdivider does not seek the rights conferred by the Vesting Tentative Map Statute, the filing of a vesting tentative map shall not be a prerequisite to any approval for any proposed subdivision, permit for construction, or work preparatory to construction.

C.     Whenever a vesting tentative map is filed, the applicant shall also file a conditional use permit application as provided in Chapter 241 for concurrent processing. (3254-11/94)

 

252.04 Filing and Processing
A vesting tentative map shall be filed in the same form and have the same contents, accompanying data and reports, and shall be processed in the same manner as set forth in Chapter 251 for a tentative map except as hereinafter provided:

A.    At the time a vesting tentative map is filed, it shall have printed conspicuously on its face the words “Vesting Tentative Map.”

B.     The design and specifications for all public facilities including but not limited to on- and off-site sewer, water, drainage, roads, and other improvements. The subdivider shall submit detailed geological, drainage, flood control, soils, traffic, or other reports deemed necessary by the City Engineer and director to permit a complete review of the design and improvements for the subdivision. For subdivisions over five parcels, the subdivider shall also submit a fiscal impact report prepared by an independent economic analyst, evaluating the projected impacts the development may have on City services. This report shall also include marketing and cost benefit information for the project. (3254-11/94)

 

252.06 Fees
A.    Upon filing a vesting tentative map, the subdivider shall pay all required fees and/or deposits for checking and processing maps, plans and reports.

B.     The director may determine the amount of all other fees required by this title either at the time of final map or parcel map approval or when an application for the building permit is made, provided that park and recreation fees may not be deferred. (3254-11/94)

 

252.08 Expiration
The approval or conditional approval of a vesting tentative map shall expire at the end of the same time period, and shall be subject to the same extensions, established by Section 251.14 of this title for the expiration of the approval or conditional approval of a tentative map. (3254-11/94)

 

252.10 Rights of a Vesting Tentative Map
A.    The approval or conditional approval of a vesting tentative map shall confer a vested right to proceed with development in substantial compliance with the ordinances, policies, and standards described in Section 66474.2 of the Subdivision Map Act. However, if Section 66474.2 is repealed, the approval or conditional approval of a vesting tentative map shall confer a vested right to proceed with development in substantial compliance with the ordinances, policies, and standards in effect at the time of the vesting.

B.     Notwithstanding Section 252.10(A), a permit, approval, extension, or entitlement may be conditioned or denied if any of the following are determined:

1.     A failure to do so would place the residents of the subdivision or the immediate community, or both, in a condition dangerous to their health or safety, or both.

2.     The condition or denial is required, in order to comply with state or federal law.

C.     The rights referred to herein shall expire if a final map is not approved prior to the expiration of the vesting tentative map as provided in Section 252.08. If the final map is approved, these rights shall last for the following periods of time:

1.     An initial time period of one year beyond the recording of the final map or parcel map. Where several final maps are recorded on various phases of a project covered by a single vesting tentative map, this one-year initial time period shall begin for each phase when the final map for that phase is recorded. All of said final maps or parcel maps must be recorded within the time period set forth in Section 252.10 or the vesting tentative map approval shall expire for those lots for which final maps or parcel maps are not timely recorded.

2.     The one-year initial time period set forth in Section 252.10(C)(1) shall be automatically extended by any time used for processing a complete application for a grading permit or for any required design or architectural review, if such processing exceeds 30 days from the date a complete application is filed.

3.     A subdivider may apply to the Planning Commission, in the case of final maps, or to the Zoning Administrator, in the case of parcel maps, for a one-year extension at any time before the initial time period set forth in (C)(1) expires. If the extension is denied, the subdivider may appeal that denial to the City Council within 15 days in accord with Section 252.12.

4.     If the subdivider submits a complete application for a building permit during the periods of time specified in subsections 252.10(C)(1) through (3), the rights referred to herein shall continue until the expiration of that permit, or any extension of that permit. (3254-11/94)

 

252.12 Amendment to Approved Vesting Tentative Map
Amendments to the approved or conditionally approved vesting tentative map shall be made in accord with Section 251.16. (3254-11/94)

 

252.14 Development Inconsistent with Zoning
A.    Whenever a subdivider files a vesting tentative map for a subdivision whose intended development is inconsistent with Titles 20 through 24 of this Code, that inconsistency shall be noted on the map. The City may deny such a vesting tentative map or approve it conditioned on the subdivider, or his or her designee, obtaining the necessary change in zoning to eliminate the inconsistency. If the change in zoning is obtained, the approved or conditionally approved vesting tentative map shall, notwithstanding Section 252.10, confer a vested right to proceed with the development in substantial compliance with the change in zoning, as approved.

B.     The rights conferred by this section shall be for the time periods set forth in Section 252.10. (3254-11/94)

 

Chapter 253 FINAL MAPS AND PARCEL MAPS
253.02 General
The form, contents, accompanying data, and filing of a final map or a parcel map shall conform to the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and this chapter. The final map or parcel map shall be prepared by or under the direction of a California registered civil engineer or California licensed land surveyor. (3254-11/94)

 

253.04 Phasing
A.    Multiple final maps or parcel maps relating to an approved or conditionally approved tentative map may be filed prior to the expiration of the tentative map if (1) the subdivider, at the time the tentative map is filed, notifies the director in writing of the subdivider’s intention to file multiple final maps on the tentative map; or (2) after filing of the tentative map, the director and the subdivider concur in the filing of multiple final maps. In submitting such a request, the subdivider shall not be required to define the number or configuration of the proposed multiple maps.

B.     The filing of a final map or parcel map on a portion of an approved or conditionally approved tentative map shall not invalidate any part of the tentative map. Each final map which constitutes a part, or unit, of the approved or conditionally approved tentative map shall have a separate subdivision number. (3254-11/94)

 

253.06 Survey Required
A.    An accurate and complete survey of the land to be subdivided shall be made by a California registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor. All monuments, property lines, centerlines of streets, alleys and easements adjoining or within the subdivision shall be tied into the survey. The allowable error of closure on any portion of the final map shall not exceed 1:10,000.

B.     At the time of making the survey for the final map or parcel map, the engineer or surveyor shall set sufficient durable monuments, conforming with the standards of the Business and Professions Code, so that another engineer or surveyor may readily retrace the survey. At least one exterior boundary line shall be monumented prior to recording the final map or parcel map. Other monuments shall be set as required by the City Engineer. (3254-11/94)

 

253.08 Form
The form of the final map or parcel map shall conform to the Subdivision Map Act, and be approved by the City Engineer. The final map or parcel map shall be legibly drawn, printed, or reproduced by a process guaranteeing a permanent record in black on tracing cloth or polyester base film. Certificates, affidavits and acknowledgments may be legibly stamped or printed upon the map with black opaque ink. If ink is used on polyester base film, the ink surface shall be coated with a suitable substance to ensure permanent legibility. The size of each sheet shall be 18 inches by 26 inches. A marginal line shall be drawn completely around each sheet, leaving an entirely blank margin of one inch. The scale of the map shall be not less than 1″ = 100′ or as may be necessary to show all details clearly, and enough sheets shall be used to accomplish this end. (3254-11/94)

 

253.10 Contents
The contents of the final map or parcel map shall conform to the Subdivision Map Act and as follows:

A.    Boundary. The boundary of the subdivision shall be designated by a heavy black line, three times heavier than the next heaviest line on the map other than the margin, in such a manner as not to obliterate figures or other data.

B.     Title. Each sheet shall have a title showing the subdivision number and name and the location of the property being subdivided with reference to maps which have been previously recorded, or by reference to the plat of a United States Survey. The following words shall appear in the title, “City of Huntington Beach, County of Orange, California.”

C.     Certificates and Acknowledgments. All certificates and acknowledgments shall be made as required by the Subdivision Map Act (Sections 66433 et seq.) and shall appear only once on the cover sheet.

D.    Scale, North Point and Basis of Bearings. There must appear on each map sheet the scale, the north point and the basis of bearings based on the California Coordinate System (NAD83), 1990 adjustment or current adjustment as directed by the City Engineer as established by the use of existing monuments, global positioning system (GPS) or by astronomic observation.

E.     Linear, Angular and Radial Data. Sufficient linear, angular and radial data shall be shown to determine the bearings and lengths of monument lines, street centerlines, the boundary lines of the subdivision, the boundary lines on every lot and parcel which is a part of the subdivision, and ties to existing monuments used to establish the boundary. Arc length, radius and total central angle and radial bearings of all curves shall be shown. Ditto marks shall not be used in the dimensions and data shown on the map.

F.     Monuments. The location and description of all existing and proposed monuments shall be shown. Standard City monuments shall be set at, or on City Engineer approved offsets, the following locations:

1.     The intersection of street centerlines;

2.     Beginning and end of curves or intersection of tangents on centerlines;

3.     Tract boundaries other than unit lines; and

4.     At other locations as may be required by the City Engineer.

G.    Parcel Numbers. Parcel numbers shall begin with the number one in each subdivision and shall continue consecutively with no omissions or duplications except where contiguous lands, under the same ownership, are being subdivided in successive units, in which event parcel numbers may begin with the next consecutive number following the last number in the preceding unit. Each parcel shall be shown entirely on one sheet of the final map or parcel map, unless approved by the City Engineer.

H.    Adjoining Properties. The adjoining corners of all adjoining subdivisions shall be identified by subdivision number, or name when not identified by official number, and reference to the book and page of the filed map showing such subdivision. If no subdivision is adjacent, then the adjacent property shall be identified by the name of the owner and reference to the recorded deed by book and page number for the last record owner.

I.      City Boundaries. City boundaries which cross or join the subdivision shall be clearly designated.

J.      Street Names. The names of all streets, alleys, or highways within or adjoining the subdivision shall be shown.

K.    Easements and Dedications.

1.     Easements and dedications for roads or streets, paths, water mains, stormwater drainage, sanitary sewers or other public use as may be required, shall be dedicated to the public for acceptance by the City or other public agency, and the use shall be specified on the map. If at the time the final map or parcel map is approved, any streets, paths, alleys or storm drainage easements are not accepted by the City Council, the offer of dedication shall remain open and the City Council may, by resolution at any later date, accept and open the streets, paths, alleys or storm drainage easements for public use, which acceptance shall be recorded in the office of the County Recorder.

2.     The City may accept any dedications lying outside the subdivision boundary which require a separate grant deed. The acceptance shall be recorded in the office of the County Recorder. All easements of record shall be shown on the map, together with the name of the grantee and sufficient recording data to identify the conveyance, e.g., recorder’s serial number and date, or book and page of official records.

3.     Easements not disclosed by the records in the office of the County Recorder and found by the surveyor or engineer to be existing, shall be specifically designated on the map, identifying the apparent dominant tenements for which the easement was created.

4.     The sidelines of all easements of record shall be shown by dashed lines on the final map or parcel map with the widths, lengths and bearings of record. The width and location of all easements shall be approved by the City Engineer.

L.     Open Space Areas. Open space areas, including greenbelts and open space corridors, may be shown, subject to the approval of the City. Such areas shall be dedicated as open space easements unless otherwise specified in the approval of the tentative map, and the subdivider shall agree to allow such land to be included within an open space maintenance assessment district if proposed by the City. (3254-11/94)

 

253.12 Preliminary Submittal for City Approval
The subdivider shall submit prints of the final map or parcel map to the City Engineer for checking. The City Engineer may waive any of the requirements if the location and nature of the final map or parcel map does not need compliance with this section. The preliminary prints shall be accompanied by the following data, plans, reports, and documents in a form as approved by the City Engineer and, where applicable, the City Attorney and Director:

A.    Improvement plans as required by Section 255.12 of this chapter.

B.     A soils report prepared in accordance with this title.

C.     A title report not more than six months old, showing the legal owners at the time of submittal of the final map or parcel map.

D.    A certificate from the County Tax Collector stating that all taxes due have been paid or that a tax bond or other adequate form of security assuring payments of all taxes that are a lien but not yet payable has been filed with the county.

E.     Deeds for off-site easements or rights-of-way required for road or drainage purposes which have not been dedicated on the final map or parcel map. Written evidence acceptable to the City in the form of rights of entry or permanent easements across private property outside of the subdivision permitting or granting access to perform necessary construction work and permitting the maintenance of the facility.

F.     Traverse closures for the boundary blocks, parcels, easements, street centerlines and monument lines.

G.    Complete hydrology and hydraulic calculations of all drainage systems.

H.    For a cooperative apartment project, condominium, stock cooperative, or conversion, the proposed Declaration of Covenants, Conditions and Restrictions containing the provisions described in Section 1353 of the Civil Code, and all other governing documents for the subdivision, as are appropriate pursuant to Section 1363 of the Civil Code; for all other subdivisions any Declaration of Covenants, Conditions and Restrictions proposed in connection therewith. All governing documents shall be subject to review and approval by the director and City Attorney.

I.      A guarantee of title, in form acceptable to the City Engineer and City Attorney, shall be issued by a competent title company to and for the benefit and protection of the City and shall be continued complete up to the instant of recording of the final map or parcel map, guaranteeing that the names of all persons whose consent is necessary to pass a clear title to the land being subdivided, and all public easements being offered for dedication, and all acknowledgments thereto, appear on the proper certificates and are correctly shown on the map, both as to consents as to the making thereof and affidavits of dedication where necessary.

J.      In the event drainage structures, grading, paving, or other required improvements have not been completed prior to the presentation of the final map or parcel map, an agreement in accordance with the requirements of Section 255.14 shall be filed for the improvement thereof. The subdivider shall secure the performance of the agreement in accordance with the requirements of Section 255.16.

K.    Liability Agreement and Insurance.

1.     A hold-harmless agreement acceptable to the City Engineer and City Attorney obligating the subdivider to hold the City and its officers, agents and employees harmless from any liability for damages or claims for damages for personal injury or death which arise from the operations of the subdivider and/or the subdivider’s subcontractors in connection with the subdivision.

2.     A certificate of insurance or contractual liability endorsement acceptable to the City Attorney naming the City as additional insured and reporting to the City the amount of insurance the subdivider carries for the subdivider’s own liability for damages or claims for damages for personal injury or death which arise from the operations of the subdivider or his/her subcontractors in connection with the subdivision.

3.     The City Attorney, in consultation with the City Manager or his/her designee, may waive the requirement for a certificate of insurance or contractual liability endorsement if evidence satisfactory to the City Attorney is submitted indicating the subdivider’s inability to obtain such a certificate or endorsement naming the City as an additional insured.

L.     Any additional data, reports, or information as required by the City Engineer, City Attorney or Director.

The subdivider or any interested person adversely affected by the City Attorney’s or other City Officer’s action under Section 253.12 may file an appeal in writing to the City Council in accord with Chapter 248. (3254-11/94)

 

253.14 Review by City Engineer
The City Engineer shall review the final map or parcel map. The subdivider shall make corrections and/or additions until the map is acceptable to the City Engineer. (3254-11/94)

 

253.16 Approval by City Engineer
The subdivider shall submit to the City Engineer the original tracing of the final or parcel map, corrected to its final form and signed by all parties required to execute the certificates on the map. Original signatures shall appear on the original drawing and on any duplicates. Upon receipt of all required certificates and submittals, the City Engineer shall sign the appropriate certificates and transmit the original final map to the City Clerk. The City Engineer shall approve the parcel map if it complies with the requirements of the Subdivision Map Act, this chapter, the tentative map and all conditions thereof and transmit the parcel map to the City Clerk. (3254-11/94)

 

253.18 Final Map Approval by City Council
A.    The final map approved by the City Engineer as complying with the approved or conditionally approved tentative map shall be filed with the City Council for approval after all required certificates have been signed. The date the map shall be deemed filed with the City Council is the date on which the City Clerk receives the map. The City Council shall consider approval of the subdivision improvement agreement and improvement security before approving the final map.

B.     If the subdivision improvement agreement and final map are approved by the City Council, it shall instruct the Mayor to execute the agreement on behalf of the City. If the subdivision improvement agreement and/or final map is unacceptable, the City Council shall make its recommended corrections, instruct the City Engineer to draft a new agreement and/or revise the final map and defer approval until an acceptable agreement and/or final map has been resubmitted.

C.     The City Council shall not postpone or refuse approval of a final map because the subdivider has failed to meet a tentative map condition requiring construction or installation of off-site improvements on land which neither the subdivider nor the City has sufficient title or interest to permit the improvements to be made. In this case, the City shall follow the procedure according to Section 255.04. (3254-11/94)

 

253.20 Limitation on Denial by City Council
The City Council shall not deny approval of the final map if the City has previously approved a tentative map for the proposed subdivision and if the City Council finds that the final map is in compliance with the requirements of the General Plan, any applicable adopted specific plans, Titles 20 through 24 of this Code, the Subdivision Map Act, this chapter, the tentative map and all conditions thereof, and all other applicable provisions of this Code. (3254-11/94)

 

253.22 Filing with the County Recorder
Upon approval of the final map by the City Council, the City Clerk shall execute the appropriate certificate on the certificate sheet and shall, subject to the provisions of Section 66464 of the Subdivision Map Act, transmit the map, or have an authorized agent transmit the map, to the County Recorder. Upon receipt of the parcel map approved by the City Engineer, the City Clerk shall transmit the map, or have an authorized agent transmit the map, to the County Recorder subject to the provisions of Section 66464 of the Subdivision Map Act. (3254-11/94)

 

253.24 Requirements for Correction and Amendment of Maps
A.    After a final or parcel map is filed in the office of the County Recorder, it may be amended by a certificate of correction or an amending map:

1.     To correct an error in any course or distance shown thereon;

2.     To show any course or distance that was omitted therefrom;

3.     To correct an error in the description of the real property shown on the map;

4.     To indicate monuments set after the death, disability or retirement from practice of the engineer or surveyor charged with responsibilities for setting monuments;

5.     To show the proper location of any monument that has been changed in location, or character, or originally was shown at the wrong location or incorrectly as to its character;

6.     To correct any other type of map error or omission as approved by the City Engineer, which does not affect any property right. Errors and omissions may include, but are not limited to, parcel numbers, acreage, street names and identification of adjacent record maps. Error does not include changes in courses or distances from which an error is not ascertainable from the data shown on the final or parcel map;

7.     To make modifications when there are changes that make any or all of the conditions of the map no longer appropriate or necessary and that the modifications do not impose any additional burden on the present fee owner of the property, and if the modifications do not alter any right, title or interest in the real property reflected on the recorded map. The modification shall be set for public hearing by the Planning Commission or the Zoning Administrator in accord with Section 250.12. The Planning Commission or Zoning Administrator shall confine the hearing to consideration of, and action on, the proposed modification.

B.     Form and Contents. The amending map or certificate of correction shall be prepared by a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor. The form and contents of the amending map shall conform to the requirements of this title. The certificate of correction shall set forth in detail the corrections made and show the names of the present fee owners of the property affected by the correction.

C.     Application Requirements. Any request for a lot line adjustment shall be accompanied by a map showing existing boundaries and the proposed change, consent of any party or entity holding beneficial interest in the property, and such other information as may be required by the director.

D.    Submittal and Approval by City Engineer. The amending map or certificate of correction, complete as to final form, shall be submitted to the City Engineer for review and approval. The City Engineer shall examine the amending map or certificate of correction and if the only changes made are those set forth in this section, this fact shall be certified by the City Engineer on the amending map or certificate of correction.

E.     Filing with the County Recorder. The amending map or certificate of correction certified by the City Engineer shall be filed in the office of the County Recorder in which the original map was filed. (3254-11/94)

 

Chapter 254 DEDICATIONS AND RESERVATIONS
Note
*       [Ordinance. No. 3827 (expired 4/15/10) and Ordinance No. 3879, effective from 5/3/10 to 5/3/11, temporarily deferred the payment of certain Development Impact Fees.]

 

254.02 Dedication of Streets, Alleys and Other Public Rights-of-Way or Easements
As a condition of approval of a tentative map, the subdivider shall dedicate, or make an irrevocable offer to dedicate, all parcels of land within the subdivision that are needed for required improvements, including access rights and abutters’ rights. In addition, the subdivider shall construct or agree to construct all required improvements in accord with Chapter 255.

 

254.04 Waiver of Direct Access Rights
The City may require as a condition of approval of a tentative map that dedications or offers of dedication of streets include a waiver of direct access rights to any such street from any property within or abutting the subdivision. Upon acceptance of the dedication, such waiver shall be reflected in an appropriate title document, which shall be recorded, and shall become effective in accordance with its provisions.

 

254.06 Dedications
All dedications of property to the City for public purposes shall be made in fee title, except that, at the City’s discretion, the grant of an easement may be taken for the following purposes: open space easements, scenic easements, street easements or public utility easements. All dedications in fee and grants of easements shall be free of liens and encumbrances except for those which the City, in its discretion, determines would not conflict with the intended ownership and use. The City may elect to accept an irrevocable offer of dedication in lieu of dedication.

 

254.08 Parkland Dedication
This section is enacted pursuant to the authority granted by the Subdivision Map Act and the general police power of the City including the power to zone and the power to implement open space and recreational elements of the General Plan. This section is adopted to implement the provisions of the Quimby Act which authorizes the City to require the dedication of land for park and recreational facilities or payment of in-lieu fees incident to and as a condition of the approval of a tentative tract map or tentative parcel map for a residential subdivision. The park and recreational facilities for which dedication of land and/or payment of an in-lieu fee as required by this section are in accordance with the policies, principles and standards for park, open space and recreational facilities contained in the General Plan.

A.    The general purposes and objectives of this section are:

1.     To preserve, enhance and improve the quality of the physical environment of the City of Huntington Beach;

2.     To provide a procedure for the acquisition, development and rehabilitation of local park and recreational facilities;

3.     To secure for the citizens of Huntington Beach the social and physical advantages resulting from the provision of orderly park, recreation and open space facilities;

4.     To establish conditions which will allow park and recreational facilities to be provided and to exist in harmony with surrounding and neighborhood land uses;

5.     To ensure that adequate park and recreational facilities will be provided;

6.     To provide regulations requiring five usable acres, or the proportionate share thereof, having a grade not exceeding two percent, for each 1,000 persons residing within the City to be supplied by persons proposing residential subdivisions.

B.     Requirements.

1.     The requirements of this section shall be complied with by the dedication of land, payment of a fee in lieu thereof, or both, at the option of the City, for park or recreational purposes at the time and according to the standards and formula contained in this section. The amount and location of land dedicated or the fees to be paid, or both, shall be used for acquiring, developing new or rehabilitating existing community and neighborhood parks and other types of recreational facilities in such a manner that the locations of such parks and recreational facilities bear a reasonable relationship to the use of the park and recreational facilities by the future inhabitants of the subdivision generating such dedication or fees, or both. Dedications for trails shall not be included as part of any requirements for park or recreational dedication.

2.     Lands to be dedicated or reserved for park and/or recreational purposes shall be suitable in the opinion of the director and the Director of Community Services in location, topography, environmental characteristics and development potential as related to the intended use. The primary intent of this section shall be construed to provide the land for passive and active recreation, including but not limited to, tot lots, play lots, playgrounds, neighborhood parks, playfields, community or regional parks, lakes, picnic areas, tree groves or urban forests, and other specialized recreational facilities that may serve residents of the City. Principal consideration shall be given therefore to lands that offer:

a.     A variety of recreational potential for all age groups;

b.     Recreational opportunities provided and maintained in a manner that will permit the maximum use and enjoyment by residents of the City of Huntington Beach;

c.     Possibility for expansion or connection with school grounds;

d.     Integration with hiking, riding and bicycle trails, natural stream reserves and other open space;

e.     Coordination with all other park systems;

f.      Access to at least one existing or proposed public street.

C.     General Standard. It is hereby found and determined that the public interest, convenience, health, safety and welfare require that five acres of property for each 1,000 persons residing within the City be devoted to local park and recreational purposes.

D.    Standards and Formula for Dedication of Land. Where a park or recreational facility has been designated in the General Plan and is to be located in whole or in part within the proposed subdivision and is reasonably related to serving the present and future needs of the residents of the subdivision, the subdivider shall dedicate land for park and recreation facilities sufficient in size and topography to meet that purpose. The amount of land to be provided shall be determined pursuant to the following standards and formula:

A = 5.0 (DF x No. DU)

1000

1.     Definitions of terms:

a.     A = the area in acres required to be dedicated as a park site.

b.     DF = density factor as determined pursuant to Section 254.08(E).

c.     5.0 = number of acres per 1,000 persons.

d.     No. DU = number of dwelling units proposed in the subdivision.

2.     When a proposed subdivision contains dwelling units with different density factors, the formula shall be used for each such density factor and the results shall be totaled.

3.     Dedication of parkland shall not be required for parcel maps or subdivisions containing 50 parcels or less; except that when a condominium project, stock cooperative or community apartment project exceeds 50 dwelling units, dedication of land may be required notwithstanding that the number of parcels may be less than 50.

E.     Density.

1.     The amount of land dedicated or fees paid shall be based upon residential density, which is determined on the basis of the approved tentative map and the average number of persons per household. The average number of persons per household by unit in a structure shall be established by City Council resolution and be derived from the most recent available federal census or state or City population and housing data.

2.     The number of dwelling units in a subdivision shall be the number proposed for construction. When the actual number of units to be constructed is unknown, it shall be assumed for the purposes of this chapter that the maximum number permissible by law will be constructed.

F.     Standard Improvements. The dedication of land for park and recreational purposes shall not be deemed to waive any other requirements that may be imposed by the City. The subdivider may, at the time of the approval of the tentative map, be obligated by condition to said map to provide curbs, gutters, sidewalks, drainage facilities, street lighting, stop lights, street signs, matching pavement and street trees to full City standards, to stub-in requested standard improvements required for residential property plus initial on-site grading required for developing the park facility. In lieu of making said improvements and upon approval of the Planning Commission or City Council, whichever acts last on the tentative map, the subdivider may pay a sum as estimated by the Director of Public Works sufficient to cover the cost of said improvements. The environmental condition of any land dedicated pursuant to this section shall satisfy all federal, state and local requirements applicable to parkland and recreational facilities.

G.    Fees in Lieu of Land Dedication.

1.     General. Whenever the requirements of this section are met solely on the basis of the payment of a fee in lieu of land dedication, the subdivider shall pay a fee in lieu of dedication according to a schedule adopted by City Council resolution.

2.     Fees in Lieu of Land—50 Parcels or Less. If the proposed subdivision contains 50 parcels or less and has no park or recreational facility, the subdivider shall pay a fee according to a schedule adopted by City Council resolution. When a condominium project, stock cooperative or community apartment project exceeds 50 dwelling units, dedication of land may be required notwithstanding that the number of parcels may be less than 50.

3.     Use of Fees. The fees paid to the City pursuant to this section and the interest accrued from such fees shall be used, in accordance with the schedule developed pursuant to Section 254.08(M), for the purpose of acquiring, developing new, or rehabilitating existing, neighborhood or community park or recreational facilities reasonably related to serving the subdivision, including the purchase of necessary land and/or improvement of such land for park or recreational purposes. All fees collected pursuant to this section shall be transferred for deposit into a separate fund and used solely for the purposes specified in this section. All monies deposited into the fund shall be held separate and apart from other City funds. All interest or other earnings on the unexpended balance in the fund shall be credited to the fund. The money deposited in the fund account shall be committed to the partial or full completion of necessary purchases or improvements within five years after payment thereof or the issuance of building permits on one-half of the lots created by the subdivision, whichever occurs later. If the money is not committed, it shall be distributed and paid to the then record owners of the subdivision in the same proportion that the size of each lot bears to the total area of all lots in the subdivision. Any requests for refunds shall be submitted to the director in accordance with the procedures set forth in Section 254.08(P).

H.    Criteria for Requiring Both Dedication and Fee. If the proposed subdivision contains more than 50 lots, the subdivider shall both dedicate land and pay a fee in lieu of dedication in accordance with the following:

1.     When only a portion of the land to be subdivided is proposed in the General Plan as the site for a local park or recreational facility, such portion shall be dedicated for local park purposes and shall be a credit toward the payment of in-lieu fees at the parkland acquisition and development cost per acre used to develop the in-lieu fee.

2.     When a major part of the local park or recreational site has already been acquired by the City and only a small portion of land is needed from the subdivision to complete the site, such portion shall be dedicated, and shall be a credit toward the payment of in-lieu fees at the parkland acquisition and development cost per acre used to develop the in-lieu fee.

3.     The fee shall be used for the improvement of the existing park or recreational facility or for the improvement of other neighborhood or community parks and recreational facilities reasonably related to serving the subdivision.

I.      Amount of Fee in Lieu of Park Land Dedication. Where a fee is required to be paid in lieu of parkland dedication, such fee shall be according to a schedule adopted by City Council resolution.

1.     Land Acquisition Cost Adjustment Challenge. If the subdivider objects to the parkland acquisition cost per acre used to develop the in-lieu fee pursuant to a schedule adopted by City Council resolution, the subdivider may, as outlined below, pay for an appraisal of the property to be developed to see if the fair market value of the land is less than the parkland acquisition cost per acre. Conversely the City retains the ability to increase the in-lieu fee in areas where the fair market value of land exceeds the parkland acquisition cost per acre.

2.     Fair market value of the land shall be determined by a qualified real estate appraiser who currently holds the MAI designation from the Appraisal Institute and has been selected and retained by the City at the expense of the subdivider (“qualified real estate appraiser”). The fair market value of the land shall be based on the average acre value of the property to be subdivided at the time of the recording of the final subdivision map, adjusted to reflect the value of such acre of property rough graded to a maximum two percent slope. Such appraisal shall exclude improvement. The date of value of the property for purposes of the appraisal shall be within 60 days of payment of the fee as referenced in Section 254.08(L).

             [Ordinance. No. 3827 (expired 4/15/10) and Ordinance No. 3879, effective from 5/3/10 to 5/3/11, temporarily deferred the payment of certain Development Impact Fees.]

3.     If the subdivider objects to the fair market value as determined by the qualified real estate appraiser, the subdivider may request an appeal by a hearing officer within 10 days. The hearing officer provided for this appeal process shall be from a list provided by the director or one selected by the mutual consent of the parties. The subdivider shall have the burden of proof in contesting the fair market value appraisal. All decisions rendered by the hearing officer shall be final for all purposes, and binding upon the parties. If the subdivider does not request an appeal within 10 days, the original decision shall stand, be final for all purposes, and binding upon the parties. If the deadline falls on a weekend or a holiday, the deadline extends to the next succeeding working day.

             [Ordinance. No. 3827 (expired 4/15/10) and Ordinance No. 3879, effective from 5/3/10 to 5/3/11, temporarily deferred the payment of certain Development Impact Fees.]

J.      Determination of Land or Fee. Whether the City accepts land dedication, or elects to require the payment of a fee in lieu of, or a combination of both, shall be determined by the director after consideration of the following:

1.     Policies, standards and principles for park and recreational facilities in the General Plan;

2.     Topography, geology, access and location of land in the subdivision available for dedication;

3.     Size and shape of the subdivision and land available for dedication;

4.     Feasibility of dedication;

5.     Compatibility of dedication with the General Plan;

6.     Availability of previously acquired park property.

The determination by the City as to whether land shall be dedicated, or whether a fee shall be charged, or a combination of both, shall be final and conclusive.

K.    Credit for Improvements and Private Open Space.

1.     If the subdivider provides park and recreational improvements to the dedicated land other than those referenced in Section 254.08(F), the value of the improvements together with any equipment located thereon shall be a credit toward the payment of fees or dedication of land required by this section.

2.     Common interest developments as defined in Section 1351 of the California Civil Code shall receive partial credit, not to exceed 50%, against the amount of land required to be dedicated, or the amount of the fee imposed, pursuant to this section, for the value of private open space within the development, which is usable for active recreational uses, if the City Council, on the recommendation of the Community Services Commission, finds that it is in the public interest to do so, and that the following standards are met:

a.     That yards, court areas, setbacks and other open areas required by Titles 20 through 24 (Zoning) shall not be included in the computation of the private open space;

b.     That the private ownership and maintenance of the open space is adequately provided for by recorded written agreement, conveyance, or restrictions;

c.     That the use of the private open space is restricted to park and recreational purposes by recorded covenant, which runs with the land in favor of the future owners of property, and which cannot be defeated or eliminated without the consent of the City or its successor;

d.     That the proposed private open space is reasonably adaptable for use for park and recreational purposes, taking into consideration such factors as size, shape, topography, geology, access, and location; and

e.     That facilities proposed for the open space are in substantial accord with the provisions of the General Plan.

L.     Procedure.

1.     As determined by the City pursuant to this section, the subdivider shall:

a.     Dedicate the land at the time of the recording of the final map or parcel map; and/or

b.     Pay the fees prior to final building permit approval.

2.     Open space covenants for private park or recreational facilities shall be submitted to the City prior to approval of the final map or parcel map and, if approved, shall be recorded concurrently with the final map or parcel map.

M.    Schedule of Use. At the time of the approval of the final map or parcel map, the City shall make a preliminary determination of how, when, and where it will use the land or fees, or both, to develop or rehabilitate park or recreational facilities to serve the residents of the subdivision. Final scheduling of improvements to these new or rehabilitated parks or recreational facilities shall be made as part of the City’s capital improvement program.

N.    Not Applicable to Certain Subdivisions. The provisions of this section do not apply to (1) commercial or industrial subdivisions; or (2) to condominium projects or stock cooperatives that consist of the subdivision of airspace in an existing apartment building which is more than five years old when no new dwelling units are added.

O.    Exemptions.

1.     The following development shall be exempt from the payment of fees pursuant to this section:

Development of real property into housing units that are either rented, leased, sold, conveyed or otherwise transferred, at a rental price or purchase price which does not exceed the “affordable housing cost” as defined in Section 50052.5 of the California Health and Safety Code when provided to a “lower income household” as defined in Section 50079.5 of the California Health and Safety Code or “very low income household” as defined in Section 50105 of the California Health and Safety Code, and provided that the applicant executes an agreement, in the form of a deed restriction, second trust deed, or other legally binding and enforceable document acceptable to the City Attorney and binding on the owner and any successor-in-interest to the real property being developed, guaranteeing that all of the units developed on the real property shall be maintained for lower and very low income households whether as units for rent or for sale or transfer, for the lesser of a period of 30 years or the actual life or existence of the structure, including any addition, renovation or remodeling thereto.

2.     Exemptions shall only be granted when the following findings can be made:

a.     The project meets the minimum on-site private and common open space requirements; or

b.     The exemption will not individually or cumulatively result in adverse impacts to public recreational opportunities in the coastal zone; and

c.     The exemption will not individually or cumulatively lead to overcrowding or overuse of public facilities by the public in any single area in the coastal zone.

P.     Appeals. Any person may appeal a determination of the City regarding the interpretation and implementation of this section. Any such appeal shall be filed with the director consistent with the requirements of Section 248.24 of the Huntington Beach City Zoning and Subdivision Ordinance.

Q.    Refunds. Requests for refunds of in-lieu fees paid pursuant to this section may be directed to the director at any time. The director may approve of a refund or a partial refund of park fees paid or release of security instruments when the following has been verified:

1.     That the refund amount requested corresponds to the amount of fees actually deposited in the fund account established pursuant to Section 254.08(G)(3) for a given number of dwelling units; and

2.     That the local park requirement for the dwelling units in question had been met by actual Council acceptance of parkland, or by an irrevocable recorded offer to dedicate a parkland on a final tract map or parcel map; or

3.     The subdivision or building permit approval for which fees were required has been withdrawn or is otherwise no longer valid. (3468-8/00, 3562-7/02, Res. 2004-80-9/04, 3827-4/09, 3879-6/10, 3960-11/12)

 

254.10 School Site Dedication
A.    General. As a condition of approval of a tentative map, a subdivider who develops or completes the development of one or more subdivisions within one or more school districts maintaining an elementary school shall dedicate to the school district or districts such lands as the City Council shall deem to be necessary for the purpose of constructing thereon elementary schools necessary to assure the residents of the subdivision adequate public school service.

B.     Procedure. The requirement of dedication shall be imposed at the time of approval of the tentative map. If within 30 days after the requirement of dedication is imposed by the City Council the school district does not offer to enter into a binding commitment with the subdivider to accept the dedication, the requirement shall be automatically terminated. The required dedication may be made any time before, concurrently with, or up to 60 days after the filing of the final map or parcel map on any portion of the subdivision.

C.     Payments to Subdivider for School Site Dedication. The school district shall, if it accepts the dedication, repay to the subdivider or his or her successors the original cost to the subdivider of the dedicated land, plus a sum equal to the total of the following amounts:

1.     The cost of any improvements to the dedicated land since acquisition by the subdivider;

2.     The taxes assessed against the dedicated land from the date of the school district’s offer to enter into the binding commitment to accept the dedication;

3.     Any other costs incurred by the subdivider in maintenance of such dedicated land, including interest costs incurred on any loan covering such land.

D.    Exemptions. The provisions of subsections A through C of this section shall not apply to a subdivider who has owned the land being subdivided for more than 10 years prior to the filing of the tentative map.

 

254.12 Reservations
A.    General. As a condition of approval of a tentative map, the subdivider shall reserve sites, appropriate in area and location, for parks, recreational facilities, fire stations, libraries or other public uses according to the standards and formula contained in this section.

B.     Standards for Reservation of Land.

1.     Where a park, recreational facility, fire station, library, or other public use is shown on the General Plan or an adopted specific plan, the subdivider may be required by the City to reserve sites as so determined by the City in accordance with the policies and standards contained in the General Plan or the adopted specific plan. The reserved area must be of such size and shape as to permit the balance of the property within which the reservation is located to develop in an orderly and efficient manner. The amount of land to be reserved shall not make development of the remaining land held by the subdivider economically infeasible.

2.     The reserved area shall be consistent with the General Plan or the adopted specific plan and shall be in such multiples of streets and lots as to permit an efficient division of the reserved area in the event that it is not acquired within the prescribed period.

C.     Procedure. The public agency for whose benefit an area has been reserved shall, at the time of approval of the final map or parcel map, enter into a binding agreement to acquire such reserved area within two years after the completion and acceptance of all improvements unless the period of time is extended by mutual agreement.

D.    Payment to Subdivider. The purchase price for the reserved area shall be the market value thereof at the time of the filing of the tentative map plus the taxes against the reserved area from the date of the reservation and any other costs incurred by the subdivider in the maintenance of the reserved area, including interest costs incurred on any loan covering the reserved area.

E.     Termination. If the public agency for whose benefit an area has been reserved does not enter into a binding agreement in accordance with this section, the reservation of the area shall automatically terminate.

 

254.14 Local Transit Facilities
As a condition of approval of a tentative map, the subdivider shall dedicate, or make an irrevocable offer of dedication, of land within the subdivision for local transit facilities such as shelters, benches, bus turnouts, park-and-ride facilities and similar items which directly benefit the residents of the subdivision, if (1) the subdivision as shown on the tentative map has the potential for 200 dwelling units or more if developed to the maximum density shown on the General Plan or contains 100 acres or more; and (2) if the City finds that transit services are or will be, within a reasonable time period, made available to the subdivision.

 

254.16 Bridges and Major Thoroughfares
The subdivider shall be required to pay a fee for the impacts of their proposed development on the City transportation system in accordance with Chapter 17.65 of the Huntington Beach Municipal Code.

 

254.18 Supplemental Improvement Capacity
A.    As a condition of approval of a tentative map, the City may impose a requirement that improvements installed by the subdivider for the benefit of the subdivision contain supplemental size, capacity, number or length for the benefit of property not within the subdivision and that those improvements be dedicated to the public. However, when such supplemental size, capacity, number or length is solely for the benefit of property not within the subdivision, the City shall, subject to the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act, enter into an agreement with the subdivider to reimburse the subdivider for that portion of the cost of such improvements equal to the difference between the amount it would have cost the subdivider to install such improvements to serve the subdivision only and the actual cost of such improvements.

B.     The City Council shall determine the method for payment of the costs required by a reimbursement agreement which may include but is not limited to the establishment and maintenance of local benefit districts for the levy and collection of such charge or costs from the property benefited.

C.     No charge, area of benefit or local benefit district shall be established unless and until a public hearing is held thereon by the City Council and the City Council finds that the charge, area of benefit or local benefit district is reasonably related to the cost of such supplemental improvements and the actual ultimate beneficiaries thereof.

D.    In addition to the notice required by Chapter 248, written notice of the hearing shall be mailed to those who own property within the proposed area of benefit as shown on the last equalized assessment roll, and the potential users of the supplemental improvements insofar as they can be ascertained at the time (10 days prior to the date established for the hearing).

 

254.20 Drainage Fees
The subdivider shall be required to pay a fee for the development of drainage facilities in accordance with Chapter 14.48 of the Huntington Beach Municipal Code.

 

254.22 Solar Access Easements
A.    As a condition of approval of a tentative map, the City may impose a requirement that the subdivider dedicate easements for the purpose of assuring that each parcel or unit in the subdivision shall have the right to receive sunlight across adjacent parcels or units in the subdivision for any solar energy system. In establishing such easements, the City shall consider the feasibility, contour, configuration of the parcel to be divided, and cost. Required easements shall not result in reducing allowable densities or the percentage of a parcel which may be occupied by a building or a structure under applicable planning and zoning provisions in force at the time such tentative map is filed.

B.     At the time of tentative map approval, the Zoning Administrator or the Planning Commission, as may be the case, shall specify: (1) the standards for determining the exact dimensions and locations of such easements; (2) any restrictions on vegetation, buildings and other objects that would obstruct the passage of sunlight through the easement; and (3) conditions, if any, under which an easement may be revised or eliminated.

C.     This section is not applicable to conversion projects.

 

254.24 Other Public Facilities
As a condition of approval of a tentative map, the subdivider shall be required to dedicate land, pay fees, or both, for fire stations, library sites, child day care, public art or any other public facilities pursuant to, and in order to implement, the provisions of the General Plan regarding such facilities.

 

Chapter 255 IMPROVEMENTS
255.02 General
The subdivider shall construct all required improvements both on- and off-site, in accordance with standard engineering specifications and other approved standards as provided by this chapter. No final map shall be presented to the City Council or parcel map to the City Engineer for approval until the subdivider either completes the required improvements, or enters into an agreement with the City agreeing to do the work. (3254-11/94)

 

255.04 Improvements Required
A.    General. All improvements as may be required as conditions of approval of the tentative map or by City ordinance or resolution, together with, but not limited to, the required improvements set forth below shall be required of all subdivisions. Requirements for construction of on-site and off-site improvements for subdivisions by parcel map shall be noted on the parcel map, waiver of parcel map, or the subdivision improvement agreement recorded prior to or concurrent with the parcel map.

B.     Frontage Improvements. The frontage of each parcel shall be improved to its ultimate adopted geometric section, including street structural section, curbs, sidewalks, driveway approaches and transitions.

C.     Storm Drainage. Stormwater runoff from the subdivision shall be collected and conveyed by an approved storm drain system. The storm drain system shall be designed for ultimate development of the watershed. The storm drain system shall provide for the protection of abutting and off-site properties that would be adversely affected by any increase in runoff attributed to the development. Off-site storm drain improvements may be required to satisfy this requirement.

D.    Sanitary Sewers. Each unit or parcel within the subdivision shall be served by an approved sanitary sewer system.

E.     Water Supply. Each unit or parcel within the subdivision shall be served by an approved domestic water system.

F.     Utilities. Each unit or parcel within the subdivision shall be served by gas (if required), electric, telephone and cablevision facilities.

G.    Underground Utilities.

1.     All proposed utilities within the subdivision and along frontage streets shall be placed underground consistent with Chapter 17.64 of the Huntington Beach Municipal Code. Existing utilities within the subdivision shall be placed underground unless specifically exempted by Public Utilities Commission regulations.

2.     The developer may request that the Planning Commission, or the Zoning Administrator, as the case may be, waive the requirement to underground existing or proposed utilities along frontage streets. The Planning Commission or Zoning Administrator, may, at its discretion, require a fee in lieu of the undergrounding.

a.     If the undergrounding requirement along frontage streets is waived, the City Engineer may require the developer to install a service panel or other acceptable facility to facilitate conversion to underground utilities at a future date.

b.     The amount of fee shall be determined by the City Engineer and shall be based upon the reasonable estimated cost of that portion of a future undergrounding project attributable to the subdivision. The requirement for undergrounding or payment of an in-lieu fee and shall be a condition of approval of the tentative map.

3.     Requirements to place existing and proposed utilities underground throughout the subdivision may be waived or modified by the Planning Commission or Zoning Administrator, as the case may be, only upon finding:

a.     The subdivision is within an area where existing utilities have not been placed underground; and

b.     Physical constraints make undergrounding of existing and proposed utilities impractical; and

c.     Overhead utilities will have no significant visual impact.

4.     If the undergrounding requirement is waived as allowed in subparagraph (G)(3) of this section, an in-lieu fee as established by the City Engineer shall be made a condition of approval of the tentative map.

5.     In-lieu fees shall be deposited in a special account to be used as approved by the City Council for future undergrounding of utilities throughout the City.

H.    Other Improvements. Other improvements such as street lights, fire hydrants, signs, street trees and shrubs, and monuments, or fees in lieu of any of the foregoing, shall also be required as determined by the City Engineer in accord with this Code and City standards and specifications.

I.      Off-Site Improvements. If the subdivider is required to construct off-site improvements on land in which neither the subdivider nor the City has sufficient title or interest to allow construction, the City shall, within 120 days of recording the final map, begin the process of acquiring by negotiation or condemning the land. If the City fails to begin this process within 120 days, the condition for the construction shall be waived.

Prior to approval of the final map, the City may require the subdivider to enter into an agreement to complete the off-site improvements at the time the City acquires title or an interest in the land. The subdivider shall pay the cost of acquiring off-site land or an interest in the land required to construct the off-site improvements. (3254-11/94)

 

255.06 Deferred Improvement Agreements
A.    Subdivisions of Four or Fewer Parcels. The frontage improvements along existing peripheral streets may be deferred when deemed necessary by the City Engineer. When improvements are deferred, the subdivider and/or owner of the real property shall enter into an agreement with the City in form acceptable to the City Engineer and City Attorney, for the installation of all frontage improvements at a time in the future as specified by the City. The agreement shall provide:

1.     Construction of improvements shall commence within 90 days of the receipt of the notice to proceed from the City.

2.     That in the event of a default by the subdivider and/or owner, operator, the City is authorized to cause construction to be done and charge the entire cost and expense to the subdivider and/or owner, including interest from the date of notice of said cost and expense until paid.

3.     That the agreement shall be recorded with the County Recorder at the expense of the subdivider and/or owner and shall constitute notice to all successors and assigns of title to the real property of the obligations set forth therein. The agreement shall also constitute a lien in such amount necessary to fully reimburse the City, including interest as provided above, subject to foreclosure in the event of a default in payment.

4.     That in event of litigation occasioned by any default of the subdivider and/or owner, the subdivider and/or owner agree to pay all costs involved, including reasonable attorneys’ fees, and that the same shall become a part of the lien against the real property.

5.     That the terms “subdivider” and “owner” shall include, respectively, not only the subdivider and the present owner of the real property but also heirs, successors, executors, administrators and assigns thereof, it being the intent of the parties that the obligations undertaken shall run with the real property and constitute a lien against it.

The agreement shall not relieve the subdivider or owner from any other specific requirements of the Subdivision Map Act, this Code or law. The construction of deferred improvements shall conform to the provisions of this chapter and all applicable provisions of this title in effect at the time of construction.

B.     Remainders. Where a remainder is made part of a final or parcel map, the subdivider may enter into an agreement with the City to construct improvements within the remainder at some future date and prior to the issuance of a permit or other grant of approval for the development of the remainder. The improvements shall be at the subdivider’s expense. In the absence of such an agreement, the City may require fulfillment of the construction requirements within a reasonable time following approval of the map and prior to the issuance of a permit or other grant of approval for the development of the remainder, upon a finding that fulfillment of the construction requirements is necessary for reasons of:

1.     The public health and safety; or

2.     The required construction is a necessary prerequisite to the orderly development of the surrounding area. (3254-11/94)

 

255.08 Design
A.    General. The design and layout of all required improvements, both on- and off-site, private and public, shall conform to generally accepted engineering standards, standard engineering specifications, the Subdivision Map Act and applicable provisions of this Code.

B.     Energy Conservation. The design of a subdivision for which a tentative map is required excluding conversions, shall provide to the extent feasible, for future passive or natural heating or cooling opportunities in the subdivision.

1.     For the purpose of this subsection, “feasible” means capable of being accomplished in a successful manner within a reasonable period of time, taking into account economic, environmental, social and technological factors.

2.     Compliance with this provision shall not result in reducing allowable densities, or the percentage of a lot which may be occupied by a building or structure under applicable planning and zoning in force at the time the tentative map is filed.

C.     Cable Television Service. A subdivider for a residential project, excluding conversions, is required to provide one or more franchised or licensed operators serving the area an opportunity to construct, install and maintain, on land dedicated or to be dedicated to public utility use, any equipment necessary to extend cable television services to each residential lot in the subdivision.

D.    Water Conservation. All applicable requirements of the Regional Water Conservation Plan adopted by the City shall be incorporated into the design of a subdivision for which a tentative map is required, excluding subdivisions. (3254-11/94)

 

255.10 Access
All parcels created shall have access to a public street improved to City standards. Private streets shall not normally be permitted; however, if the Planning Commission or Zoning Administrator determines that the most logical development of the land requires that parcels be created with access to private streets, such a development may be approved. The subdivider shall submit a development plan showing the alignment, width, grade, and material specifications of any proposed private street, the topography and means of access to each parcel, and the drainage and sewerage of the parcels served by such private street. Construction of the private street, as approved by the City Engineer, shall be completed prior to the completion of the construction and/or occupancy of the parcels. The subdivider shall be required to provide a feasible method for the maintenance of such private streets. (3254-11/94)

 

255.12 Improvement Plans
A.    General. Improvement plans shall be prepared under the direction of and signed by a California registered civil engineer; and shall conform to the standard engineering specifications of the City. Improvement plans shall include, but not be limited to, grading, storm drains, landscaping, streets and related facilities.

B.     Supplementary Plans and Calculations. Hydrology, hydraulic plans and calculations, bond or other security estimates and any structural calculations, as may be required, shall be submitted with the improvement plans to the City Engineer. All calculations shall be legible, systematic and signed and dated by a California registered civil engineer in a form approved by the City Engineer.

C.     Review by the City Engineer. The subdivider shall submit the improvement plans and all computations to the City Engineer for review. Within 60 working days of submittal, the City Engineer shall complete this review and return to the subdivider one set of the preliminary improvement plans, with any required revisions indicated. The 60-working-day period shall not include any days during which the improvement plan has been returned to the subdivider for correction, has been subject to review by other than the City Engineer, or following that review, has been returned to the subdivider for correction.

D.    Approval by the City Engineer.

1.     After completing any required revisions, the subdivider shall transmit the originals of the improvement plans to the City Engineer for signature and retention.

2.     Upon finding that any required revisions have been made and that the plans conform to all applicable City ordinances and plans, design requirements and conditions of approval of the tentative map, the City Engineer shall sign and date the plans.

3.     Approval of the improvement plans shall not be construed as approval of the gas, electric, telephone and cable television service construction plans.

4.     Approval by the City Engineer shall in no way relieve the subdivider or the subdivider’s engineer from responsibility for the design of the improvements and for any deficiencies resulting from the design or from any required conditions of approval of the tentative map.

E.     Revision to Approved Plans.

1.     By Subdivider.

a.     Requests by the subdivider for revisions to the approved plans appearing necessary or desirable during construction shall be submitted in writing to the City Engineer or authorized representative and shall be accompanied by revised drawings showing the proposed revision. If the revision is acceptable to the City Engineer and consistent with the tentative map, the originals shall be revised and returned to the City Engineer’s office for initialing and retention.

b.     Construction of any proposed revision will not be permitted to commence until the revised plans have been approved by the City Engineer.

2.     By City Engineer.

a.     When revisions are deemed necessary by the City Engineer to protect the public health and safety, or as field conditions may require, a request in writing shall be made to the subdivider. The subdivider shall revise the plans and transmit the originals to the City Engineer for initialing within the time specified by the City Engineer. Upon receipt of the initialized originals, the subdivider shall immediately transmit revised drawings to the City Engineer. Construction of all or any portion of the improvements may be stopped by the City Engineer until revised drawings have been submitted.

b.     The subdivider may appeal revisions required by the City Engineer to the City Council by filing an appeal with the City Clerk within seven working days following receipt of the request to revise the plans.

3.     Plan Checking and Inspection Costs for Revisions. Costs incurred by the City for the checking of plans or calculations or inspection as a result of revisions to the approved plans shall be borne by the subdivider in accord with the schedule of fees adopted by the City. A deposit, when required, shall be submitted with the revised plans and applied toward the actual costs. (3254-11/94)

 

255.14 Improvement Agreement
The improvement agreement shall be prepared and signed by the City Engineer and approved as to form by the City Attorney. The agreement shall provide for:

A.    Construction of all improvements, including any required off-site improvements, according to the approved plans and specifications on file with the City Engineer.

B.     Completion of improvements within the time specified by Section 255.20.

C.     Warranty by the subdivider that construction will not adversely affect any portion of adjacent properties.

D.    Payment of inspection fees in accordance with the City’s resolution.

E.     Payment of in-lieu fees for undergrounding of utilities on frontage streets.

F.     Improvement security as required by this chapter.

G.    Maintenance and repair of any defects or failures and their causes.

H.    Release and indemnification of the City from all liability incurred in connection with the development and payment of all reasonable attorneys’ fees that the City may incur because of any legal action or other proceeding arising from the development.

I.      Any other deposits, fees or conditions as required by City ordinance or resolution and as may be required by the City Engineer.

J.      Right of the City to withhold occupancy permits until completion of improvements.

K.    Any other provisions required by the City as reasonably necessary to effectuate the purposes and provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and this Code. (3254-11/94)

 

255.16 Improvement Security
A.    General. Any improvement agreement, contract or act required or authorized by the Subdivision Map Act or this chapter, for which security is required, shall be secured in accord with Section 66499 et seq. of the Subdivision Map Act and as provided below. No final map or parcel map shall be signed by the City Engineer or recorded until all improvement securities required by this section have been received and approved.

B.     Form of Security. The form of security shall be one or a combination of the following at the option and subject to the approval of the City:

1.     Bond or bonds by one or more duly authorized corporate sureties. The form of the bond or bonds shall be in accordance with Sections 66499.1 and 66499.2 of the Subdivision Map Act.

2.     A deposit, either with the City or a responsible escrow agent or trust company, at the option of the City, of money or negotiable bonds of the kind approved for securing deposits of public monies.

3.     An irrevocable instrument of credit or letter of credit from one or more financial institutions regulated by the state or federal government pledging that the funds necessary to carry out the act or agreement are on deposit and guaranteed for payment and will only be released upon receipt of written instructions from the City.

4.     Any other form of security, acceptable to the City, as provided in Section 66499 of the Subdivision Map Act.

C.     Amount of Security.

1.     A performance bond or other security in the amount of 100% of the total estimated construction cost to guarantee the construction or installation of all improvements shall be required of all subdivisions. An additional amount of 50% of the estimated construction cost shall be required to guarantee payment to subdivider’s contractor, subcontractors, and to persons furnishing labor, materials or equipment for the construction or installation of improvements. As a part of the obligation guaranteed by the security and in addition to the full amount of the security, there shall be included costs and reasonable expenses and fees, including attorneys’ fees, incurred by the City in enforcing the obligations secured.

2.     The estimate of improvement costs shall be as approved by the City Engineer and shall provide for:

a.     Not less than five percent nor more than 10% of the total construction cost for contingencies.

b.     Increase for projected inflation computed to the estimated midpoint of construction.

c.     All utility installation costs or a certification acceptable to the City Engineer from the utility company that adequate security has been deposited to ensure installation.

D.    Cash Bond. The subdivider shall deposit with the City not less than $1,000 cash for subdivisions by parcel map, and $3,000 for other subdivisions, or an additional amount as required by the City Engineer, not to exceed one percent of the total estimated construction cost. The deposit may be used at the discretion of the City to correct deficiencies and conditions caused by the subdivider, contractor or subcontractors that may arise during or after the construction of the subdivision. Any unexpended amount will be returned to the subdivider at the time all bonds and other security are released.

E.     Warranty Security. Upon acceptance of the subdivision improvements by the City, the subdivider shall provide security in the amount as required by the City Engineer to guarantee the improvements against any defective work or labor done or defective materials used in the performance of the improvements throughout the warranty period which shall be the period of one year following completion and acceptance of the improvements. The amount of the warranty security shall not be less than 10% of the cost of the construction of the improvements, including the cash bond which shall be retained for the one-year warranty period.

F.     Reduction in Performance Security. The City Engineer may authorize in writing the release of a portion of the security in conjunction with the acceptance of the satisfactory completion of a part of the improvements as the work progresses upon application by the subdivider, but in no case shall the security be reduced to less than 10% of the total improvement security given for faithful performance. The amount of reduction of the security shall be determined by the City Engineer; however, in no event shall the City Engineer authorize a release of the improvement security which would reduce security to an amount below that required to guarantee the completion of the improvements and any other obligation imposed by the Subdivision Map Act, this title or the improvement agreement.

G.    Release of Improvement Security.

1.     Performance Security. The performance security shall be released only upon acceptance of the improvements by the City and when an approved warranty security has been filed with the City Engineer.

2.     Material and Labor Security. Security given to secure payment to the contractor, subcontractors and to persons furnishing labor, materials or equipment may, six months after the completion and acceptance of the improvements by the City, be reduced to an amount equal to the amount of all claims therefor filed and of which notice has been given to the City Council. The balance of the security shall be released upon the settlement of all claims and obligations for which the security was given.

3.     Warranty Security. The warranty security shall be released upon satisfactory completion of the warranty period, provided:

a.     All deficiencies appearing on the warranty deficiency list for the subdivision have been corrected.

b.     Not less than 12 months have elapsed since the acceptance of the improvements by the City. (3254-11/94)

 

255.18 Construction and Inspection
The construction methods and materials for all improvements shall conform to the standard engineering specifications and all other standard plans and specifications of the City. Construction shall not commence until all required improvement plans have been approved by the City Engineer. All improvements are subject to inspection by the City Engineer or authorized personnel in accordance with the City’s approved specifications. (3254-11/94)

 

255.20 Completion of Improvements
A.    Subdivisions by Final Map.

1.     The improvements for subdivisions by final map shall be completed by the subdivider within 24 months, or a time as approved by the City Engineer, not to exceed 36 months, from the recording of the final map, unless an extension is granted by the City Council. Improvements shall be completed prior to final building inspection or the issuance of an occupancy permit for any unit within the subdivision.

2.     Should the subdivider fail to complete the improvements within the specified time, the City may, by resolution of the City Council and at its option, cause any or all uncompleted improvements to be completed and the parties executing the security or securities shall be firmly bound for the payment of all necessary costs.

B.     Subdivisions by Parcel Map. The completion of improvements for subdivisions by parcel map shall not be required until application for a permit or other grant of approval for the development of any parcel within the subdivision. The completion of the improvements may be required by a specified date by the City when the completion of the improvements are found to be necessary for public health or safety or for the orderly development of the surrounding area. This finding shall be made by the City Engineer or authorized representative. The specified date, when required, shall be stated in the subdivision improvement agreement. Improvements shall be completed prior to final building inspection or the issuance of an occupancy permit for any unit within the subdivision.

C.     Extensions.

1.     The completion date may be extended by the City Council, for subdivisions by final map, upon written request by the subdivider and the submittal of adequate evidence to justify the extension. The request shall be made not less than 30 days prior to expiration of the subdivision improvement agreement.

2.     The subdivider shall enter into a subdivision improvement agreement extension with the City. For subdivisions by final map, the agreement shall be prepared and signed by the City Engineer, approved as to form by the City Attorney, executed by the subdivider and surety and transmitted to the City Council for its consideration. If approved by the City Council, the Mayor shall execute the agreement on behalf of the City.

3.     In consideration of a subdivision improvement agreement extension, the following may be required:

a.     Revision of improvement plans to provide for current design and construction standards when required by the City Engineer;

b.     Revised improvement construction estimates to reflect current improvement costs as approved by the City Engineer;

c.     Increase of improvement securities in accordance with revised construction estimates;

d.     Inspection fees may be increased to reflect current construction costs but shall not be subject to any decrease or refund.

4.     The City Council may impose additional requirements as recommended by the City Engineer or as it may deem necessary as a condition to approving any time extension for the completion of improvements.

5.     The costs incurred by the City in processing the agreement shall be paid by the subdivider. (3254-11/94)

 

255.22 Acceptance of Improvements
A.    General. When all improvement deficiencies have been corrected and record drawings of the improvements submitted, the subdivision improvements shall be considered by the City for acceptance. The completed improvements for subdivisions by final map or subdivisions by parcel map shall be considered and, if acceptable, accepted by the City Engineer. Acceptance of the improvements shall imply only that the improvements have been completed satisfactorily and that public improvements have been accepted for public use.

B.     Acceptance. If the subdivision improvements have been accepted by the City and public improvements have been dedicated on the final map or parcel map, the City Clerk shall file an Acceptance of Public Improvements with the County Recorder.

C.     Acceptance of a Portion of the Improvements. When requested by the subdivider in writing, the City may consider acceptance of a portion of the improvements as recommended by the City Engineer. The improvements will be accepted by the City only if it finds that it is in the public interest and such improvements are for the use of the general public. Acceptance of a portion of the improvements shall not relieve the subdivider from any other requirements imposed by this chapter. (3254-11/94)

 

Chapter 256 REVERSIONS TO ACREAGE
256.02 General
Any subdivided property may be reverted to acreage pursuant to the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and this chapter. Subdivisions also may be merged and resubdivided without reverting to acreage under the provisions of Chapter 251. (3254-11/94)

 

256.04 Initiation of Proceedings
A.    By Owners. Proceedings to revert subdivided property to acreage may be initiated by petition (in a form prescribed by the City Engineer) of all of the owners of record of the property.

B.     By City Council. The City Council, at the request of any person or on its own motion may initiate proceedings to revert property to acreage. The City Council shall direct the City Engineer to obtain the necessary information to initiate and conduct the proceedings. (3254-11/94)

 

256.06 Contents of Petition
The petition shall contain, but not be limited to, the following:

A.    Evidence of title to the real property.

B.     Evidence of the consent of all of the owners of an interest in the property.

C.     Evidence that none of the improvements required to be made has been made within two years from the date the final or parcel map was filed for record, or within the time allowed by agreement for completion of the improvements, whichever is later.

D.    Evidence that no lots shown on the final or parcel map have been sold within five years from the date such final or parcel map was filed for record.

E.     A final or parcel map, delineating dedications that will not be vacated and dedications required as a condition to reversion. Final or parcel maps shall be conspicuously designated with the title, “Reversion to Acreage.” (3254-11/94)

 

256.08 Submittal of Petition to the City Engineer
A.    The final or parcel map for the reversion, together with all other data as required by this chapter, shall be submitted to the City Engineer for review.

B.     Upon finding that the petition meets with all the requirements of the Subdivision Map Act and this chapter, the City Engineer shall submit the final or parcel map, together with a report and recommendations of approval or conditional approval of the reversion to acreage, to the City Council for its consideration. (3254-11/94)

 

256.10 City Council Action
A.    Notice and Public Hearing. A public hearing shall be held by the City Council on all petitions for initiations for reversions to acreage. Notice of the public hearing shall be given as provided in Section 251.08.

B.     Findings for Approval. The City Council may approve a reversion to acreage only if it finds:

1.     Dedications or offers of dedication to be vacated or abandoned by the reversion to acreage are unnecessary for present or prospective public purposes; and

2.     All owners with an interest in the real property within the subdivision have consented to reversion; and

3.     None of the improvements required to be made has been made within two years from the date the final or parcel map was filed for record, or within the time allowed by agreement for completion of the improvements, whichever is later; and

4.     No parcels shown on the final or parcel map have been sold within five years from the date such map was filed for record.

C.     Conditions of Approval. The City Council may require as conditions of the reversion:

1.     That owners dedicate or offer to dedicate streets, public rights-of-way or easements;

2.     That all or a portion of previously paid subdivision fees, deposits or improvement securities be retained if the same are necessary to accomplish any of the purposes or provisions of this chapter; or

3.     Such other conditions of reversion as are necessary to accomplish the purposes or provisions of this chapter or necessary to protect the public health, safety or welfare. (3254-11/94)

 

256.12 Filing with County Recorder
Upon approval of the reversion to acreage, the City Clerk shall transmit the final or parcel map, together with the City Council ordinance approving the reversion, to the County Recorder for recordation. Reversion shall be effective upon the final map being filed for record by the County Recorder. Upon filing, all dedications and offers of dedication not shown on the final or parcel map for reversion shall be of no further force and effect. (3254-11/94)

 

Chapter 257 MERGERS
257.02 Mergers Required
Two or more contiguous parcels held by the same owner shall be merged if one of the parcels does not conform to the minimum lot size required by Titles 20-24 (Zoning) of this Code, and if all the following requirements are satisfied:

A.    At least one of the affected parcels is undeveloped by any structure for which a building permit was issued, or for which a building permit was not required at the time of construction, or is developed only with an accessory structure or accessory structures, or is developed with a single structure, other than an accessory structure, that is also partially sited on a contiguous parcel.

B.     With respect to any affected parcel, one or more of the following conditions exists:

1.     Comprises less than 5,000 square feet in area at the time of the determination of merger;

2.     Was not created in compliance with applicable laws and ordinances in effect at the time of its creation;

3.     Does not meet current standards for sewage disposal and domestic water supply;

4.     Does not meet slope stability standards;

5.     Has no legal access which is adequate for vehicular and safety equipment access and maneuverability;

6.     Will create health or safety hazards if developed; or

7.     Is inconsistent with the General Plan and any applicable specific plan, other than minimum lot size or density standards.

C.     For purposes of determining whether contiguous parcels are held by the same owner, ownership shall be determined as of the date that the Notice of Intention to Determine Status is recorded pursuant to this chapter.

D.    Subsection B of this section shall not apply if any of the conditions stated in Section 66451.11(b)(A), (B), (C), (D) or (E) of the Subdivision Map Act exist. (3531-2/02)

 

257.04 Notice of Intention to Determine Status
Prior to recording a Notice of Merger, the director shall mail, by certified mail, a Notice of Intention to Determine Status to the current record owner of the property. The notice shall state that the affected parcels may be merged pursuant to this chapter and that, within 30 days from the date the notice of intention was recorded, the owner may request a hearing before the director to present evidence that the property does not meet the criteria for merger. The Notice of Intention to Determine Status shall be filed for record with the County Recorder by the director on the same day that the notice is mailed to the property owner. (3531-2/02)

 

257.06 Hearing on Determination of Status
A.    The owner of the affected property may file a written request for a hearing with the director within 30 days after recording of the Notice of Intention to Determine Status. Upon receipt of the request, the director shall set a time, date and place for a hearing before the director and notify the owner by certified mail. The hearing shall be conducted within 60 days following the receipt of the owner’s request, or may be postponed or continued by mutual consent of the director and the property owner.

B.     At the hearing, the property owner shall be given the opportunity to present any evidence that the affected property does not meet the requirements for merger specified in this chapter.

C.     At the conclusion of the hearing, the director shall determine whether the affected parcels are to be merged or are not to be merged and shall notify the owner of the determination. Such notification shall be mailed to the property owner by the director within five days of the date of the hearing. (3531-2/02)

 

257.08 Determination of Merger
A.    If the director makes a determination that the parcels are to be merged, a Notice of Merger shall be filed for record with the County Recorder by the director within 30 days of the conclusion of the hearing, unless the decision has been appealed pursuant to Section 257.10. The Notice of Merger shall specify the name of the record owner and a description of the property.

B.     If the director makes a determination that the parcels shall not be merged, a release of the Notice of Intention to Determine Status shall be filed for record with the County Recorder by the Community Development Department within 30 days after the director’s determination and a clearance letter shall be mailed to the owner by the director. (3531-2/02, 4102-10/16)

 

257.10 Appeals
The determination of the director may be appealed to the Planning Commission in accordance with Chapter 248, provided that the appeal shall be filed within 10 calendar days of the date of mailing of the notice of determination and the Planning Commission shall hear the appeal within 60 days from the date of appeal. If, after this hearing, the Planning Commission grants the appeal and determines that the affected property has not been merged pursuant to this chapter, the director shall, within 30 days after the Planning Commission determination, file with the County Recorder a release of the Notice of Intention to Determine Status and mail a clearance letter to the owner. (3531-2/02)

 

257.12 Determination When No Hearing Is Requested
If the owner does not file a request for a hearing within 30 days after the recording of the Notice of Intention to Determine Status, the director may, at any time thereafter, make a determination that the parcels are or are not to be merged. If they are to be merged, a Notice of Merger shall be filed for record with the County Recorder by the director within 90 days after the mailing of the Notice of Intention to Determine Status pursuant to Section 257.04. (3531-2/02)

 

257.14 Request to Merge by Property Owner
A.    If the merger of contiguous parcels is initiated by the property owner, the owner may waive the right to a hearing before the Zoning Administrator and to all notices required by this chapter. Upon signing the waiver, the director shall simultaneously file for record with the County Recorder a Notice of Intention to Determine Status, a waiver of right of hearing and notice, and a Notice of Merger. The owner may apply for merger pursuant to Chapter 256.

B.     When two or more contiguous parcels are developed and used as one residential site, the property owner shall at the time of remodel or expansion initiate a merger request. The director may approve the merger and cause to be recorded a covenant to hold as one parcel provided no public improvements or dedications are required. (3531-2/02)

 

257.16 Request for Determination by Owner
A.    Upon written application made by the owner to the director, the director shall make a determination that the affected parcels have merged or are to be merged. If the director determines that the parcels have not merged, the owner shall be so notified by the director.

B.     If the director determines that the parcels were merged but that they meet the conditions for unmerger in Section 257.18, a notice of status shall be issued to the owner and filed for record with the County Recorder by the director. The notice of status shall identify each parcel and declare that they are unmerged pursuant to this chapter.

C.     If the director determines that the parcels were merged but do not meet the conditions for unmerger in Section 257.18, a Notice of Merger specifying the record owner and description of the parcel shall be issued to the owner and filed for record with the County Recorder by the director. The owner may appeal the decision of the director to the Planning Commission in accordance with Chapter 248, provided that the appeal must be filed within 10 calendar days of the date of the mailing of the Notice of Merger. The Planning Commission shall hear the appeal within 60 days from the date of appeal. (3531-2/02)

 

257.18 Unmerged Lots
Any parcels that were merged under the provisions of any law prior to January 1, 1984, but for which a Notice of Merger was not recorded on or before January 1, 1986, shall remain unmerged until such time as the parcels have been lawfully merged by subsequent proceedings initiated by the City that meet the requirements of this chapter. (3531-2/02)

 

Chapter 258 ENFORCEMENT
258.02 Prohibition
A.    No person shall sell, lease, or finance any parcel or parcels of real property or commence construction of any building for sale, lease or financing thereon, except for model homes, or allow occupancy thereof, for which a final map, or a parcel map, is required by the Subdivision Map Act or this title, until such a map, in full compliance with the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and this title, has been filed for record by the County Recorder.

B.     Conveyances of any part of a division of real property for which a final or parcel map is required by the Subdivision Map Act or this title shall not be made by parcels or block number, letter or other designation, unless and until such map has been filed for record by the County Recorder.

C.     This section does not apply to any parcel or parcels of a subdivision offered for sale or lease, contracted for sale or lease, or sold or leased in compliance with or exempt from any law, including this title, regulating the design and improvement of subdivisions in effect at the time the subdivision was established.

D.    Nothing contained in subsections A and B of this section shall be deemed to prohibit an offer or contract to sell, lease or finance real property or to construct improvements thereon where such sale, lease or financing, or the commencement of such construction, is expressly conditioned upon the approval and filing of a final map or parcel map, as required under the Subdivision Map Act or this title. (3254-11/94)

 

258.04 Remedies
A.    Any deed of conveyance, sale or contract to sell real property which has been divided or which has resulted from a division in violation of the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act or this title, is voidable at the sole option of the grantee, buyer or person contracting to purchase, any heirs, personal representative, or trustee in insolvency or bankruptcy thereof within one year after the date of discovery of such violation. The deed of conveyance, sale or contract to sell is binding upon any successor in interest of the grantee, buyer or person contracting to purchase, other than those above enumerated, and upon the grantor, vendor or person contracting to sell, or his or her assignee, heir or devisee.

B.     Any grantee, or successor in interest thereof, of real property which has been divided, or which has resulted from a division, in violation of the provisions of this title or the Subdivision Map Act may, within one year of the date of discovery of such violation, bring an action in the superior court to recover any damages suffered by reason of such division of property. The action may be brought against the person who so divided the property and against any successors in interest who have actual or constructive knowledge of such division of property.

C.     The provisions of this section shall not apply to the conveyance of any parcel of real property identified in a certificate of compliance filed recorded final map or parcel map, from and after the date of recording.

D.    This section does not bar any legal, equitable or summary remedy to which the City or other public agency, or any person, firm or corporation may otherwise be entitled, and the City or other public agency, or such person, firm or corporation may file a suit in the superior court to restrain or enjoin any attempted or proposed subdivision or sale, lease, or financing in violation of the Subdivision Map Act or this title.

E.     The City shall not issue a permit or grant any approval necessary to develop any real property which has been divided or which has resulted from a division, in violation of the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act or this title, if it finds that development of such real property is contrary to the public health or the public safety. The authority to deny or approve such a permit shall apply whether the applicant therefor was the owner of record at the time of such violation or whether the applicant therefor is either the current owner of record or a vendee thereof with, or without, actual or constructive knowledge of the violation at the time of the acquisition of an interest in such real property.

F.     If the City issues a permit or grants approval for the development of any real property illegally subdivided, the City may impose those additional conditions which would have been applicable to the division of the property at the time the current owner of record acquired the property. If the property has the same owner of record as at the time of the initial violation, the City may impose conditions applicable to a current division of the property. If a conditional certificate of compliance has been filed for record in accordance with the provisions of Section 258.06, only those conditions stipulated in that certificate shall be applicable. (3254-11/94)

 

258.06 Certificate of Compliance
A.    Any person owning real property or a vendee of such person pursuant to a contract of sale of such real property may request the director to determine whether the real property complies with the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and this title. A written application for a certificate of compliance shall be accompanied by a preliminary title report not more than six months old that shows the legal owners of the property and copies of all previous recorded deeds applicable to the property.

B.     If the director determines that the real property complies with the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and this title or the City subdivision laws applicable at the time of creation, the Department shall prepare a certificate of compliance to be placed on record with the County Recorder. The certificate of compliance shall identify the real property and shall state that the division thereof complies with the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and this title.

C.     If the director determines that the real property does not comply with the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act or this title, the director may, as a condition to granting a certificate of compliance, impose conditions in accordance with Section 258.04(E). Upon the director’s making such a determination and establishing such conditions, the director shall prepare a conditional certificate of compliance to be placed on record with the County Recorder. Such certificate shall serve as notice to the property owner or vendee who has applied for the certificate, a grantee of the property owner, or any subsequent transferee or assignee of the property, that the fulfillment and implementation of such conditions shall be required prior to subsequent issuance of a permit or other grant of approval for development of the property. Compliance with such conditions shall not be required until such time as a permit or other grant of approval for development of such property is issued by the City.

D.    A recorded final map or parcel map shall constitute a certificate of compliance with respect to the lots of real property described therein.

E.     Subject to the provisions of Section 66499.35(E) of the Subdivision Map Act, an official map prepared pursuant to Section 66499.52(B) of the Subdivision Map Act shall constitute a certificate of compliance with respect to the lots of real property described therein.

F.     A fee and/or deposit shall be charged to the applicant for making the determination and processing the certificate of compliance. (3254-11/94)

 

258.08 Notice of Violation
A.    If the director has knowledge that real property has been divided in violation of the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act or this title, a Notice of Intention to Record a Notice of Violation shall be mailed by the director by certified mail to the current owner of record. The notice shall describe the property in detail, name the owners, describe the violation and state that the owner will be given the opportunity to present evidence. The notice shall also contain an explanation as to why the subject lot is not lawful under Section 66412.6(a) or (b) of the Subdivision Map Act. The notice shall specify the date, time and place for a meeting at which the owner may present evidence to the director why a notice of violation should not be recorded.

B.     The meeting shall be held no sooner than 30 days and no later than 60 days from the date of mailing of the Notice of Intention to Record a Notice of Violation. If, within 15 days of receipt of the notice, the owner fails to file with the director a written objection to recording the notice of violation, the director shall file the notice of violation for record with the County Recorder. If, after the owner has presented evidence, the director determines that there has been no violation, the director shall mail a clearance letter to the then current owner of record. If, however, after the owner has presented evidence, the director determines that the property has in fact been illegally divided, the director shall file the notice of violation for record with the County Recorder.

C.     The notice of violation, when recorded, shall be deemed to be constructive notice of the violation to all successors in interest in such property.

1.     The statute of limitations for beginning any civil or criminal action against an owner or subdivider for violating the Subdivision Map Act shall be tolled for any time period during which there is no constructive notice of the transaction constituting the violation.

2.     Each violation of the provisions of this title or the Subdivision Map Act by the subdivider or owner of record of the property involved in the violation shall be punishable by imprisonment in the county jail or in the state prison not exceeding one year, by a fine of no more than $10,000.00, or by both. Every other violation of this title is a misdemeanor. (3254-11/94)

 

258.10 Appeals of Director’s Action
Appeal of any director’s action pursuant to this chapter shall be made to the City Council under the procedures established in Chapter 248. (3254-11/94)