HESPERIA, CALIFORNIA MUNICIPAL CODE 
____________ 
A Codification of the General Ordinances of 
the City of Hesperia, California 
____________ 
Beginning with Supp. No. 7, 
Supplemented by Municipal Code Corporation 
____________ 

> 
OFFICIALS 
OF THE 
CITY OF HESPERIA, CALIFORNIA 
____________ 
City Council 
Larry Bird, Mayor 
Jeremiah Brosowske 
Cameron Gregg 
Bill Holland, Mayor Pro Tem 
Rebekah Swanson 
____________ 
Planning Commission 
James Blocker 
Rusty Caldwell 
Kerrie Justice 
Cody Leis, Vice Chair 
Tom Murphy, Chair 
____________ 
Public Safety Advisory Committee 
Christopher Dusin, Chair 
Michelle Estrada, Vice Chair 
Kelly Gregg 
Shawna Lupton 
Anthony Rhoades 
____________ 
City Council Advisory Committee 
Brigit Bennington 
Mark Kirk 
James Roberts 
Sophie Steeno 
Robert Stine, Chair 
PREFACE 
    The Hesperia, California Municipal Code, originally published by Book Publishing Company in 1977, has been kept current by regular supplementation by Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., its successor in interest. 
    Beginning with Supplement No. 7, Municipal Code Corporation will be keeping this code current by regular supplementation. 
    During original codification, the ordinances were compiled, edited and indexed by the editorial staff of Book Publishing Company under the direction of Marsha Walen, city clerk, Dave Reno, associate planner, and Ralph Hanson, deputy city attorney. 
    The code is organized by subject matter under an expandable three-factor decimal numbering system which is designed to facilitate supplementation without disturbing the numbering of existing provisions. Each section number designates, in sequence, the numbers of the Title, chapter, and section. Thus, Section 2.12.040 is Section .040, located in Chapter 2.12 of Title 2. In most instances, sections are numbered by tens (.010, .020, .030, etc.), leaving nine vacant positions between original sections to accommodate future provisions. Similarly, chapters and titles are numbered to provide for internal expansion. 
    In parentheses following each section is a legislative history identifying the specific sources for the provisions of that section. This legislative history is complemented by an ordinance list and disposition table, following the text of the code, listing by number all ordinances, their subjects, and where they appear in the codification; and beginning with Supplement No. 7, legislation can be tracked using the "Code Comparative Table and Disposition List." 
    A subject-matter index, with complete cross-referencing, locates specific code provisions by individual section numbers. 
    This supplement brings the Code up to date through Ordinance No. 2017-16 , passed September 19, 2017. 
Municipal Code Corporation 
1700 Capital Circle SW 
Tallahassee, FL 32310 
800-262-2633 
HOW TO USE YOUR CODE 
    This code is organized to make the laws of the city as accessible as possible to city officials, city employees and private citizens. Please take a moment to familiarize yourself with some of the important elements of this code. 
Numbering System. 
    The numbering system is the backbone of a Code of Ordinances; Municipal Code Corporation uses a unique and versatile numbering structure that allows for easy expansion and amendment of this code. It is based on three tiers, beginning with title, then chapter, and ending with section. Each part is represented in the code section number. For example, Section 2.04.010 is Section .010, in Chapter 2.04 of Title 2. 
Title. 
    A title is a broad category under which ordinances on a related subject are compiled. This code contains about 15 to 20 titles. For example, the first title is Title 1, General Provisions, which may contain ordinances about the general penalty, code adoption and definitions. The titles in this code are separated by tabbed divider pages for quick reference. Some titles are Reserved for later use. 
Chapter. 
    Chapters deal with more specific subjects, and are often derived from one ordinance. All of the chapters on a related subject are grouped in one title. The chapters are numbered so that new chapters which should logically be placed near certain existing chapters can be added at a later time without renumbering existing material. For example, Chapter 2.06, City Manager, can be added between 2.04, City Council, and Chapter 2.08, City Attorney. 
Section. 
    Each section of the code contains substantive ordinance material. The sections are numbered by "tens" to allow for expansion of the code without renumbering. 
Tables of Contents. 
    There are many tables of contents in this code to assist in locating specific information. At the beginning of the code is the main table of contents listing each title. In addition, each title and chapter has its own table of contents listing the chapters and sections, respectively. 
Ordinance History Note. 
    At the end of each code section, you will find an "ordinance history note," which lists the underlying ordinances for that section. The ordinances are listed by number, section (if applicable) and year. (Example: (Ord. 272 § 1, 1992).) 
    Beginning with Supplement No. 7, a secondary ordinance history note will be appended to affected sections. Ordinance history notes will be amended with the most recent ordinance added to the end. These history notes can be cross-referenced to the code comparative table and disposition list appearing at the back of the volume preceding the index. 
Statutory References. 
    The statutory references direct the code user to those portions of the state statutes that are applicable to the laws of the municipality. As the statutes are revised, these references will be updated. 
Cross-Reference Table. 
    When a code is based on an earlier codification, the cross-reference table will help users find older or "prior" code references in the new code. The cross-reference table is located near the end of the code, under the tabbed divider "Tables." This table lists the San Bernandino County Code section in the column labeled "San Bernandino County Code §" and the new code section in the column labeled "Hesperia Municipal Code §." 
    As of Supplement No. 7, this table will no longer be updated. 
Ordinance List and Disposition Table. 
    To find a specific ordinance in the code, turn to the section called "Tables" for the Ordinance List and Disposition Table. This very useful table tells you the status of every ordinance reviewed for inclusion in the code. The table is organized by ordinance number and provides a brief description and the disposition of the ordinance. If the ordinance is codified, the chapter (or chapters) will be indicated. (Example: (2.04, 6.12, 9.04).) If the ordinance is of a temporary nature or deals with subjects not normally codified, such as budgets, taxes, annexations or rezones, the disposition will be "(Special)." If the ordinance is for some reason omitted from the code, usually at the direction of the municipality, the disposition will be "(Not codified)." Other dispositions sometimes used are "(Tabled)," "(Pending)," "(Number Not Used)" or "(Missing)." 
    Beginning with Supplement No. 7, this table will be replaced with the "Code Comparative Table and Disposition List." 
Code Comparative Table and Disposition List. 
    Beginning with Supplement No. 7, a Code Comparative Table and Disposition List has been added for use in tracking legislative history. Located in the back of this volume, this table is a chronological listing of each ordinance considered for codification. The Code Comparative Table and Disposition List specifies the ordinance number, adoption date, description of the ordinance and the disposition within the code of each ordinance. By use of the Code Comparative Table and Disposition List, the reader can locate any section of the code as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
Index. 
    If you are not certain where to look for a particular subject in this code, start with the index. This is an alphabetical multi-tier subject index which uses section numbers as the reference, and cross-references where necessary. Look for the main heading of the subject you need, then the appropriate subheadings: 
BUSINESS LICENSE 
See also BUSINESS TAX 
Fee 5.04.030 
Required when 5.04.010 
    The index will be updated as necessary when the code text is amended. 
Instruction Sheet. 
    Each supplement to the new code will be accompanied by an Instruction Sheet. The Instruction Sheet will tell the code user the date of the most recent supplement and the last ordinance contained in that supplement. It will then list the pages that must be pulled from the code and the new pages that must be inserted. Following these instructions carefully will assure that the code is kept accurate and current. Removed pages should be kept for future reference. 
Page Numbers. 
    When originally published, the pages of this code were consecutively numbered. As of Supplement No. 7, when new pages are inserted with amendments, the pages will follow a "Point Numbering System." (Example: 32, 32.1, 32.2.1, 32.2.2, 33). Backs of pages that are blank (in codes that are printed double-sided) are left unnumbered but the number is "reserved" for later use. 
Electronic Submission. 
    In the interests of accuracy and speed, we encourage you to submit your ordinances electronically if at all possible. We can accept most any file format, including Word, WordPerfect or text files. If you have a choice, we prefer Word, any version. You can send files to us as an e-mail attachment, by FTP, on a diskette or CD-ROM. Electronic files enable us not only to get you your code more quickly but also ensure that it is error-free. Our e-mail address is: ords@municode.com. 
For hard copy, send two copies of all ordinances passed to: 
Municipal Code Corporation 
P.O. Box 2235 
Tallahassee, FL 32316 
Customer Service. 
    If you have any questions about this code or our services, please contact Municipal Code Corporation at 1-800-262-2633 or: 
Municipal Code Corporation 
1700 Capital Circle SW 
Tallahassee, FL 32310 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits." 
    In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Ordinance 
Number Date 
Adopted Include/ 
Omit Supplement 
Number Supp. No. 9 2010-10 11- 2-10 Include 9 2010-11 11- 2-10 Omit 9 2011-01  3-15-11 Include 9 2011-02  4- 5-11 Include 9 2011-03  5- 3-11 Include 9 2011-04  5- 3-11 Include 9 2011-005  4-19-11 Include 9 2011-06  7-19-11 Include 9 2011-07  8- 2-11 Include 9 2011-11  8- 2-11 Omit 9 2011-08  8- 2-11 Include 9 Supp. No. 10 2011-10  8-16-11 Include 10 2011-13  9-20-11 Include 10 2011-16  9- 6-11 Include 10 2012-03  2-21-12 Include 10 2012-04  4- 3-12 Include 10 2012-07  6-19-12 Include 10 2012-08  6-19-12 Include 10 2012-09  6-19-12 Include 10 2012-10  7- 3-12 Omit 10 2012-11  7-17-12 Include 10 2012-12  7- 3-12 Include 10 2012-13  7-17-12 Include 10 Supp. No. 11 2012-14  8- 7-12 Include 11 2012-15  1-15-13 Include 11 2013-01  2- 5-13 Include 11 2013-003  4- 2-13 Include 11 2013-04  4- 2-13 Include 11 2013-05  4-16-13 Include 11 2013-06  6-18-13 Include 11 2013-08  8-20-13 Include 11 Supp. No. 12 2013-11 12-17-13 Omit 12 2013-015 11- 5-13 Include 12 2013-016 10-15-13 Omit 12 2014-01  2- 4-14 Omit 12 2012-02  2- 7-12 Include 12 2013-09 11- 5-13 Include 12 2013-10 12-17-13 Omit 12 2014-02  2-18-14 Include 12 2014-03  2-18-14 Omit 12 2014-04  3-18-14 Omit 12 2014-05  4- 1-14 Include 12 2014-06  4- 1-14 Omit 12 2014-07  4-15-14 Include 12 2014-09  5- 6-14 Include 12 2014-10  5- 6-14 Omit 12 2014-11  5- 6-14 Omit 12 2014-13  5-20-14 Include 12 2014-14  8-19-14 Include 12 2014-15  8-19-14 Include 12 Supp. No. 13 2012-06 10- 2-12 Include 13 2015-03  5- 5-15 Omit 13 2015-05  7-21-15 Omit 13 2015-08  8-18-15 Omit 13 Supp. No. 14 2015-09  9- 1-15 Omit 14 2015-10  2- 2-16 Omit 14 2015-11 10- 6-15 Omit 14 2015-12 11-17-15 Include 14 2015-13  1-19-16 Include 14 2016-03  7-19-16 Omit 14 2016-04  7-19-16 Omit 14 2016-05  7-19-16 Omit 14 2016-06 10- 4-16 Include 14 2016-08 11-15-16 Include 14 2016-09  2- 7-17 Include 14 2017-01  3- 7-17 Include 14 2017-02  1-17-17 Include 14 2017-04  3-21-17 Include 14 2017-05  3- 7-17 Omit 14 2017-06  3-21-17 Include 14 Supp. No. 15 2017-07  4-18-17 Omit 15 2017-09  6- 6-17 Include 15 2017-10  6- 6-17 Include 15 2017-11  6-20-17 Include 15 2017-12  6-20-17 Include 15 2017-13  7-18-17 Include 15 2017-14  8-15-17 Omit 15 2017-16  9-19-17 Include 15 Supp. No. 16 2017-18 10-17-17 Include 16 2017-19 10-17-17 Include 16 2017-15 12- 5-17 Include 16 2018-01 3-20-18 Include 16 2018-02 3-20-18 Include 16 2018-03 3-20-18 Include 16 2018-04 4- 3-18 Include 16 2017-03  5- 2-17 Include 16 2017-08 10- 3-17 Include 16 2017-17 10-17-17 Omit 16 2017-21  1-16-18 Omit 16 2018-05  6-19-18 Include 16 2018-06  6-19-18 Omit 16 2018-37(Res.)  5-10-18 Omit 16 Supp. No. 17 2018-08 11- 6-18 Include 17 2018-09  2- 5-19 Include 17 2019-01  2- 5-19 Include 17 2019-02  2- 5-19 Omit 17 2019-03  2- 5-19 Include 17 2019-04  4-16-19 Include 17 2019-05  5- 7-19 Omit 17 2019-06  5- 7-19 Omit 17  
Title 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Chapters: 
Chapter 1.01 - CODE ADOPTION 
Sections: 

1.01.010 - Adoption. 
    The Hesperia municipal code is adopted. 
(Ord. 250 § 2, 1998) 
1.01.020 - Title-Citation-Reference. 
    It shall be sufficient to refer to said code as the Hesperia Municipal Code in any prosecution for the violation of any provision thereof or in any proceeding at law or equity. It shall be sufficient to designate any ordinance adding to, amending, correcting or repealing all or any part or portion thereof as an addition to, amendment to, correction or repeal of the Hesperia Municipal Code. References may be made to the titles, chapters, sections and subsections of the Hesperia Municipal Code and such references shall apply to those titles, chapters, sections or subsections as they appear in the code. 
(Ord. 250 § 3, 1998) 
1.01.030 - Reference applies to all amendments. 
    Whenever a reference is made to this code as the Hesperia Municipal Code, or to any portion thereof, or to any of the city of Hesperia, California, codified herein, the reference shall apply to all amendments, corrections and additions heretofore, now or hereafter made. 
(Ord. 250 § 4, 1998) 
1.01.040 - Environmental impact. 
    The adoption of this code is exempt from review under the California Environmental Quality Act, specifically CEQA Guidelines Section 15061(b)(3), as it can be seen with certainty there will be no environmental impacts resulting from such action. 
(Ord. 250 § 5, 1998) 
1.01.050 - Title, chapter and section headings. 
    Title, chapter and section headings contained herein shall not be deemed to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any title, chapter or section hereof. 
(Ord. 250 § 6, 1998) 
1.01.060 - Reference to specific ordinances. 
    The provisions of this code shall not in any manner affect matters of record which refer to, or are otherwise connected with ordinances which are therein specifically designated by number or otherwise and which are included within the code, but such reference shall be construed to apply to the corresponding provisions contained within this code. 
(Ord. 250 § 7, 1998) 
1.01.070 - Ordinances or portions thereof repealed or amended. 
    Those ordinances, or portions thereof, are hereby repealed or amended as set forth in Exhibit "A" attached to the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
(Ord. 250 § 8, 1998) 
1.01.080 - Effect of code on past actions and obligations. 
    The adoption of this code does not affect prosecutions for ordinance violations committed prior to the effective date of this code, does not waive any fee or penalty due and unpaid on the effective date of this code, and does not affect the validity of any bond or cash deposit posted, filed or deposited pursuant to the requirements of any ordinance. 
(Ord. 250 § 9, 1998) 
1.01.090 - Severability. 
    If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this code is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by the decision of any court of competent jurisdiction or by preemptive legislative action, such decision or legislative action shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this code. The city council declares that it would have adopted this code and each section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion thereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses, phrases, or portions be declared invalid or unconstitutional or preempted by legislation. 
(Ord. 250 § 10, 1998) 
1.01.100 - References to county code. 
    References in city forms, documents and regulations to the chapters and sections of the former San Bernardino County Code shall be construed to apply to the corresponding provisions contained within this code. 
(Ord. 250 § 11, 1998) 
Chapter 1.04 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Sections: 

1.04.010 - Effect on past actions and rights previously accrued. 
    Neither the adoption of this code nor the repeal hereby of any ordinance of the city shall in any manner affect the prosecution for violation of any ordinance, which violation was committed prior to the effective date hereof, nor shall the same be construed as a waiver of any permit, license, fee, charge or penalty at such effective date required or due and unpaid under such ordinance, nor shall the same be construed as affecting any of the provisions of such ordinance relating to the collection of any such fee, charge or penalty, or the penal provisions applicable to any violation thereof, required to be posted, filed or deposited pursuant to any ordinance, and all rights and obligations thereunder appertaining shall continue in full force and effect. 
(Added during 1997 codification) 
1.04.020 - Pending actions and accrued rights not affected. 
    No action or proceeding commenced before this code takes effect, and no right accrued, is affected by the provisions of this code, but all procedures thereafter taken therein shall conform to the provisions of this code so far as possible. 
(Added during 1997 codification) 
1.04.030 - Rights under existing licenses and certificates. 
    No rights given by any license or certificate under any ordinance repealed by this code are affected by the enactment of this code, or by such repeal, but such rights shall hereafter be exercised according to this code. 
(Added during 1997 codification) 
1.04.040 - Headings of provisions. 
    The headings of the part, title, chapter, section and subsection headings contained in this code are intended to indicate the contents thereof and shall not be deemed to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent thereof. 
(Added during 1997 codification) 
1.04.050 - Definitions. 
A.  Definitions. As used in this code: 
    "Abandoned vehicle" means a vehicle which is located on public or private property without the express or implied consent of the property owner or person in lawful possession or control of the property. 
    "Abatement" means to complete all corrective work for the removal of a violation with all required permits, city approvals and inspections. 
    "Abatement costs" includes actual, administrative and incidental costs incurred by the city during the abatement of a nuisance by the city, or its agents or representatives. 
    "Above-ground/On-ground Pool." See definition of swimming pool. 
    "Abused animal" shall mean any animal which is mistreated, beaten, tormented or teased, or is deprived of water or food or shelter or otherwise not properly cared for; or is kept under unsanitary or unsafe conditions; or is abandoned; or is trained for fighting other animals. 
    "Activity or using agency" means any department, agency or other unit of city government which derives its support wholly or in part from the city. 
    "Acts or Omissions." This code shall refer only to the omission or commission of acts within the territorial limits of the city and to that territory outside of the city over which the city has jurisdiction or control by virtue of the Constitution, any law, or by reason of ownership or control of property. Whenever any act or omission is made unlawful, it includes causing, permitting, aiding, abetting, suffering or concealing such act or omission. 
    "Adequate water" shall mean that a constant access to a supply of clean, fresh, potable water is provided in a sanitary manner. 
    "Administrative board" means the Hesperia city council advisory committee, or other entity as designated by the city council. 
    "Adoptable animal" shall include only those cats and dogs eight weeks of age or older that have manifested no sign of behavioral or temperamental defect that could pose a public health or safety risk or otherwise make the animal unsuitable for placement as a pet, and have manifested no sign of disease, injury, congenital or hereditary condition that adversely affects the health of the animal, or that is likely to adversely affect the animal's health in the future. "Adoptable" also means that the animal has been held at the animal shelter for the period of time specified by law. 
    "Adult arcade" means any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin-operated or slug-operated or electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by the depicting or describing of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
    "Adult bookstore" or "adult video store" means a commercial establishment which, as one of its principal business purposes, offers for sale or rental for any form of consideration any one or more of the following: 
1.  Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes or video reproductions, slides, or other visual representations which depict or describe "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas"; or 
2.  Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia which are designed for use in connection with "specified sexual activities"; 
3.  A commercial establishment may have other principal business purposes that do not involve the offering for sale or rental of material depicting or describing "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" and still be categorized as adult bookstore or adult video store. Such other business purposes will not serve to exempt such commercial establishments from being categorized as an adult bookstore or adult video store so long as one of its principal business purposes is the offering for sale or rental for consideration the specified materials which depict or describe "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
    "Adult cabaret" means a nightclub, bar, restaurant, or similar commercial establishment which regularly features; 
1.  Persons who appear in a state of nudity; or 
2.  Live performances which are characterized by the exposure of "specified anatomical areas" or by "specified sexual activities"; or 
3.  Films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
    "Adult motel" means a hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment which: 
1.  Offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration; provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas"; and has a sign visible from the public right-of-way which advertises the availability of this adult type of photographic reproductions; or 
2.  Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less than ten hours; or 
3.  Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to sub-rent the room for a period of time that is less than ten hours. 
    "Adult motion picture theater" means a commercial establishment where, for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or similar photographic reproductions are regularly shown which are characterized by the depiction of "specified sexual activities," "specified anatomical areas," or persons in a state of nudity. 
    "Adult theater" means a theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar commercial establishment which regularly features persons who appear in a state of nudity or live performances which are characterized by the exposure of "specified anatomical areas" or by "specified sexual activities." 
    "Aerosol paint container" means any aerosol container, which is adapted or made for the purpose of spraying paint or other substance capable of defacing property. 
    "Alley" means a public thoroughfare, not exceeding twenty-five (25) feet in width for the use of pedestrians and/or vehicles, which affords only a secondary means of access to the abutting property. 
    Amendments. Whenever a reference is made to any portion of this code or to any ordinances of the city, the reference applies to all amendments and additions now or hereafter made. 
    "Animal" unless otherwise stated, includes birds, fish, non-human mammals, reptiles, and amphibians. 
    "Animal control officer" means any person duly authorized by the city manager to perform the functions of animal control. 
    "Animal menagerie" means any place where wild animals are kept or maintained for private or commercial purposes, including places where wild animals are boarded, trained or kept for hire. 
    "Animal shelter" means the Hesperia Animal Shelter. The term "city pound" as may be used in this title or this code shall mean the "animal shelter." 
    "Animal waste" means manure, fertilizer, or any form of solid excrement produced by any and all forms of animals or commercial livestock. 
    "Apiary" means any structure used to house or attract bees. 
    "Attractive nuisance" means any condition which may prove detrimental to a person under eighteen (18) years of age that could result in bodily harm or involuntary confinement to said person, whether in a building, on the premises of a building, or on an unoccupied lot. This may include but not be limited to any abandoned wells, shafts, basements or excavations; abandoned refrigerators and motor vehicles; or any structurally unsound fences or structures; or any lumber, trash, fences, debris or vegetation which may prove a hazard for inquisitive minors. 
    "Banner." In addition to the meanings ordinarily ascribed thereto, the term "banner" shall include any article of display, advertising or decorative matter, including but not limited to Christmas, Easter and other holiday festoons on, over, along or across any highway or highway right-of-way. 
    "Bar" means an area which is devoted primarily to the serving of alcoholic beverages and in which the service of food is only incidental to the consumption of such beverages. Although a restaurant may contain a bar, the term bar shall not include the restaurant dining area. 
    "Barrier" means a fence, wall, building wall, or a combination thereof, which completely surrounds the swimming pool and obstructs access to the swimming pool, spa or hot tub. When approved by the enforcement agency, barriers may also incorporate natural or manmade features, such as topography, waterways, restricted areas and similar features including geographically isolated areas which provide an effective access barrier to the pool area. 
    "Base flood" means a flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year (also called one hundred (100) year flood). 
    "Basement" means an area of a building having its floor subgrade, below ground level, on all sides. 
    "Bin" means any solid waste container of a capacity exceeding one hundred (100) gallons and generally unmovable by just one individual (i.e., a "dumpster") that is provided by the city's franchisee. 
    "Bingo" means a game of chance in which prizes are awarded by designated numbers or symbols on a card which conform with numbers or symbols selected at random. 
    "Blinder rack" means a display device which provides a covering in front of the display matter so that the lower two-thirds of the materials are not exposed to view. 
    "Blinker light" means a light whether colored or uncolored which emits an intermittent light. 
    "Boarding and breeding kennel" means a kennel in which dogs are kept for boarding, breeding, training, marketing, or other purposes. 
    "Boarding kennel" means a kennel in which dogs owned by persons other than the kennel owner/operator are being cared for. 
    "Body art" means body piercing, tattooing, branding, or application of permanent cosmetics. 
    "Body art facility" means the specified building, section of a building, or vehicle in which a practitioner performs body art, decontamination and sterilization area. 
    "Body piercing" means the creation of an opening in a human body for the purpose of inserting jewelry or other decoration. "Body piercing" includes, but is not limited to, the piercing of an ear, including the tragus, lip, tongue nose, or eyebrow. "Body piercing" does not include the piercing of the ear with a disposable, single-use, presterilized clasp and stud or solid needle that is applied using a mechanical device to force the needle or stud through the ear. 
    "Branding" means the process in which a mark or marks are burned into human skin tissue with a hot iron or other instrument, with the intention of leaving a permanent scar. 
    "Breeding kennel" means a kennel in which dogs are kept for the primary purpose of breeding. 
    "Building and/or structure." In addition to the meanings ordinarily ascribed thereto, the term "building and/or structure" includes any machine, implement, device, article of manufacture, tree, derrick, stage or other setting, lumber, sash or door, structural steel, dynamo, transformer, generator, press, industrial tooling, agitator, object or thing having a width of more than eight feet, other than any implement of husbandry or any special mobile equipment, as deemed in the California Vehicle Code having a width of ten feet or less. 
    "Building code" is the Uniform Building Code promulgated by the International Conference of Building Officials, as adopted by this jurisdiction. 
    "Bulky waste" means oversized or overweight household articles placed curbside by a residential tenant or owner, which oversized or overweight household articles have weight, volumes or dimensions which cannot be accommodated by solid waste containers for single-family or multifamily residential premises, such as stoves, refrigerators, water heaters, washing machines, furniture, sofas, mattresses, box springs and large rugs or other similar large items. 
    "Bus loading zone" means that space adjacent to a curb or edge of a roadway reserved for the exclusive use of busses during the loading or unloading of passengers. 
    "Business" means a commercial or public entity including, but not limited to, a firm, partnership, proprietorship, joint-stock company, corporation, or association that is organized as a for-profit or nonprofit entity, strip mall, school, school district, special district, federal, state, local, regional agency or facility. "Business" also includes a multi-family complex or mobile home park of five or more units. 
    "Cable service" means the one-way transmission to subscribers of video programming, or other programming services, and subscriber interaction, if any, that is required for the selection or use of that video programming or other programming service. For the purposes of this definition, "video programming" means programming provided by, or generally considered comparable to programming provided by, a television broadcast station; and "other programming service" means information that a cable system operator makes available to all subscribers generally. 
    "Cable system operator" means any person or group of persons: 
1.  Who provides cable service over a cable system and directly or through one or more affiliates owns a significant interest in that cable system; or 
2.  Who otherwise controls or is responsible for, through any arrangement, the management and operation of that cable system. 
    "Cable system," or "cable communications system" or "cable television system," means a facility, consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception, and control equipment that is designed to provide cable service that includes video programming and that is provided to multiple subscribers within a community. The term "cable system" does not include: 
1.  A facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of one or more television broadcast stations; 
2.  A facility that serves subscribers without using any public right-of-way; 
3.  A facility of a common carrier that is subject, in whole or in part, to the provisions of Title II of the Telecommunications Act of 1996, except that such facility will be considered a cable system (other than for purposes specified in Section 621(c) of the 1984 Cable Act) to the extent such facility is used in the transmission of video programming directly to subscribers, unless the extent of such use is solely to provide interactive on-demand services; 
4.  An open video system that complies with Section 653 of Title VI of the Telecommunications Act of 1996; or 
5.  Any facilities of an electric utility that are used solely for operating its electric utility system. 
    California Massage Therapy Council. The term California Massage Therapy Council (CAMTC) shall mean the massage therapy organization responsible for certification of the massage therapists or massage practitioners. The CAMTC or massage therapy organization was created pursuant California Business and Professions Code Sections 4600 thru 4620. 
    "Cart" means any molded solid waste container provided by franchisee of a size not to exceed ninety-five (95) gallons with two or more wheels for easy carting by an individual. 
    "Cat" means all domesticated felines. 
    "Cattery" means a place where eight or more cats are kept. The term cattery shall not apply to animal shelters operated by governmental agencies nor shall it apply to veterinary hospitals. 
    A cattery is subdefined as follows: 
1.  "Breeding cattery" means a cattery in which more than four cats are kept for the primary purpose of breeding. 
2.  "Boarding cattery" means a cattery in which cats owned by persons other than the cattery owner/operator are being cared for. 
3.  "Boarding and breeding cattery" means a cattery in which cats are being kept for boarding, breeding, marketing or other purposes. 
    "_____ CFR Section _____" means the Code of Federal Regulations. Thus, the citation of "47 CFR 80.1" refers to Title 47, part 80, section 1, of the Code of Federal Regulations. 
    "Chapter" means a chapter of this title, unless the chapter of some other division or law is indicated. 
    "Charitable purposes" means filming or video taping for a motion picture or television production conducted by an organization in which no individual either directly or indirectly receives a profit from the production, marketing or showing of the films or tapes. 
    "Chief of police" means the highest ranking officer in charge of the city's police department, whether contracted or city operated. 
    "City" means the city of Hesperia, a municipal corporation formed and operating pursuant to the laws of the State of California. 
    "City clerk" means the city clerk of the city. 
    "City council" or "council" is the city council of the City of Hesperia. 
    "City manager" means the city manager of the City of Hesperia or his designated agent. 
    "City" or "this city" means and shall be construed as if followed by the words "of Hesperia." 
    "Code enforcement" means the personnel within the code enforcement division. 
    "Code enforcement action" means any action undertaken for the enforcement of this code. 
    "Code enforcement officer" means the city manager for the city or his/her designee in the enforcement of any provision of this code. 
    "Code" or "this code" means the Hesperia Municipal Code. 
    "Code violation" means any violation of this code. 
    "Collector" means and includes the city manager of the City of Hesperia or any person or persons designated by the city manager to act in that capacity. 
    "Combustible vegetation" shall mean tumbleweeds (Russian Thistle), weeds, dead limbs within six feet of the ground, dead trees and plants or plant debris, dry grasses over four inches in height. 
    "Commercial or industrial establishment" means, for the purpose of this chapter, all commercial and industrial sites including the following, but not restricted to retail and wholesale stores, factories, service shops, hospitals, convalescent home, construction material, hotels, motels, restaurants, office complexes, apartment complexes, condominiums and townhouses, mobile home parks, trailer courts, and all other types of multi-family dwellings; however, not included: all units considered residential as defined by this chapter. 
    "Commercial/industrial business owner" means any person, firm, corporation or other enterprise or organization holding or occupying, alone or with others, non-residential premises, whether or not it is the holder of the title or the owner of record of the non-residential premises. 
    "Commission" means the Public Utilities Commission of the state. 
    "Committee" means the Hesperia city council advisory committee as set forth in this code. 
    "Communications Act" means the Communications Act of 1934 (47 U.S.C. Sections 153, et seq.), as amended by the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992, and the Telecommunications Act of 1996. 
    "Completion" means the earliest of the following dates: The date a temporary certificate of occupancy is issued by the city for a project, the date a certificate of occupancy is issued by the city for a project, or the date the final city inspection approving the project is completed. 
    "Computation of time" means the time in which any act provided by law is to be done is computed by excluding the first day and including the last, unless the last day is a holiday, and then it is also excluded. 
    "Congregate residences" is any building or portion thereof which contains facilities for living, sleeping and sanitation, as required by this code, and may include facilities for eating and cooking, for occupancy by other than a family. A congregate residence may be a shelter, convent, monastery, dormitory, fraternity or sorority house but does not include jails, hospitals, nursing homes, hotels or lodging houses. 
    "Construction material" means all waste material and rubbish from the construction, alteration, repair, moving and demolition of buildings or production and development of property by real estate or commercial agents, contractors, or commercial agents, contractors, or manufacturing process which are handled by the utilization of roll-off receptacle or any other type of enclosed receptacle. 
    "Construction or demolition" means all building, landscaping, remodeling, room additions, renovations, demolition or destruction of any facility or structure located in the city, or any portion thereof, including but not limited to, any tenant improvements to an existing facility or structure and including the use or disposal of designated recyclable and reusable materials. 
    "Construction or demolition waste" ("C&D") means any solid waste, inert building materials or debris used, discarded or generated as the result of construction, renovation, remodeling, repair, cleanup or demolition operations, including without limitation, asphalt, concrete, cement, brick, lumber, gypsum wallboard, cardboard, and other associated packaging, roofing material, ceramic tile, carpeting, plastic pipe, steel, discarded packaging or containers and other waste construction materials, whether brought on site for fabrication or used in construction or resulting from demolition, excluding liquid waste and hazardous waste. 
    "Construction site" means any location where grading, construction of structures, remodeling, manufactured building setdown, renovation or any other work subject to the issuance of grading or building permit is occurring. 
    "Construction site maintenance" means the routine continuous maintenance of the construction site in order to adequately contain the storage of trash, rubbish or debris and maintain a clean and safe construction site. 
    "Construction site trash, rubbish or debris" means any container, wrapper, crate or packaging that accompanies the construction material, any surplus or residual construction material brought to or originating at the construction site, and any other residual materials used by the construction workers and brought to the site. 
    "Container" or "solid waste container" interchangeably means a bin or cart used for solid waste collection. 
    "Conversion rate" means the rate set forth in the standardized conversion rate table approved by the city pursuant to this title for use in estimating the volume or weight of materials identified in a waste management plan. 
    "Cottage food operation" means an enterprise that has not more than the amount in gross annual sales that is specified in this subdivision, is operated by a cottage food operator, and has not more than one full-time equivalent cottage food employee, not including a family member or household member of the cottage food operator, within the registered or permitted area of a private home where the cottage food operator resides and where cottage food products are prepared or packaged for direct, indirect, or direct and indirect sale to consumers pursuant to this part. In 2013, the enterprise shall not have more than thirty-five thousand dollars ($35,000.00) in gross annual sales in the calendar year. In 2014, the enterprise shall not have more than forty-five thousand dollars ($45,000.00) in gross annual sales in the calendar year. Commencing in 2015, and each subsequent year thereafter, the enterprise shall not have more than fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) in gross annual sales in the calendar year. 
    "Council" or "city council," as used in this code, means the city council of the City of Hesperia. 
    "County" means the County of San Bernardino. 
    "Covered project" means and includes any project located in the city which consists of one or more items as defined by Title 8. 
    "Day" is the period of time between any midnight and the midnight following. 
    "Daytime" means the period of time between sunrise and sunset. 
    "Deputy." Whenever a power is granted to or a duty is imposed upon a public officer or employee, the power may be exercised or the duty may be performed by a deputy of such officer or employee, or by a person otherwise duly authorized pursuant to law or ordinance, unless this code expressly provides otherwise. 
    "Development" is defined for the purposes of this chapter as the construction or the enlargement of any primary use building. 
    "Director" means the city manager or his/her designee. 
    "Dismantled" means that integral component parts necessary to operate the vehicle on a highway, roadway or public street have been removed from the vehicle. 
    "Distribution lines" are defined for the purposes of this chapter as those electrical utility conductors which are energized at thirty-four thousand five hundred (34,500) volts or less, telephone, cable or other utility lines that supply utility product to "service lines." 
    "Diversion requirement" means the state-mandated diversion of the total construction and demolition debris generated by a project through reuse or recycling, unless an exemption has been given pursuant to Section 8.04.520, in which case the diversion requirement shall be the maximum feasible diversion rate established by the waste management plan (WMP) compliance official for the project. 
    "Divert" means to use material for any purpose other than disposal in a landfill or transformation facility. 
    "Dog" means any member of the canine species canus familiaris, commonly domesticated by man. 
    "Domestic animal" means an animal or fowl which has historically and commonly been tamed for the use of man. 
    "Driver" means any person driving a taxicab either as owner or under the direction, employment control, or service of the owner as herein defined. 
    "Efficiency dwelling unit" is a dwelling unit containing only one habitable room. 
    "Electrical code" is the National Electrical Code promulgated by the National Fire Protection Association, as adopted by this jurisdiction. 
    "Electronic waste" means "covered electronic waste" as defined in Section 42463 of the Public Resources Code and other discarded electronic equipment commonly known as "brown goods" such as, but not limited to, CD players and recorders, DVD players and recorders, stereos, computers, printers, keyboards, and peripherals. 
    "Eligible organizations" is an organization exempted from the bank and corporation tax by the California Revenue and Taxation Code and would include the following: 
1.  Labor, agricultural and horticultural organizations exempted under Section 23701(a); 
2.  Fraternal beneficiary societies, orders or organizations exempted under Section 23701(b); 
3.  Religious, charitable, scientific, educational, amateur sports or humanitarian organizations exempted under Section 23701(d); 
4.  Business leagues, Chambers of Commerce, real estate boards and boards of trade exempted under Section 23701(e); 
5.  Civil leagues, social welfare and employers organizations exempted under Section 23701(f); 
6.  Nonprofit pleasure and recreation clubs exempted under Section 23701(g); 
7.  Domestic fraternal societies, orders or associations exempted under Section 23701(1). 
    "Emergency" means the actual or threatened existence of conditions of disaster or of extreme peril to the safety of persons and property within this city caused by such conditions as air pollution, fire, flood, storm, epidemic, riot, earthquake, or other conditions, including conditions resulting from war or imminent threat of war, but other than conditions resulting from a labor controversy, which conditions are or are likely to be beyond the control of the services, personnel, equipment and facilities of this city, requiring the combined forces of other political subdivisions to combat. 
    "Enclosed" means closed in by a roof and four walls with appropriate openings for ingress and egress. 
    "Encroachment" means and includes any tower, pole, pole line, pipe, pipeline, fence, billboard, stand, or building, or any structure or object of any kind or character not particularly mentioned in this division, which is placed in, under, or over any portion of the city property and/or right-of-way. 
    "Escort" means any person who, for consideration, agrees or offers to act as a companion, guide, or date for another person, or who agrees or offers to privately model lingerie or to privately perform a "striptease" for another person. Escort shall not include any person hired by a state licensed school for purposes of modeling in any art education class, while such person acts in that capacity. 
    "Escort agency" means a person or business entity which furnishes, offers to furnish, or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its primary business purposes, for any form of consideration. 
    "Establishment" means and includes any of the following: 
1.  The opening or commencement of any sexually-oriented business as a new business; 
2.  The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually-oriented business, to any sexually-oriented business; 
3.  The addition of any sexually-oriented business to any other existing sexually-oriented business; or 
4.  The relocation of any sexually oriented business. 
    "Excavation" means digging or removing soil, rocks, gravel, sand or related materials from a site including, but not limited to, such work as is customarily performed in connection with the construction of buildings. 
    "Exclusive solid waste handling services" means any action by the city, whether by franchise, contract, license, permit or otherwise whereby the city council has the exclusive right to provide solid waste handling services within the city limits. 
    "Exhibit" means to show. 
    "Exotic animal" means any animal belonging by nature or origin to another part of the world or any animal not normally kept as a pet or livestock animal. 
    "Facility" means any public roadway, utility, public street, public way, or public place in the city, owned or maintained by the city, or dedicated to the public for the purpose of travel. 
    "Fats, oils and grease (FOG)" means any vegetable or animal product that is used in or is a by-product of the cooking or food preparation process, and that turns or may turn viscous or solidifies with a change in temperature or other conditions. 
    "Fats, oils, and grease control program" refers to a document adopted by an ordinance of the city council providing procedural guidelines to implement the purpose and intent of chapter 14.53. 
    "FCC" or "Federal Communications Commission" means the federal administrative agency, or any lawful successor, that is authorized to regulate telecommunications services and telecommunications service providers on a national level. 
    "Felt tip marker" means any tipped style marker or similar implement with a tip which, at its broadest width is one-eighth inch or greater. 
    "Film" or "filming" means and includes, but shall not be limited to, feature motion pictures, video tapes, television, motion pictures, and commercials. 
    "Finance department" means the management services department of the city. 
    "Fire hazard" shall mean combustible vegetation found adjacent to improved property, along easements and within ten feet of a roadway; tumbleweeds regardless of the distance from structures; combustible rubbish such as furniture, paper and cardboard, yard clipping, leaves, dead trees or tree trimmings, unstacked wood or lumber, tires, construction or demolition debris; portions of trees within ten feet of a chimney outlets; leaves, needles or other dead vegetation found on the roof of a structure that create a danger to public health, safety and welfare. 
    "Flood insurance rate map (FIRM)" means the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the city. 
    "Flood insurance study" means the official report provided by the Federal Insurance Administration that includes flood provides, the FIRM, the flood boundary and floodway map, and the water surface elevation of the base flood. 
    "Flood" or "flooding" means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: (1) the overflow of flood waters; (2) the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source; and/or (3) the collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of any lake or other body of water as a result of erosion or undermining caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable event which results in flooding as defined in this definition. 
    "Floodplain management regulations" means federal, state and local regulations which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction, including the zoning ordinance, the subdivision ordinance, building codes, health regulations, grading and erosion ordinances, and other ordinances or regulations implementing the police power given the city. 
    "Floodproofed" means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water, and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
    "Floodway" means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. 
    "Food service establishment (FSE)" means a place where food is prepared and served and/or sold for consumption by the public and includes commercial and non-commercial establishments. 
    "Franchise" means an initial authorization, or the renewal of an initial authorization, issued by the city council, whether such authorization is designated as a franchise, permit, license, resolution, contract, certificate, agreement, or otherwise, that authorizes the construction or operation of a cable system. 
    "Franchise fee" means any fee or assessment of any kind that is authorized by state or federal law to be imposed by the city on a grantee as compensation in the nature of rent for the grantee's use of the public rights-of-way. The term "franchise fee" does not include: 
1.  Any tax, fee, or assessment of general applicability (including any such tax, fee, or assessment imposed on both utilities and cable operators or their services); 
2.  Capital costs that are required by the franchise to be incurred by grantee for public, educational, or governmental access facilities; 
3.  Costs or charges that are incidental to the award or enforcement of the franchise, including payments for bonds, security funds, letters of credit, insurance, indemnification, penalties, or liquidated damages; or 
4.  Any fee imposed under Title 17, United States Code. 
    "Franchise service area" or "service area" means the entire geographic area of the city as it is now constituted, or may in the future be constituted, unless otherwise specified in the ordinance or resolution granting a franchise, or in a franchise agreement. 
    "Franchisee" as stated in this chapter, means a solid waste handler authorized by the city council to collect solid waste within the city pursuant to Title 8. 
    "Fuel load reduction" shall mean combustible vegetation that is cleared away from structures for a distance that is determined to prevent ignition of either a structure or the vegetation, should the other burn or combustible vegetation existing away from the immediate area of the structure that if not thinned and pruned will allow a fire to be carried toward or away from the structure. 
    "Garage sales" means the sale of personal property (excluding motor vehicles) in, at or upon any residentially occupied parcel, or lot, and/or any parcel or lot occupied by any religious, social or charitable organizations. Garage sales shall include, but are not limited to, any "yard sale," "home sale," "patio sale," or other similarly conducted sale. 
    Gender. The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter. 
    "Goods" means and includes wares or merchandise. 
    "Grade" means the underlying surface such as earth or a walking surface. 
    "Graffiti" means any inscription, word, figure or design that is marked, etched, scratched, drawn, painted, pasted or otherwise affixed to or on any surface, regardless of the nature of the material of that structural component, to the extent the same was not authorized in advance by the owner thereof, or, despite advance authorization, is otherwise deemed by the city council to be a public nuisance. 
    "Graffiti implement" means an aerosol paint container, a felt tip marker, or any other device containing any solution or substance capable of being used to leave a visible mark at least one-eighth of an inch in width upon any surface. 
    "Grantee" means any person that is awarded a franchise in accordance with this title, and that person's lawful successor, transferee, or assignee. 
    "Grease pre-treatment device" means any device that reduces excessive amounts of fats, oils, and grease prior to discharge into the wastewater collection system. 
    "Green waste" or "yard waste" means leaves, grass clippings, brush, branches and other forms of organic materials generated from landscapes or gardens. "Green waste" or "yard waste" does not include stumps or branches exceeding three inches in diameter or three feet in length, unless they are reduced to a chipped form. 
    "Gross annual cable service revenues" means the annual gross revenues derived from the grantee's operations of its cable television system within the city, excluding uncollected bad debt, refundable deposits, rebates or credits, and further excluding any sales, excise, or other taxes or charges that are required to be collected for direct pass-through to the local, state or federal government. Revenues identified and collected from subscribers as franchise fees may not be excluded from a grantee's gross annual cable service revenues. 
    "Guard dog" means any dog used for the purpose of guard duty. 
    "Harmful matter" means as such term is defined in California Penal Code Section 313(a). 
    "Hawking" means offering personal property or products of any kind for sale on any public property or public right-of-way or on private property by attracting the attention of persons by any means including, without limitation, the display of any personal property or the use of signs, horns, labels or signals. 
    "Hazardous waste" means and includes extremely hazardous waste or infectious waste as such terms are defined by the California Health and Safety Code Sections 25100 et seq., or as such is defined by regulations promulgated under said sections or by the California State Department of Health Services. 
    Health Officer. The term "health officer" means an officer of the San Bernardino County Department of Environmental Health Services or such other authority as designated by the city council. 
    Hot Tub. See definition of spa. 
    "Hot water" is hot water supplied to plumbing fixtures at a temperature of not less than one hundred ten (110) degrees. 
    "Hotel" means any building or portion thereof containing six or more guest rooms, designed for and/or used by six or more guests for compensation on a daily basis, and with no provision for cooking in any individual room or suite, but not including those facilities defined as social care facilities. Such establishments provide lodging and usually meals, various personal services and sometimes entertainment and recreational opportunities. 
    "Immediate hazard" shall mean an extreme fire hazard which constitutes an immediate threat to public health, safety and welfare. 
    "Impoundment" means the picking up of an animal by a duly authorized person and bringing same into an animal shelter for confinement, custody and disposition. 
    "In the city" means and includes all territory over which the city now has, or shall hereafter acquire, jurisdiction for the exercise of its police powers or other regulatory powers. 
    "In-ground pool." See definition of swimming pool. 
    "Inoperable" means the vehicle is absent a motor, transmission, wheels or any other part or equipment necessary to operate safely on a highway, roadway or public street. 
    "Inoperative vehicle" is any vehicle that is missing any part, component, or equipment that would prevent the vehicle from being driven under it's own power or prevent said vehicle from being operated legally and safely on a highway, roadway, or public street, or any vehicle not currently licensed, smog certified, and/or registered. 
    "Joint authority." All words giving a joint authority to three or more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such persons or officers. 
    "Junk dealer" means any person having a fixed place of business and conducting, managing or maintaining any place where secondhand and used personal property including, without limitation, used machinery, scrap automobiles, tools, equipment, implements, or parts or portions thereof, are gathered together, stored, purchased, or kept for collection, shipment, sale, or transfer. 
    "Junked" means a vehicle which has been destroyed or damaged to such an extent that it is non-repairable. 
    "Kennel" means a place where eight or more dogs over four months of age are kept. The term "kennel" shall not apply to animal shelters operated by governmental agencies, or nonprofit societies for the care of stray dogs nor shall the term apply to veterinary hospitals. 
    "Licensed dismantler's yard" means premises used for dismantling or wrecking of vehicles, where there is buying, selling or dealing in such vehicles, their integral parts, or component materials thereof, and the sale of dismantled, partially dismantled, wrecked or inoperative vehicles. 
    "Licensee" means a person in whose name a license to operate a sexually-oriented business has been issued, as well as the individual listed as an applicant on the application for a license. 
    "Lien sale" means a sale of a vehicle to obtain legal ownership of a vehicle under title or requiring registration, under the California Vehicle Code. 
    "Livestock" means and includes all domesticated bovine, equine, caprine, ovine, and porcine species. 
    "Loading zone" means the space adjacent to a curb or edge of a roadway reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or materials. 
    "Local bidder" means a person, firm, partnership or corporation considered to be a "point of sale" within the city pursuant to the Constitution and laws of the State of California. 
    "Local enforcement agency" means the local health agency of the county, the San Bernardino County Environmental Health Services (EHS) Department. 
    "Lodging house" is any building or portion thereof containing not more than five guest rooms where rent is paid in money, goods, labor or otherwise. 
    "Lot" means a lot, parcel, tract, or piece of land, improved, or unimproved, including the sidewalk area butting or adjoining such lot, parcel, tract or piece of land, and the parkways or areas lying between any abutting sidewalk and the curb or street line, or between the abutting property ownership line and any street line. 
    "Low bidder" means the person, firm, partnership or corporation submitting the lowest price for the supplies, materials, equipment or services which meet or exceed the specifications, delivery terms and conditions and other requirements included in the invitation to bid. 
    "Lowest floor" means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided, that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements of this chapter. 
    "Manufactured home" means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. For floodplain management purposes the term "manufactured home" also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and other similar vehicles placed on a site for more than one hundred eighty (180) days in any year period. 
    Massage. The word "massage" means any method of pressure on or friction against, or stroking, kneading, rubbing, tapping, pounding, or stimulating the external parts of the body with the hands or other parts of the body, with or without the aid of any mechanical or electrical apparatus or appliances, or with or without supplementary aids such as rubbing alcohol, liniments, antiseptics, oils, powder, creams, lotions, ointments, or other similar preparations commonly used in this practice. 
    Massage facility. The term "massage facility" means and includes, without limitation, any structure or room, or part thereof or facility where massage is given or administered as a matter of business for consideration whether or not actually received. 
    Massage practitioner. The term "massage practitioner," means and includes any person who gives, performs or administers to another person a massage or massage therapy who is certified by the CAMTC under California Business and Professions Code Sections 4600 thru 4620 and who administers massage for compensation. 
    "Massage technician" means and includes any person licensed by the city prior to July 1, 2017 who gives, performs or administers to another person a massage as defined in this section as a matter of business and for consideration whether or not actually received. If the license for a massage technician lapses as described in Section 5.20.050(D), then the massage professional shall become CAMTC certified to resume performing massage services in the city. 
    Massage therapist. The term "massage therapist," means and includes any person who gives, performs or administers to another person a massage or massage therapy who is certified by the CAMTC under California Business and Professions Code Sections 4600 thru 4620 and who administers massage for compensation. 
    "Matter" means as such term is defined in California Penal Code Section 313(b). 
    "May" is permissive. 
    "Mechanical code" is the Uniform Mechanical Code promulgated by the International Conference of Building Officials, as adopted by this jurisdiction. 
    "Minor" means any natural person under eighteen (18) years of age. 
    "Minors" are all persons defined as minors under Civil Code Section 25.1. 
    "Month" means a calendar month. 
    "Multi-family complex" means a premises with one or more residential buildings designed for one or more dwelling units as defined in Chapter 16.08, but does not include hotels, motels and other premises designed for transient occupancy. 
    "Multichannel video programming distributor" or "video programming distributor" means a person such as, but not limited to, a cable system operator, a multichannel multipoint distribution service, a direct broadcast satellite service, or a television receive-only satellite program distributor, who makes available multiple channels of video programming for purchase by subscribers or customers. 
    "News purposes," as specified in this chapter, means filming or video taping for television news broadcasting by reporters, photographers or camerapersons in the employ of a newspaper, news service, or similar entity, of news events concerning those persons, scenes or occurrences which are in the news and of general public interest. The filming or video taping of such shall be for regularly scheduled news programs (but not magazine or documentary programs) and special news programs which are not preplanned and are broadcast within twenty-four (24) hours after the event. 
    "Nighttime" means the period of time between sunset and sunrise. 
    "Non-profit car wash" means any car wash conducted for a charitable non-profit purpose, including, but not limited to, religious, social, senior citizen, youth or school purposes, whereby all funds, after deducting costs of materials only are to be forwarded to such non-profit charitable group. 
    "Non-rehabilitatable" shall include: (1) any animal for which euthanasia is the most humane alternative to alleviate pain and suffering due to severe disease or injury, (2) vicious cats and dogs, (3) any animal that poses a public health hazard, and (4) cats and dogs determined to be non-adoptable. 
    "Non-residential" means a premises intended for commercial, industrial, and/or institutional purposes. 
    "Nude model studio" means any place where a person who appears in a state of nudity or displays "specified anatomical areas" is provided to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted by other persons, for any form of consideration. Nude model studio shall not include any classroom of any school licensed under state law to provide art education, while such classroom is being used in a manner consistent with such state license. 
    "Nudity" or a "state of nudity" means the appearance of a human bare buttock, anus, male genitals, female genitals or female breast. 
    "Number." The singular number includes the plural, and the plural the singular. 
    "Oath" means and includes an affirmation. 
    "Occupancy" means the use or possession, or the right to the use or possession of any room or rooms or portion thereof, in any hotel for dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes. 
    "Occupant" means and includes every owner of, and every tenant or person who is in possession of, is the inhabitant of, or has the care and control of, an inhabited residence. 
    "Officers, departments and other agencies." Officers, departments, boards, commissions and employees referred to in this code means officers, departments, boards, commissions and employees of the city, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise. 
    "Official time." Whenever certain hours are named in this code, they mean Pacific Standard Time or Daylight Saving Time, as may be in current use in the city. 
    "Official traffic control devices" means all signs, signals, markings and devices not inconsistent with this title, placed or erected by authority of a public body or official having jurisdiction for the purpose of regulating, warning or guiding traffic. 
    "Official traffic signals" means any device whether manually, electrically or mechanically operated, by which traffic is alternatively directed to stop and proceed, and which may be equipped with a flashing feature which when operated, discontinues normal signal operation and causes the flashing of any predetermined combination of signal lights, and which is erected by authority of a public body or official having jurisdiction. 
    "One hundred (100) year flood" means the same as base flood. 
    "Open video system" means a facility consisting of a set of transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception, and control equipment that is designed to provide cable service, including video programming, and that is provided to multiple subscribers within the city, provided that the FCC has certified that such system complies with 47 CFR Section 1500 et seq., entitled open video systems. 
    "Open video system operator" means any person or group of persons who provides cable service over an open video system and directly or through one or more affiliates owns a significant interest in that open video system, or otherwise controls or is responsible for the management and operation of that open video system. 
    "Operate" means and includes carry on, keep, engage in, conduct or maintain, or permit the carry on or maintenance of any act. 
    "Operator" means the person who is proprietor of the hotel, whether in the capacity of owner, lessee, sublessee, mortgagee in possession, licensee, or any other capacity. Where the operator performs his functions through a managing agent shall also be deemed an operator for the purposes of this chapter and shall have the same duties and liabilities as his principal. Compliance with the provisions of this chapter by either the principal or the managing agent shall, however, be considered to be compliance by both. 
    "Or, and." "Or" may be read "and" and "and" may be read "or" if the sense requires it. 
    "Owner," may mean any of the following: 
1.  Applied to a building or land, means and includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant, or tenant by the entirety of the whole or of a part of such building or land. 
2.  Means every person having control, whether by outright ownership, lease or otherwise of any taxicabs for hire. Owner shall also include a person who owns, operates or is in charge of a taxicab service in the city. 
3.  Means any person who owns an animal, or who harbors or cares for an animal for five or more consecutive days. 
4.  Means the last registered owner and legal owner of record for any vehicle. 
    "Owner of a body art facility" means either of the following: 
1.  The person or persons whose name or names appear on the health permit, business license, property deed or rental agreement of the body art facility. 
2.  A person, acting as a principal of a corporation or partnership. 
    "Panic" means a sudden overpowering terror often accompanied by mass flight. 
    "Park" means to leave standing any vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading of passengers or materials. 
    "Passenger loading zone" means the space adjacent to a curb or edge of a roadway reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers. 
    "Pawnbroker" means any person engaged in any one or more of the following businesses: 
1.  Pawnbroking; 
2.  Lending money for himself or on behalf of any other person to another on personal property, pawns, or pledges in the possession of the lender; 
3.  Purchasing articles of personal property and reselling or agreeing to resell such articles to the vendors or assignees at prices agreed upon at or before the time of such purchase. 
    "Peddling" means selling merchandise which is transported from place to place in the course of approaching customers or selling merchandise or services from door to door. 
    "Pedestrian" means any person afoot. 
    "Permanent cosmetics" means the application of pigments in human skin tissue for the purpose of permanently changing the color or other appearance of the skin. This includes, but is not limited to, permanent eyeliner, eyebrow, or lip color. 
    "Permittee" means any person or firm authorized by the city council to conduct business within the city. 
    "Person" means and includes any person, firm, association, organization, partnership, business trust, corporation or company, and any municipal, political or governmental corporation, district, body or agency other than the city. 
    "Personal property" means every kind or form of property that is not real property and shall include, without limitation, automobiles, machinery, equipment, tools, merchandise, food products, or parts or portions thereof. 
    "Plumbing code" is the Uniform Plumbing Code, as adopted by this jurisdiction. 
    "Poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures" means poles, towers, supports, wires, conductors, guys, stubs, platforms, crossarms, braces, transformers, insulators, cutouts, switches, communication circuits, appliances, attachments and appurtenances located aboveground within a district and used or useful in supplying electric, communication or similar or associated service. 
    "Police department" means that law enforcement agency responsible for the city's public safety, whether contracted or operated by the city. 
    "Police dog" means any canine trained for law enforcement purposes and used by the police department for such purpose, and so designated by the police chief by the issuance of distinguishing tags. 
    "Potentially dangerous animal" is defined as any of the following: 
1.  Any dog or animal which when unprovoked, on two separate occasions within a thirty-six (36) month period, engages in any behavior that requires a defensive action by any person to prevent bodily harm when the person and the dog or animal are off of the property of the owner or keeper of the dog or animal. 
2.  Any dog or animal which, when unprovoked, bites a human being. 
3.  Any dog or animal, when unprovoked, within the prior thirty-six (36) month period has killed, seriously bitten, inflicted injury or otherwise caused injury attacking a domestic animal off the property of the owner or keeper of such dog or animal. 
4.  Any dog or animal, which on three separate occasions within a thirty-six (36) month period was observed unrestrained off its owner's premises by a city official or private citizen or was apprehended and/or impounded on three separate occasions within a thirty-six (36) month period for being unrestrained or uncontrolled off its owner's premises. 
    "Practioner of a body art facility" means a person who performs body art on a client. 
    "Premises" means any parcel of land, building(s) and/or structure(s), or portion thereof, in the city where solid waste is produced, generated or accumulated and which is billed as one customer or one multi-family complex. 
    "Private lot" means any lot as above defined not owned and in the possession of a governmental agency or entity. 
    "Private patrol service" means any person who furnishes another person the service of patrolling or inspecting private property within the city, for any purpose whatsoever. 
    "Private patrolman" means any person who is employed by or is an agent of a private patrol service. 
    "Private property" means property owned by a person other than a public entity. 
    "Prizes" mean cash, kind, or both for each separate game which is held. 
    "Procedure area of a body art facility" means a room, or designated portion of a room, that is set apart and only used to perform body art. 
    "Process" means and includes a writ or summons issued in the course of judicial proceedings of either a civil or criminal nature. 
    "Processing" means the reduction, separation, recovery and conversion of solid waste. 
    "Production" means the activity of making a film for commercial or noncommercial purposes on property owned by the city or on private property within the jurisdiction of the city. 
    "Professional services" means the services of attorneys, physicians, architects, engineers, auditors, specialized printers, or other individuals or organizations possessing a high degree of professional, unique, specialized or technical skill or expertise, not adaptable to competitive bidding, or where the service involves a contract for special activities, negotiations for the acquisition of land, trash services, insurance, bonds or other service of a similar nature to the above, engaged for a particular project or series of projects. 
    "Property" means and includes real and personal property. 
    "Property owner" means the person, partnership or corporation to whom the taxes on the property are assessed, as shown on the last equalized assessment roll of the County of San Bernardino, or alternatively, from such other records of the county assessor or tax collector as contain more recent information. 
    "Public dance" or a "public dance hall" means and includes any public place, open to the public, wherein or whereat the public may engage in dancing, including places and dances where admission thereto is by membership or other special privilege. 
    "Public nuisance" means, unless otherwise indicated, any unlawful condition, use or activity as set forth in the Hesperia municipal code. 
    "Public property" means property owned by a public entity. 
    "Public, educational or government access facilities" or "PEG access facilities," means the total of the following: 
1.  Channel capacity designated for noncommercial public, educational, or government use; and 
2.  Facilities and equipment for the use of that channel capacity. 
    "Purchases" means purchases of supplies, equipment, services and personal property and shall not include real property leases, rentals or purchases. 
    "Purchasing policy limits" means such limits which shall be those amounts which determine purchase procedures. Such purchase limits shall be established by a resolution of the city council. 
    "Purchasing supervisor" means the official(s) designated by the city manager for administration and/or enforcement of this chapter. 
    "Rabies control officer" means animal control officer. 
    "Real property" means land, or that which is affixed to land, or that which is incidental or appurtenant to land. 
    Recognized school. The term "recognized school" means any school or institution of learning which teaches the theory, ethics, practice, profession, and work of massage. Any school located outside the United States or a school offering a correspondence course not requiring actual attendance shall not be deemed a recognized school. The school or institution must be approved by one of the following: 
1.  The Bureau for Private Postsecondary and Vocational Education Act of the Education Code prior to July 1, 2007. 
2.  The department of consumer affairs. 
3.  An institution accredited by the Accrediting Commission for Senior Colleges and Universities or the Accrediting Commission for Community and Junior Colleges of the Western Association of Schools and Colleges. 
4.  A college or university of the state higher education system, as defined in Section 100850 of the Education Code. 
5.  A school of equal or greater training that is approved by the corresponding agency in another state or accredited by an agency recognized by the United States Department of Education. 
    "Recyclable materials" or "recyclables" interchangeably mean any product salvaged or collected for the purpose of reprocessing or remanufacturing including, but not limited to, electronic waste, glass, newsprint, aluminum, cardboard, paper, green waste, wood, plastics or metal. Recyclable materials discarded by the owner (including where the owner pays a fee or other consideration to have recyclable materials collected by another party) are solid waste. 
    "Recycling" means the process of collecting, sorting, cleansing, treating and reconstituting materials that would otherwise become solid waste, and returning them to the economic mainstream in the form of raw material for new, reused or reconstituted products which meet the quality standards necessary to be used in the marketplace. 
    "Remodel" means any construction or demolition project to an existing structure (other than mere repair work) requiring the issuance of a building permit or such construction and demolition project that generates for disposal bulky structural items, appliances (household or commercial) like showers, tubs, toilets, ovens, stoves, cabinetry and built-in units, roofing materials, etc., and other C&D material. 
    "Rent" means the consideration charged, whether or not received, for the occupancy of space in a hotel valued in money, whether to be received in money, goods, labor or otherwise including all receipts, cash, credits and property and services of any kind or nature, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever. 
    Resident course or resident instruction. The term "resident course" or "resident instruction" means that the student is physically attending a course or instruction, and not an on-line course or instruction. 
    "Residential unit" means each place used for residential purposes including the following but not restricted to: single-family dwellings; however not included: hospitals, convalescent homes, hotels, motels, apartments, mobile home parks, trailer courts, multi-family dwellings, condominiums and townhouses. 
    "Responsible person" means the person, who a city official believes, is causing, performing, permitting to exist or otherwise maintaining, a public nuisance and includes the owner of the real property involved and tenant, occupant or user thereof, or any other person in real or apparent charge or control of said real property. 
    "Reuse" means further or repeated use of construction or demolition debris or other waste material. 
    "Roadway" means that portion of a highway which is improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular travel, including improved shoulders. 
    "Roaming sidewalk vendor" means a sidewalk vendor who moves from place to place and stops only to complete a transaction. 
    "Rubbish" means and includes, but is not restricted to, all nonbiodegradable waste, or debris such as paper, cardboard, grass, tree or shrub trimmings, rugs, straw, clothing, wood or wood products, crockery, glass, rubber, metal, plastic, construction waste and debris and other similar materials. 
    "Sale" means and includes any sale, exchange, barter or offer for sale. 
    "Salvage" means and includes rubbish, from which articles of value or material of value, may be extracted segregated, removed or developed. 
    "Salvage collector" means a person not having a fixed place of business who goes from structure to structure or location to location gathering, collecting, buying, selling, or otherwise dealing in secondhand or used personal property including, without limitation, equipment, machinery, scrap metal, scrap automobiles, tools, or parts or portions thereof, or other articles commonly known as salvage. 
    "Secondhand dealer" means any person whose principal business is that of engaging in buying, trading, selling, whether on consignment by auction or otherwise, of previously owned personal property. 
    "Section" means a section of this chapter unless some other ordinance or statute is specifically mentioned. 
    "Semi-nude" means a state of dress in which clothing, including supporting straps or devices, covers no more than the genitals, pubic region and areolae of the female breast. 
    "Separation fence" means a barrier which separates all doors of a dwelling unit or building accessory thereto with direct access to a swimming pool, spa or hot tub from that swimming pool, spa or hot tub. 
    "Service animal" means any guide dog, signal dog, or other animal individually trained by a certified trainer to provide assistance to an individual with a disability. Examples include dogs trained to assist the blind, hearing impaired, mobility impaired, and similar disabilities. Service animal would also include animals used by public law enforcement agencies. 
    "Service lines" are defined for the purposes of this chapter as those electrical, telephone, cable or other utility conductors that extend from the "distribution lines" to the building, structure or improvement which consume or uses the utility service. 
    "Services" means any and all services, including, but not limited to, equipment service contracts. The term does not include services rendered by city officers or employees, nor professional services for which the procedure for procurement is specifically provided by law or approved city procedures or are in their nature unique and not subject to competitive bidding. This definition does not include public works projects; see Section 3.08.110 regarding bidding for public works. 
    "Sewage" means any liquid waste or water borne solid waste resulting from residential, commercial, industrial, or institutional activities or uses. 
    "Sexual encounter center" means a business or commercial enterprise that, as one of its primary business purposes, offers for any form of consideration: 
1.  Physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between persons of the opposite sex; or 
2.  Activities between male and female persons and/or persons of the same sex when one or more of the persons is in a state of nudity or is semi-nude. 
    "Sexually-oriented business" means an adult arcade, adult bookstore or adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion picture theater, adult theater, escort agency, nude model studio, or sexual encounter center located, or proposed to be located, within the city. 
    "Shall" is mandatory and "may" is permissive. 
    "Sidewalk vendor" means a person who sells food or merchandise from a pushcart, stand, display, pedal-driven cart, wagon, showcase, rack, or other non-motorized conveyance, or from one's person, upon a public sidewalk or other pedestrian path. 
    Signature or subscription by mark. "Signature" or "subscription" means and includes a mark when the signer or subscriber cannot write, such signer's or subscriber's name being written near the mark by the witness who writes his own name near the signer's or subscriber's name; but a signature or subscription by mark can be acknowledged or can serve as a signature or subscription to a sworn statement only when two witnesses so sign their own names thereto. 
    "Smoking" means the carrying or holding of a lighted pipe, cigar, or cigarette of any kind, or any other lighted smoking equipment or the lighting or emitting or exhaling the smoke of a pipe, cigar, or cigarette of any kind. 
    "Soliciting" means asking or inviting persons to pay money or trade services or personal property in return for other personal property or services to be delivered concurrently therewith or in the future. Solicitation shall also include any act or communication to a person for the purpose of obtaining a charitable donation. 
    "Solid waste" means all putrescible and nonputrescible solid and semisolid wastes in or upon, related to the occupancy of, remaining in or emanating from residential premises or commercial/industrial premises, including garbage, trash, refuse, rubbish, ashes, animal feces or any other material as defined by Public Resources Code Section 40191. Materials shall be deemed "solid waste" whether or not they may be potentially recyclable, if (i) the material is mixed or commingled with other types of solid waste, or (ii) the payment of a fee, charge, or other consideration, in any form or amount, is directly or indirectly solicited or received from the generator by any person or combination of persons in exchange for collection, removal, transportation, storage, processing, conversion, consulting, container rental or disposal services ("fee for service" recycling), whether or not arranged by or through a subcontractor, broker, agent or affiliate of the service provider. Solid waste does not include hazardous waste as defined in Title 8 or any waste which is not permitted to be disposed of at a Class III landfill and which fall within the definition of "Nonhazardous Solid Waste" set forth in Title 23, Chapter 15, Section 2523(a) of the California Code of Regulations as amended, or designated Class II wastes. 
    "Solid waste enterprise" means any individual, partnership, joint venture, unincorporated private organization or private corporation regularly engaged in the business of providing solid waste handling services. 
    "Solid waste handling" means the collection, transportation, storage, transfer, processing and disposal of solid wastes for residential or non-residential users or customers. 
    "Spa" means a structure intended for recreational bathing, designed to contain water over eighteen (18) inches (457mm) deep and outside dimensions not exceeding one hundred sixty (160) square feet (14.72 sq. meters). 
    "Special flood hazards area" means an area having special flood or flood-related erosion hazards and shown on an FHBM or FIRM as Zone A. 
    "Specified anatomical areas" means human genitals or areolae of the female breast. 
    "Specified sexual activities" means and includes any of the following: 
1.  The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus or female breasts; 
2.  Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation or sodomy; 
3.  Masturbation, actual or simulated; or 
4.  Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in subsections (1) through (3) of this definition. 
    "Staff time" means the actual time spent by officers, employees, agents or representatives of the city during the enforcement of this code. Staff time, as a component of enforcement fees or abatements costs, shall be calculated at an hourly rate based on a schedule established by resolution of the council. 
    "Start of construction" (includes "substantial improvement") means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, placement, or other improvement was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. 
    "State" or "this state" means the state of California. 
    "State department of transportation" means the department of transportation of the state of California. 
    "Stationary sidewalk vendor" means a sidewalk vendor who vends from a fixed location. 
    "Stop or stand." 
1.  The word "stop" means the complete cessation of movement. 
2.  The words "stop or stand" mean any stopping or standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except where necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or official traffic control device. 
    "Street" or "public way" means each of the following that has been dedicated to the public and maintained under public authority or by others and is located within the city limits: streets, roadways, highways, avenues, lanes, alleys, sidewalks, easements, rights-of-way, and similar public property that the city from time to time authorizes to be included within the definition of a street. 
    "Supplies and equipment" means any and all articles, things or personal property furnished to, or used by, any city department. 
    "Swimming pool" means any structure intended for swimming or recreational bathing that is designed to contain water over eighteen (18) inches (457mm) deep. This includes in-ground, above-ground and on-ground swimming pools and fixed-in-place wading pools, and excludes spas. 
    "Swimming pool, outdoor," means any swimming pool which is all or in part outside the residential structure. 
    "Tattooing" means the insertion of pigment in human skin tissue via piercing with a needle. 
    "Tax collector" means the management services director of the city. 
    "Taxicab" means any passenger vehicle which is used to provide taxicab service as defined in this chapter. 
    "Taxicab service" means any public passenger transportation service available for hire on call or demand over the public streets of the city. 
    "Telecommunications" means the transmission, between or among points specified by the user, of information of the user's choosing, without change in the form or content of the information as sent and received. 
    "Telecommunications equipment" means equipment, other than customer premises equipment, used by a telecommunications service provider to provide telecommunications service, including software that is integral to that equipment. 
    "Telecommunications service" means the offering of telecommunications directly to the public for a fee, or to such classes of users as to be effectively available directly to the public, regardless of the equipment or facilities that are used. 
    "Telecommunications service provider" means any provider of telecommunications service. 
    "Tenant" means a person who, pursuant to a lease, rental agreement or other contractual right, has possession or use, or the right to possession or use, of real property or structures thereon. 
    "Theater" means any place, building, enclosure, or structure partially or entirely, temporarily or permanently used for dramatic or operatic presentations, acts, motion pictures, or any picture projected from slides, films or video tape devices, vaudeville show, performances, or any place of public entertainment is determined to be a theater within the meaning of this chapter. Theaters specifically include, but are not limited to, places to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin or slug operated or electronically, electronically or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors or other image producing devices are maintained, used or available to show images to one or a few persons at any one time. 
    "Time." Whenever certain hours are named herein, they mean standard time or daylight-saving time as may be in current use. 
    "Transfer of ownership or control" of a sexually-oriented business means and includes any of the following: 
1.  The sale, lease or sublease of the business; 
2.  The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest in the business, whether by sale, exchange or otherwise; or 
3.  The establishment of a trust, gift or other similar legal device which transfers the ownership or control of the business, except for transfer by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the person possessing ownership or control. 
    "Transient" means any person who exercises occupancy or is entitled to occupancy by reason of concession, permit, right of access, license or other agreement for a period of thirty (30) consecutive calendar days or less, counting portions of calendar days as full days. Any such person so occupying space in a hotel shall be deemed a transient until the period of thirty (30) days has expired unless there is an agreement in writing between the operator and the occupant providing for a longer period of occupancy. In determining whether a person is a transient, uninterrupted periods of time extending both prior and subsequent to the effective date of this chapter may be considered. 
    "Treatable" shall include an animal that is not "adoptable" but that could become so with reasonable efforts. 
    "Truck" means any truck, trailer, semitrailer, conveyance or vehicle used or intended to be used for the purpose of collecting or to haul or transport refuse. 
    "_____ U.S.C. Section _____" means the United States Code. Thus, the citation of "47 U.S.C. Section 153" refers to Title 47, Section 153, of the United States Code. 
    "Unattended vehicle" means a vehicle for which the licensed driver responsible for the same is not within an audible distance and immediately available for moving the vehicle. 
    "Underground utility district" or "district" means that area in the city within which poles, overhead wires, and associated overhead structures are prohibited as such area is described in a resolution adopted pursuant to the provisions of Section 13.04.030. 
    "Unlicensed dog" means any dog for which the license for the current year has not been paid, or to which the tag for the current year provided for in this code is not attached. 
    "Utility" means and includes all persons or entities supplying electric, communication or similar or associated service by means of electrical materials or devices. 
    "Vehicle" means any device by which persons or property may be propelled, moved or drawn upon a highway, and shall include all types of motor vehicles, but shall exclude devices moved exclusively by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
    "Vehicle code" means the vehicle code of the State of California. 
    "Vicious animal" is defined as any of the following: 
1.  Any dog or animal seized under Section 599aa of the Penal Code (birds and animals used for illegal purposes) and upon the sustaining of a conviction of the owner or keeper under subdivision (a) of Section 597.5 of the Penal Code (fighting dogs). 
2.  Any dog or animal which, when unprovoked, in an aggressive manner, inflicts severe injury on or kills a human being. Severe injury means any physical injury to a human being that results in muscle tears or disfiguring lacerations or requires multiple sutures or corrective or cosmetic surgery. 
3.  Any dog or animal previously determined to be, and currently designated as, a "potentially dangerous or vicious dog or animal" which, after its owner or keeper has been notified of its determination, continues the behavior described for a potentially dangerous animal. 
4.  Any dog or animal currently listed and determined to be a potentially dangerous or vicious dog or animal, which is not properly licensed and vaccinated, not properly restrained and/or maintained on the owner's property. 
    "Video provider" means any person, company or service that provides one or more channels of video programming to a residence, including a home, condominium, apartment, or mobile home, where some fee is paid for that service, whether directly or as included in dues or rental charges, and whether or not public rights-of-way are used in the delivery of that video programming. A "video provider" includes, without limitation, providers of cable television service, master antenna television, satellite master antenna television, direct broadcast satellite, multipoint distribution services, and other providers of video programming, whatever their technology. 
    "Waste management plan" means a written plan, on a form approved by the city manager or designee, and submitted by a covered project applicant for the purpose of compliance with this chapter, including a goal to achieve a minimum fifty (50) percent by weight diversion requirement. 
    "Wastewater" means any volume of untreated or partially treated sewage ultimately discharged into the public sewer. 
    "Wastewater collection system" means any system of pipes, pump stations, sewer lines, or similar devices or appurtenances used to collect and convey sewage to a treatment plant. 
    "Water closet" means a conventionally constructed water closet with permanent water supply and draining to an approved sewer or septic system or a patented chemical type toilet. 
    "Weeds" means weeds which, when mature, bear wingy or downy seeds, which will attain such a large growth as to become a fire menace when dry, or which are otherwise noxious or dangerous, and shall include any of the following: 
1.  Poison oak and poison ivy; 
2.  Dry grasses over four inches in height, brush, litter, or other combustible vegetation; 
3.  Tumbleweeds (Russian Thistle) weeds shall not be classified as any living plant which is listed as an endangered or threatened species under any federal or state or county endangered species list; including but not limited to living Joshua Trees, creosote bushes, century plans. Nolinas, yuccas and all species of cactus, including the cholla. 
    "Week." A "week" consists of seven consecutive days. 
    "Width" means that dimension measured at right angles to the anterior-posterior axis of the conveyance upon which the building or structure or portion thereof is, or is to be, loaded or moved, or to the median line of the highway over which the same is being, or is to be moved. 
    "Wild animal" means any wild, exotic, dangerous or venomous animal including but not limited to mammals, fowl, fish or reptile. 
    "Wrecked" means a vehicle which has been damaged to such an extent that it is only semi-repairable and/or uneconomical to repair. 
    "Writing" means and includes any form of recorded message capable of comprehension by ordinary visual means. Whenever any notice, report, statement or record is required or authorized by this code, it shall be made in writing in the English language, unless it is expressly provided otherwise. 
    "Year" means a calendar year, except where otherwise provided. 
(Ord. 2002-08 Exh. A, 2002: Ord. 2001-7 Exh. A, 2001: Ord. 2001-4 § 1 (part), 2001; Ord. 250 (part), 1997) 
(Ord. No. 2009-07, § 3(Exh. A), 11-3-09; Ord. No. 2010-002, § 3(Exh. B), 3-3-10; Ord. No. 2012-15, § 3(Exh. A), 1-15-13; Ord. No. 2014-13, §§ 2, 3, 5-20-14 ; Ord. No. 2012-06, § 3(Exh. A), 10-2-12 ; Ord. No. 2017-10 , § 3(Exh. A), 6-6-17; Ord. No. 2018-05 , § 2(Exh. B), 6-19-18; Ord. No. 2018-09 , § 2(Exh. B), 2-5-19) 
1.04.060 - Construction of provisions. 
    Words and phrases are to be construed according to the context and the approved usage of the language. Technical words and phrases, and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and specific meaning in the law, or are specifically defined herein, are to be construed in accordance with such peculiar and specific meaning or definition. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997) 
1.04.070 - Notices-Service procedure. 
    Whenever a notice is required to be given under this code, unless different provisions are otherwise specifically made in this code, such notice may be given either by personal delivery thereof to the person to be notified, or by deposit in the United States mail in a sealed envelope, postage paid, addressed to the person to be notified, at his or her last known business or residence address, as the same appears in the public records of the city or other records pertaining to the matter to which such notice is directed. Service by mail shall be deemed to have been completed at the time of deposit in the United States mail. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997) 
1.04.080 - Notices-Proof of service. 
    Proof of giving any notice required by this code may be made by the certificate of any officer or employee of the city, or by affidavit or declaration of any person over the age of eighteen (18) years which shows service in conformity with this code or other provisions of law applicable to the subject matter concerned. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997) 
1.04.090 - Hold harmless clause for licenses and permits. 
A.  Every license, permit, authorization or grant which is issued or given by the city or any of its officers, agents, employees, departments or agencies shall be contingent upon and shall be subject to the following condition: 
    The licensee, permittee, authorize or grantee agrees, guarantees and promises to save, indemnify and keep harmless the city and all its officers, agents, employees, departments and agencies against all liabilities, judgments, costs and expenses which may in any manner or form accrue against the city or against any of its officers, agents, employees, departments or agencies in consequence of the issuance or granting of such license, permit, authorization or grant, or in consequence of the use or occupancy of any sidewalk, street or other public place, or in any other wise by virtue thereof, and will in all things strictly comply with the conditions of the license, permit, authorization or grant, and with this code, all ordinances, rules and regulations of the city relating to the license, permit, authorization or grant. 
B.  Whenever it is administratively proper, the city clerk and all officers, agents, employees, departments and agencies of the city shall print, type or write the condition stated above into every license, permit, authorization or grant substantially as it appears in this section. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997) 
Chapter 1.08 - ELECTIONS 
Sections: 

1.08.010 - General municipal elections-Held when. 
    Commencing with the general municipal election to occur during 1990, general municipal elections of the city shall be held on the same day as the statewide general election (i.e., the first Tuesday after the first Monday of November in each even-numbered year). 
(Ord. 38 § 2, 1989) 
1.08.020 - Elected city officers-Terms continuation. 
A.  Those elected officers of the city whose terms of office would have, prior to the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter, expired following the April, 1990, general municipal election shall, instead, continue in their offices until no later than the fourth Tuesday after the day of the November, 1990, general municipal election of the city. 
B.  Those municipal officers of the city whose terms of office would have, prior to the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter, expired following the April, 1992, general municipal election shall, instead, continue in their offices until no later than the fourth Tuesday after the day of the November, 1992, general municipal election of the city. 
(Ord. 38 § 3, 1989) 
Chapter 1.09 - CITY COUNCIL ELECTIONS BY DISTRICT 

1.09.010 - Declaration of purpose. 
    The city council of the city hereby declares the purpose of this chapter is to further the purposes of the California Voting Rights Act of 2001 (Elections Code Section 14025, et seq.), as amended. 
( Ord. No. 2017-09, § 2 , 6-6-17) 
1.09.020 - By-district elections for city council. 
A.  Pursuant to Government Code Section 34886, members of the city council shall be elected by-district in five single-member districts. Members of the city council shall be elected by-district, as that term is defined in Government Code Section 34871(a), as amended, meaning one member of the city council shall be elected from each district by the voters of that district alone. Each member of the city council shall serve a four-year term until his or her successor is qualified. 
B.  Pursuant to Government Code Section 34882, the city council member elected to represent a district must reside in that district and be a registered voter in that district, and any candidate for city council must reside in, and be a registered voter in, the district in which he or she seeks election at the time nomination papers are issued, pursuant to Elections Code Section 10227. 
( Ord. No. 2017-09, § 2 , 6-6-17) 
1.09.030 - City council districts established. 
A.  The boundaries and identifying number of each of the five city council districts shall be as described on the city council district map attached to the ordinance from which article is derived as Exhibit "A", and incorporated by this reference. 
B.  The city council districts described in subsection A, above, shall continue in effect until they are amended or repealed in accordance with law. The boundaries of the city council districts shall be reapportioned from time to time as required by the Elections Code, or any other applicable law. 
( Ord. No. 2017-09, § 2 , 6-6-17) 
Editor's note- Exhibit A was not included in the codification of this chapter and can be found on file in the office of the city clerk. 
1.09.040 - Implementation of by-district elections. 
A.  The by-district system of elections shall be implemented, beginning at the general municipal election held in November 2018, as follows: 
1.  Members of the city council shall be elected in districts Two, Three and Four beginning at the general municipal election in November 2018, and every four years thereafter; and 
2.  Members of the city council shall be elected in districts One and Five beginning at the general municipal election in November 2020, and every four years thereafter. 
B.  No term of any member of the city council that commenced prior to the effective date of this chapter shall be affected by the adoption of this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 2017-09, § 2 , 6-6-17) 
Chapter 1.12 - MUNICIPAL CODE ENFORCEMENT 
Sections: 
Article I. - General Provisions 

1.12.010 - Enforcement of code. 
A.  The city council hereby declares that violations of the code are harmful, injurious and threatening to the public health, safety and welfare. Therefore, it is the intent of the city council that the provisions of the code shall be enforced as provided in this chapter or as may otherwise be provided under the code or under the laws of the state of California. 
B.  It is the intent of the city council to use all administrative, criminal and civil procedures legally available to enforce the provisions and requirements of this code, to correct code violations and to abate public nuisances arising from violations of the code. 
(Ord. 2001-6 Exh. A (part), 2001) 
1.12.020 - Definitions. 
    Unless otherwise specially defined in this section, all words, terms and phrases used in this chapter shall have the meaning ascribed to them in Section 1.04.050 of Chapter 1.04 of Title 1 of the code or, if not defined therein, as otherwise may be defined in the code. If no special definition is provided in the code, then such words, terms and phrases shall have their common meaning. 
(Ord. 2001-6 Exh. A (part), 2001) 
1.12.030 - Violations of the code. 
A.  Misdemeanor. Any responsible person who commits a code violation or who causes or permits the occurrence or continuance of a public nuisance on property which that person owns, leases, possesses or controls is guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per each violation or by imprisonment not exceeding six months or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
B.  Infractions. 
1.  Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 1.12.030(A), any offense that may be cited as a misdemeanor may be reduced by the city to an infraction where the code violation or public nuisance does not present an immediate danger, hazard or injury to the public health or safety or where the responsible party has not previously been convicted of the same or substantially similar code violations or public nuisances within the past five years. 
2.  Any responsible person who commits a code violation or who causes or permits the occurrence or continuance of a public nuisance on property which that person owns, leases, possesses or controls which has been reduced to an infraction by the city is punishable by a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the first violation within a five year period; by a fine not exceeding two hundred dollars ($200.00) for the second violation of the same provision within the same five year period; and by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each additional violation of the same provision within the same five year period. 
C.  Public Nuisance. Each and every violation of the provisions this code and other unlawful conditions are hereby declared to constitute a separate public nuisance which may be abated by the city through the enforcement procedures provided for in this chapter or in any other manner provided by law for the abatement of public nuisances. 
(Ord. 2001-6 Exh. A (part), 2001) 
1.12.040 - Separate and continuing violations. 
A.  Each and every code violation and public nuisance committed, continued or permitted by a responsible person is a separate offence severally punishable or abatable as provided in this chapter or as may otherwise be provided for under this code. 
B.  Each responsible person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day, or any portion thereof, during which any code violation or public nuisance is committed, continued or permitted by such person and shall be punishable as provided in this chapter or as may otherwise be provided for in this code. 
(Ord. 2001-6 Exh. A (part), 2001) 
1.12.050 - Procedures are cumulative. 
    The enforcement procedures authorized by this chapter or as may otherwise be provided for in this code or under the laws of the state of California are cumulative and not mutually exclusive. The city may simultaneously commence and pursue any one or more enforcement procedures against the responsible party for each code violation or public nuisance to the fullest extent allowed by the law provided the city does not receive duplicative payment for any single code violation or public nuisance. 
(Ord. 2001-6 Exh. A (part), 2001) 
1.12.060 - Obligation to pay abatement costs. 
    The approved enforcement and abatement costs in an enforcement procedure against a responsible person for a code violation or public nuisance which results in a conviction, civil judgment, injunction, abatement order or other administrative order shall constitute a personal obligation of the responsible person and may be recovered from the responsible person in said proceeding. 
(Ord. 2001-6 Exh. A (part), 2001) 
Article II. - General Enforcement Procedures 

1.12.080 - Enforcement procedures. 
A.  This chapter provides for criminal, civil and administrative enforcement procedures for code violations and public nuisances. The enforcement officer is hereby authorized to select and pursue any one or more of the enforcement procedures for each code violation or public nuisance. The enforcement officer is further authorized to pursue the enforcement procedures provided for in Article III (Special Enforcement Provisions) and Article VII (Summary Enforcement Procedures) where applicable. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the enforcement officer is also authorized to pursue any and all other enforcement procedures provided for by this code and any procedures or remedies provided for under the laws of the state of California. 
B.  Except where the special procedures of Article III or the summary procedures of Article VII are applicable, the enforcement officer shall commence each enforcement procedure by first issuing the notices required under this article. 
C.  If, after issuance of the notices provided for in this article and the expiration of the correction or abatement period stated in the notice of public nuisance, the responsible person has failed to complete the corrections or abatement specified in the notice of public nuisance, the enforcement officer may proceed with the criminal, civil and/or administrative procedures provided for in this chapter with respect to the noticed code violation(s) or public nuisance(s). 
(Ord. 2001-6 Exh. A (part), 2001) 
1.12.090 - Notice to responsible person. 
A.  Initial Notice. The enforcement officer shall, upon the identification of any code violation or public nuisance which does not constitute an imminent danger or hazard under Article VII of this chapter, advise the responsible person in writing of the existence thereof by means of a notice of violation, a stop work order or a notice to cease use or occupancy as provided herein. 
B.  Notice of Violation. Unless this section prescribes the use of a stop work order or a notice to cease use or occupancy, the enforcement officer shall issue a notice of violation to the responsible person describing the code violation(s) or public nuisance(s) stating a reasonable period of not less then seven calendar days during which correction or abatement must occur and setting forth the actions required to correct the code violation or abate the public nuisance. The notice shall also inform the responsible person of his liability for enforcement costs and any abatement costs incurred by the city in the enforcement procedure if the code violation or public nuisance is not fully corrected within the stated period. The notice of violation shall be in the form as on file in the city clerk's office. The responsible person shall correct the code violation or abate the public nuisance within the time stated in the notice. 
C.  Stop Work Order. Whenever any work is being done without or in violation of the appropriate permit or license, or that is otherwise contrary to the provisions of the code, the enforcement officer may order such work discontinued and the buildings, dwellings or structures, or portion thereof, vacated by notice issued to the responsible person. The notice shall describe the code violation(s) or public nuisance(s), state a reasonable period of not less then seven calendar days during which correction or abatement must occur and set forth the actions required to correct the code violation or abate the public nuisance. The notice shall also inform the responsible person of his liability for enforcement fees and abatement costs incurred by the city in the enforcement procedure if the code violation or public nuisance is not fully corrected within the stated period. The stop work order shall be in the form as on file in the city clerk's office. When a stop work order is issued any and all persons shall forthwith stop such work until the violations have been corrected and the city has authorized the responsible party to proceed with the work. 
D.  Notice to Cease Use or Occupancy. Whenever any building, dwelling, structure or equipment therein regulated by the code is being used or occupied contrary to the provisions of the code, the enforcement officer may order such use discontinued and the building, dwelling, structure or equipment vacated by issuance of a notice to cease use or occupancy to the responsible person. The notice shall describe the code violation(s) or public nuisance(s), state a reasonable period of not less then seven calendar days by which the use or occupancy of the building, dwelling, structure or equipment must cease, state a reasonable period of not less than seven calendar days during which correction or abatement must occur, and set forth the actions required to correct the code violation or abate the public nuisance. The notice shall also inform the responsible person of his liability for enforcement fees and abatement costs incurred by the city in the enforcement procedure if the code violation or public nuisance is not fully corrected within the stated period. The notice to cease use or occupancy shall be in the form as on file in the city clerk's office. All persons shall cease use or occupancy of the building, dwelling, structure or equipment within the time stated in the notice. The responsible person shall make the required corrections or complete the abatement within the time stated in the notice. 
(Ord. 2001-6 Exh. A (part), 2001) 
1.12.100 - Notice of public nuisance. 
    If, upon expiration of the period stated in the notice of violation, stop work order or notice to cease use or occupancy, the corrective or abatement work specified in the notice has not been completed, the enforcement officer shall issue a notice of public nuisance to the responsible person. This notice shall be in the form as on file in the city clerk's office. The responsible person shall complete the corrective or abatement work within the time stated in the notice. 
(Ord. 2001-6 Exh. A (part), 2001) 
1.12.110 - Issuance of notices. 
A.  All notices required under this article shall be issued to the responsible person in the following manner: 
1.  Except as is provided in Section 1.12.110(A)(3), the enforcement officer shall, with reasonable diligence, attempt to personally serve the notice on the responsible person in the manner provided in California Code of Civil Procedure Section 415.10 or Section 415.20. 
2.  If after reasonable diligence the enforcement officer is not able to personally serve the notice as provided in Section 1.12.110(A)(1), the enforcement officer may issue the notice by completing both of the following: 
a.  Posting the notice in a conspicuous place at the real property, building, dwelling or structure where the code violation or public nuisance is alleged to exist; and 
b.  Mailing a copy of the notice via United States mail, postage prepaid, to the responsible person at his last known address. A declaration of service, showing the date and manner of service shall be made by the person mailing the notice, under the penalty of perjury. 
3.  At the discretion of the enforcement officer, subsequent notice of public nuisance which relates to the initial code violation or public nuisance may be served upon the responsible person via United States mail, postage prepaid, at his last known address. A declaration of service, showing the date and manner of service shall be made by the person mailing the notice, under the penalty of perjury. 
B.  Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, the failure of any responsible person to actually receive any of the notices provided for under this section shall not invalidate any enforcement procedure taken against the responsible person pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. 2001-6 Exh. A (part), 2001) 
(Ord. No. 2011-02, § 3(Exh. A), 4-5-11) 
1.12.120 - Right of entry and inspection. 
A.  The enforcement officer is hereby authorized to enter upon or into, in compliance with this section, any real property, building, dwelling or structure located within the city and its sphere of influence for the purpose of investigating the existence of suspected or reported code violations and public nuisances. 
B.  The enforcement officer shall only enter upon or into real property, buildings, dwellings and structures for the purpose of making an inspection as follows: 
1.  If the enforcement officer has duly obtained an inspection warrant pertaining to the real property, buildings, dwellings or structures from a California court of competent jurisdiction; or 
2.  If the enforcement officer is accompanied by a peace officer who has obtained a search warrant pertaining to the real property, buildings, dwellings or structures from a California court of competent jurisdiction; or 
3.  If the enforcement officer is accompanied by a peace officer without a search warrant but there exists facts that the peace officer determines fulfill an exemption to the search warrant requirement under prevailing state or federal law; or 
4.  If the enforcement officer has obtained the permission of the responsible person or the owner, tenant, or occupant of the real property, buildings, dwellings or structures to be entered upon or in; or 
5.  If the enforcement officer is informed of facts reasonably showing that an emergency exists or that there exists on or in the real property, buildings, dwellings or structures a condition which is imminently dangerous, hazardous or injurious to the public health or safety. 
C.  Nothing in this section shall prohibit an enforcement officer from making a visual inspection of any real property, building, dwelling or structure from the public right-of-way or from any other real property, building, dwelling or structure for which the enforcement officer has obtained permission to enter by the owner, tenant or occupant thereof. 
D.  No person shall hinder or prevent an enforcement officer from entering, in compliance with this section, upon or in any and all real property, buildings, dwellings or structures for the purpose of conducting any inspection authorized by this chapter or as may otherwise be provided for in this code or the laws of the state of California. 
(Ord. 2001-6 Exh. A (part), 2001) 
Article III. - Special Enforcement Provisions 

1.12.130 - Special enforcement procedures. 
A.  The city council has provided that certain code violations or public nuisances shall be enforced, corrected or abated in accordance with special provisions stated in the code. Where applicable, the enforcement officer shall first determine whether an alleged code violation or public nuisance is governed by such special provisions. In the event such special provisions apply, the enforcement officer shall proceed in accordance with any alternative procedures or penalties prescribed therein. To the extent such special provisions conflict or augment the enforcement procedures provided for in this chapter the special provisions shall govern. 
B.  Special provisions have been enacted relating to the following circumstances: 
1.  Abatement concerning massage parlors pursuant to Section 5.20.080 et seq. of Title 5 of the code; 
2.  License suspension and revocation concerning sexually oriented business pursuant to Section 5.48.090 et seq. of Title 5 of the code; 
3.  Penalties concerning blinder racks pursuant to Section 5.52.030 of Title 5 of the code; 
4.  Penalties concerning telecommunication services and system pursuant to Section 5.64.600 of Title 5 of the code; 
5.  Penalties concerning smoking pursuant to Section 8.12.110 of Title 8 of the code; 
6.  Abatement and removal of vehicles pursuant to Section 8.16.010 et seq. of Title 8 of the code; and 
7.  Weed and rubbish abatement. 
a.  Removal of Combustible Vegetation, Weeds and Refuse Required-Notice Provisions. 
    Whenever combustible vegetation, weeds or refuse as defined in Section 1.04.050 of this code exist upon any private lot, the enforcement officer shall inspect the property and cause notice to be mailed to the property owner of record requiring that any such combustible vegetation and weeds be destroyed or removed and refuse be removed by the owner or occupant within thirty (30) days from and after the date of such notice. In the event such weed or refuse are not so destroyed or removed within such time, or if a hearing is not timely requested as provided for in Section 1.12.130(B)(7)(c), the enforcement officer shall forthwith cause the same to be destroyed or removed and he and other employees of the city and any contractors for the city may enter upon the property for such purpose. Such notice shall be in the following form: 
Pursuant to Hesperia Municipal Code Chapter l.12.130(B)(7) notice is hereby given that combustible vegetation, weeds and/or refuse are situated upon this lot, and are a public nuisance. Said combustible vegetation and weeds are required to be destroyed or removed, and any such refuse is required to be removed from this lot, and the public nuisance thus abated, within thirty (30) days after the date of this notice, unless within fourteen (14) days after said notice date a person interested in this lot files in writing with the City Clerk of the City of Hesperia, a request for hearing before the City Council to consider objections to this abatement order. Said hearing shall be at the next regularly scheduled City Council meeting, or any adjournment thereof, after filing of said request. The date, time and place may be obtained from the City Clerk. If a hearing is so requested, said public nuisance is required to be abated within fourteen days after the date of said notice, or within five days after the decision of the Council, whichever is later, unless a longer period is directed by said Council. If said public nuisance is not abated as required, the Hesperia Fire District will abate or cause it to be abated, and the costs thereof shall be immediately due and payable and shall be assessed against this lot and become a lien thereon. A hearing before the Council to consider objections to said costs will be held on ________, 20___. Said cost can be obtained from the City Clerk ten days before said hearing date. Said city of Hesperia Ordinance is available in the office of the City Clerk. 
Dated and Posted 
CITY OF HESPERIA 
By ___________ 
Public Official 
b.  Written Notification. 
    Within three business days after inspecting the property, the enforcement officer shall send a written notification to the property owner, along with a response action card, through the United States mail, first class, postage prepaid, to the owner of the subject property as shown upon the last equalized assessment roll then available to the city, which shall describe the property on which the inspection had been conducted by street address, property or by any other description sufficient to identify the property. Such notice shall thereupon repeat the wording as outlined in Section 1.12.130(B)(7)(a), including the date thereof and the name of the public official so giving notice. The property owner will have fourteen (14) days to return a response action card to the fire district. If a response card is not returned by a property owner the enforcement officer will verify the property owner information and send a second notice requesting compliance when the enforcement officer determines that an immediate hazard exists. Said items creating the hazard shall be removed within seventy-two (72) hours. A non-compliance notice shall be sent via first class mail by the enforcement officer within ten days after the abatement due date. A non-compliance notice is sent when the property owner has partially removed the fire hazard or notified the fire district that the hazard has been abated and the fire district determines that the fire hazard still exists. 
c.  Hearing. 
    Any person with an interest in any property who receives a "Notice to Destroy Weeds and to Remove Refuse" may, within fourteen (14) days of such notice, request a hearing before the city council with respect to the abatement order. Such request shall be in writing and shall identify the property and the interest of the person making such request for a hearing. It shall be automatically scheduled for the next regular city council meeting at which the council shall hear and consider all objections to the abatement order. 
    It shall be the responsibility of the party requesting the hearing to ascertain from the city clerk the date, time and place of the hearing. The hearing may be continued from time to time. By motion or resolution at the conclusion of the hearing, the council shall allow or overrule any objections. The decision of the council shall be final and conclusive and the burden shall be upon the objecting party to show that the abatement order is improper. 
    In holding such hearing, the council need not adhere to formal rules of evidence. In the event the objections are overruled, the owner and/or occupant will cause such abatement within five days after the date of such hearing or within fourteen (14) days from and after the date such notice was mailed, whichever is later, unless a longer period is permitted by the city council in its motion or resolution overruling such objections. 
d.  Abatement Procedures. 
i.  The enforcement officer shall review parcel maps in the field to identify parcels owned, leased, controlled, operated or maintaining building or structures in or upon adjoining hazardous fire areas, or parcels owned, leased or controlled lands adjacent to such buildings or structures, or in areas of close proximity to buildings or structures that may constitute a fire hazard as defined in Section 1.04.050. 
ii.  The enforcement officer shall assure that an effective firebreak is developed by the removal and clearing away of all combustible vegetation from areas within thirty (30) feet of the property line containing such building or structures. 
(A)  Combustible vegetation and weeds within the firebreak area shall be treated (mowed, mulched, converted to compose, etc.) or removed frequently. The tractor operator should not discard or scrap the soil. Combustible vegetation on a fifteen (15) percent slope or greater shall be removed using hand tools. Motorized tractors will not be permitted on slopes greater than fifteen (15) percent. 
(B)  Combustible ground vegetation should be maintained at a height that will preclude it from functioning as a ladder for fire to travel into larger vegetation and trees. 
(C)  Live vegetation within the firebreak area should have dead material removed and shall be thinned and pruned to reduce fire intensity and rate of spread. 
(D)  Dead trees within the firebreak area shall be removed. 
(E)  Dead tree limbs within six feet of the ground shall be removed. 
(F)  Dry grass should be reduced to less than four inches in height. 
iii.  Maintain additional fire protection or firebreak by removing and clearing away combustible vegetation from within thirty (30) to one hundred (100) feet of buildings or structures in areas of substantial or very high hazard severity zones. 
iv.  Additional firebreaks, a minimum of thirty (30) feet, should be created along both thereby reducing the spread of fire during windy conditions. 
v.  Remove or clear combustible vegetation located upon property that may be considered a fire hazard and is in proximity of buildings or structures. 
(A)  Portions of trees which extend within ten feet of a chimney outlet. 
(B)  Trees adjacent to or overhanging a building shall be free of dead wood, with roofs free of leaves, needles or other dead vegetative growth. 
(C)  Combustible vegetation found along easements and within ten feet of a roadway. 
vi.  Remove all tumbleweeds (Russian Thistle) from parcels that would constitute a fire hazard. 
vii.  Remove all refuse from the property; 
8.  Abatement and removal of graffiti pursuant to Section 9.08.010 et seq. of Title 8 of the code; 
9.  Penalties for skateboards and similar devises pursuant to Section 9.14.020 of Title 9 of the code; 
10.  Penalties relating to pedestrians pursuant to Section 10.16.040 of Title 10 of the code; 
11.  Penalties relating to speed limits pursuant to Section 10.20.090 of Title 10 of the code; 
12.  Suspension and revocation of film permits and violations thereof pursuant to Section 12.28.150 et seq. of Title 12 of the code; 
13.  Penalties relating to operation of mobile home parks pursuant to Section 15.20.100 of Title 15 of the code; 
14.  Potentially dangerous or vicious animals. 
a.  Public Nuisance. 
    Potentially dangerous animals and vicious animals are hereby declared a public nuisance. 
b.  Declaration of Potentially Dangerous Or Vicious. 
    When an enforcement officer has probable cause, or if there are two sworn statements from witnesses, that an animal is potentially dangerous or vicious, they may set a hearing to determine if the animal should be declared a public nuisance. 
    The enforcement officer shall notify the owner or keeper of the animal that an administrative hearing will be conducted, at which time the owner may present evidence as to why the animal in question should not be declared potentially dangerous or vicious. 
    Notice of the hearing shall be served on the owner, either in person, or by first class mail, certified return receipt, at the owners last known address at least five days but not more than ten days prior to the hearing. Service shall be deemed complete when the notice is personally served or deposited in the mail. Failure to receive notice shall not affect the validity of the hearing. 
    Notice shall include the date, time, and location of the administrative hearing, a statement that the purpose is to determine whether their animal (named and described) is a potentially dangerous or vicious animal, that if found to be potentially dangerous or vicious certain remedies, up to and including destruction, may be demanded, and that you will have five days from the receipt of the notice of the findings to make the corrections or the animal will be destroyed. 
    The hearing shall be conducted at the time and location specified. The hearing officer may admit into evidence all relevant evidence, including incident reports and affidavits of witnesses. 
c.  The hearing officer may find, upon a preponderance of evidence, that the animal is potentially dangerous or vicious and may order any of the following: 
i.  The dog or animal shall be properly licensed and vaccinated. The city shall include the potentially dangerous or vicious designation in the registration records. The city may charge an additional fee to maintain the records of the animal. 
ii.  Dog or animal shall be maintained on owner's property and be kept indoors or in a securely fenced yard from which the dog or animal cannot escape. 
iii.  Dog or animal shall be maintained in a covered chain-link run with cement flooring and locked gate from which the dog or animal cannot escape and into which children cannot trespass. Said run shall provide shelter from the elements. 
iv.  The dog or animal cannot be off the owner's premises unless it is restrained by a substantial leash and muzzled (if appropriate) under the control of a responsible adult. 
v.  If the dog or animal dies or is sold, transferred or permanently removed from the city where the owner resides, the owner shall notify the city of the changed condition and new location of the dog or animal within two days in writing. 
vi.  The dog or animal owner shall pay all costs incurred by the city for housing, maintenance, feeding, and vet care during such time the dog or animal is in the custody of the city. 
vii.  Dog or animal shall be required to be sterilized. 
viii.  Any person keeping or harboring any dog or animal deemed vicious within the city must provide proof of ability to respond in damages up to one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) by obtaining a policy of insurance coverage in said amount for bodily injury to, or death of, any person or persons or for damage to property owned by any other person or persons or damage to property owned by any other person which may result from the ownership, keeping or maintenance of such dog or animal. 
ix.  You have five days from the date you receive the written notice of the findings and orders in the hearing to comply with required corrections and pay all fees and/or fines associated with this hearing. On day six the dog or animal will become property of the animal control and be disposed of. 
x.  Animal control has the right to inspect the property at any reasonable time after giving twenty-four (24) hours written notice for violations of the findings and orders in the hearing. In the event the owner fails to meet the required conditions from the findings and orders in the hearing, animal control may impound the dog or animal and take it to the shelter or otherwise dispose of such dog or animal, so that it may not become a menace to the public. 
xi.  The dog or animal shall be destroyed. 
d.  Determination and Orders-Notice-Compliance-Decision Final. 
    After an administrative hearing is conducted pursuant to this section, the owner or keeper of the animal shall be notified in writing of the determination and orders issued, either personally or by first class mail, postage prepaid. If a determination is made that the animal is potentially dangerous or vicious, the owner or keeper shall comply with those orders made by the hearing officer in accordance with any time schedule established, but in no case more than thirty (30) days after the date of the determination or thirty-five (35) days if the notice of determination is mailed to the owner or keeper of the dog or animal. The findings and orders by the hearing officer may be appealed to the superior court. 
e.  Seizure and Impoundment of Animal. 
    If upon investigation it is determined by the enforcement officer that probable cause exists to believe that the animal in question poses an immediate threat to the public safety, the enforcement officer may seize and impound the animal pending the administrative hearing to be held pursuant to this section. The owner or keeper of the animal shall be liable to the city for all costs and expenses of keeping the animal if the animal is found to be potentially dangerous or vicious. When an animal has been impounded, and it is not contrary to public safety, the enforcement officer may permit the animal to be confined at the owner's expense in a city approved kennel or veterinary facility. 
f.  Cost Assessment When Animal is Seized. 
    If it is determined at the administrative hearing as provided in this section that the animal in question is potentially dangerous or vicious, the hearing officer may assess the owner or keeper of the animal for any costs of administration incurred by the city, including but not limited to costs incurred in housing the animal, maintaining and feeding the animal, or for any medical attention required for the animal. Costs assessed shall be charged to the owner or keeper and if unpaid a lien shall be placed upon the owner's real property where the animal was maintained. 
g.  Restraint or Enclosure of Potentially Dangerous or Vicious Animal. 
    An animal determined to be potentially dangerous or vicious pursuant to this section shall at all times while not securely confined indoors: 
i.  Be humanely confined in an area, which is securely fenced and locked so as to prevent trespass by children and from which the animal cannot escape. 
ii.  When off the property of its owner or keeper, humanely muzzled (if appropriate) and leashed with a substantial leash not to exceed six feet in length and under the control of a responsible adult. 
iii.  Humanely confined in a vehicle so that it can neither escape nor inflict injury on passers-by. 
iv.  Be humanely confined in an outdoor fenced enclosure on the property where the animal is kept or maintained so it cannot bite, attack, or cause injury to any person or domestic animal. The enclosure must be anchored solidly to the ground and must be of sufficient structural strength and height to ensure the strict confinement of the animal and to prevent unauthorized access. If necessary to accomplish the intent of containment, a cover over the enclosure and a cement or solid bottom shall be installed. In addition, any and all gates must be kept locked by a substantial lock. 
v.  A vicious animal may be off the property of the owner or keeper for the purpose of obtaining veterinary care, sale, or given away, complying with the provisions of this section. 
vi.  When off the property of its owner or keeper or in the care of a veterinarian, the animal shall be securely and humanely muzzled (if appropriate) and restrained with a harness, collar, or choke chain and nylon or leather leash sufficient to restrain the animal not exceeding six feet in length and shall be under the direct charge and control of its owner or adult keeper. 
    When circumstances warrant, the officer in charge of the animal control division may modify conditions of restraint to accommodate the special needs of dogs or animals. 
h.  Notice of Disposal or Escape of Potentially Dangerous or Vicious Animal. 
    The owner or keeper of any animal found to be potentially dangerous or vicious, pursuant to this section, shall notify the animal control division immediately if the animal has escaped, is unconfined, has attacked or bitten an animal or human being, or has died. The owner or keeper shall notify the animal control division within forty-eight (48) hours if the animal is sold, transferred, or permanently removed from the place where the owner or keeper resides or kept the animal at the time the animal was determined to be potentially dangerous or vicious. The owner or keeper shall also inform the animal control division of any new name, address, and phone number of any new owner or keeper of said animal. 
i.  Owners of Potentially Dangerous or Vicious Animal to Permit Compliance Inspection. The owner or keeper of the potentially dangerous or vicious animal, determined to be potentially dangerous or vicious pursuant to this section shall consent to inspection of the property where the animal is kept upon twenty-four (24) hour written notice by the animal control division. Said inspection shall be set at a reasonable time and manner to verify full compliance with the requirements of this section and/or the requirements of the orders issued by the hearing officer. 
j.  Keeping of Potentially Dangerous or Vicious Animal. It is unlawful to own, harbor, or keep any animal found by another jurisdiction to be potentially dangerous or vicious. Any animal that has previously been determined to be potentially dangerous or vicious after an administrative hearing or court order by another jurisdiction will not be allowed to be kept, owned or harbored within the city. 
15.  Nuisance Vehicles. 
a.  All rights, title and interest to the vehicle shall vest in the city upon commission of the act giving rise to the nuisance described in Section 8.32.022. 
b.  Vehicles determined to be nuisance vehicles under Section 8.32.022 are subject to forfeiture and may be seized by any peace officer under the following conditions: 
i.  Process is served by any court having jurisdiction over the vehicle. 
ii.  The seizure in incident to an arrest or search pursuant to a search warrant. 
iii.  There is probable cause to believe that the vehicle was used in violation of Chapter 8.32.022 of this code. 
c.  If the city determines that the factual circumstances warrant the vehicle was used to commit the act or acts described in Section 8.32.022, the city shall petition the court for forfeiture. 
i.  The petition shall be filed as soon as practicable, but in any case within one year of the seizure of the vehicle. 
ii.  The city shall cause notice of the seizure and of the intended forfeiture proceedings, as well as notice that any interested party may file a claim with the Superior Court to any person who has an interest in the vehicle. Notice shall also be posted in a newspaper of general circulation in San Bernardino County. Notice shall include a description of the vehicle, the date and place of the seizure, the violation of the law leading to the forfeiture, and instructions and time limits for filing a claim. 
iii.  The city shall investigate any claim as the claimant's rights, title, or interest. If the city finds that any person, other than the registered owner, is the legal owner of the vehicle, and that such ownership did not arise subsequent to the date and time of arrest or notification of the forfeiture proceedings or seizure of the vehicle, it shall send a notice to the legal owner at his or her address appearing on the records of the department of motor vehicles or other appropriate agency. 
iv.  Upon proof by a preponderance of the evidence that the vehicle was used to commit an act or acts described in Section 8.32.022, the court shall declare the vehicle a nuisance and order the vehicle seized, if not previously seized, forfeited and sold with the proceeds distributed pursuant to this section. 
v.  If no claims are filed, the city shall prepare a written declaration of forfeiture of the vehicle to the court and dispose of the vehicle. Copies of the declaration of forfeiture shall be provided to any person who received notice of the forfeiture proceedings. 
d.  Upon proof that the vehicle was used for any purpose set forth in Section 8.32.022 the court shall declare the vehicle a nuisance and order the vehicle to be forfeited, sold, and the proceeds distributed as follows: 
i.  To the mortgage or lien holder of the vehicle, up to the amount of his or her interest in the vehicle, when the court declares a distribution to that person; 
ii.  To the city for all expenditures made or incurred by it in connection with the seizure, storage, and sale of the vehicle; 
iii.  Remaining funds, if any, shall be placed in the city's general fund. 
e.  The city shall return a seized vehicle upon the filing of a timely claim and providing evidence that one of the following exist. 
i.  The vehicle is owned by two or more persons and there is a community property interest in the vehicle by a person other than the person who used or maintained the vehicle in violation of Section 8.32.022, and that the vehicle is the sole vehicle available to the persons immediate family. 
ii.  The vehicle is owned by a rental car agency with a duly executed contract with the person who used or maintained the vehicle in violation of Section 8.32.022. 
iii.  For purposes of this section, a claim shall be filed within ten days of the date of the seizure notice, shall be filed with the Superior Court of San Bernardino County, and shall state the persons interest in the vehicle. The claimant shall serve an endorsed copy of the claim on the city within ten days of filing the claim. 
f.  Any person who owns, leases, uses or maintains a vehicle in violation of Section 8.32.022, and whose vehicle has been seized, may request to execute a voluntary settlement agreement with the city for return of the vehicle. At the minimum, the agreement shall include the city's reasonable administrative costs including attorney's fees. 
g.  This section is not the exclusive regulation or penalty for the acts described in Section 8.32.022. It is the intention of the Hesperia City Council to use any and all remedies allowed by this Code and State Law to enforce the provisions of this code. 
16.  Multiple Police Responses. 
a.  Purpose and Intent. Large or tumultuous parties, domestic disturbances, gatherings, boisterous activities, or music, or any combination thereof, which interfere with the neighbors' reasonable enjoyment of their property, constitute a threat to public peace, morals, and safety, and elicit numerous calls to the police department. Manpower and resources generally allocated to regular duties or activities and normal services are necessarily shifted when the police have to respond multiple times to the same event. With the rapid growth of the city's population, the problems associated with scarce manpower and resources are exacerbated by this persistent and unbudgeted reallocation of resources. The city has developed a cost recovery mechanism for multiple responses by the police department to unreasonably boisterous events in an effort to deter such disturbances to public peace, morals and safety. 
    In addition to disturbances and boisterous activities, the occurrence of multiple false alarms requiring police department response and multiple 911 calls where reasonable circumstances are not established have the effect of reducing manpower availability and therefore, threatening public safety. For the purposes of this section, multiple false alarms and/or multiple unreasonable 911 calls shall be considered a disturbance and subject to police multiple response fees. 
b.  First Warning. Whenever an officer is called to a scene where a disturbance described in subsection (B)(16)(a) of this section is reported, the officer shall leave a written warning with the responsible person as defined in Section 1.04.050 of this code. The written warning shall identify the date, time, and location; include an explanation of the violation, and consequences of subsequent police responses. In addition to the persons described in Section 1.04.050, the responsible person(s) may include the event planner or organizer. 
i.  In the event there is no responsible person who is an adult at the scene, the parents or legal guardians of the organizer shall be considered the responsible person(s). 
ii.  In the event that the responsible person cannot be located, the officer shall post the written warning on the front door or primary entrance. If neither is present, the written warning shall be posted where it is visible from the street. 
iii.  The written warning posted under this section shall establish that there is probable cause of a violation of Penal Code Sections 407, 415 or 416 and/or this section for subsequent calls to the police department. 
iv.  When written warning is given and the property owner does not reside on the same parcel, a copy of the warning will be mailed to the property owner's mailing address as determined by the San Bernardino County tax rolls. 
c.  Police Multiple Response Fee. Police multiple response fees shall be as established by resolution of the Hesperia City Council. A police multiple response fee shall be imposed when any member of the City's police department receives a subsequent service request to the same address or parcel. When there is a multiple disturbance at an apartment complex or multi-family dwelling, each unit shall be considered separate dwelling. This fee is in addition to the authority to regulate events and shall supplement, and in no manner supplant, the exercise of any other available law, including, but not limited to, arrest or citation pursuant to the California Penal Code, or local law. The actual cost of the officer(s) time at the scene and any equipment and other expenses may be charged in addition to the police multiple response fee. 
    The fines for multiple police responses are cumulative for each parcel and shall not sunset. However the following exceptions allow for the disturbance to be dismissed, as long as there are not outstanding fees or fines, and allows the property to return to the First Warning violation stage: 
1.  The property changes owners and/or tenants. The city may request proof of such change in the tenancy or ownership before releasing the disturbance reports. 
2.  The property has not had any responses in the past three years beginning on the date of their last response, and all outstanding fees are paid in full. 
    Should a disturbance be recorded at any time during the three-year period, the property shall return to the response that was last recorded, and be subject to the fees established by resolution and the procedures set forth in this chapter, and the three-year period shall start over. 
    When a police multiple response fee is imposed and the property owner does not reside on the same parcel, a copy of the invoice and response notice will be mailed to the property owner's mailing address as determined by the San Bernardino County tax rolls. 
d.  Appeals. 
i.  Any responsible person receiving a notice by the police for the police multiple response fee, including those for a First Warning, may request a hearing with the police department to appeal the fees and/or notice. 
ii.  The responsible person must submit a written appeal request to the Hesperia police department. The appeal must include the responsible person's name, the address, date, time, and circumstances of the incident; and an explanation of why the fee is being appealed. A non-refundable appeal fee must accompany the written appeal request. 
iii.  The written appeal request must be filed within ten days of the date of the response. 
iv.  Collection of fees on the invoice shall be suspended until the conclusion of the appeal. Should the appeal be denied, any amount due to the city shall be paid within thirty (30) days of the hearing. 
v.  The Police Chief or his/her designee shall serve as the hearing officer for appeals under this section. 
C.  Failure to apply any procedure or penalty made applicable to a code violation or public nuisance by any special provisions set forth in this code shall not invalidate an enforcement procedure commenced by the city for such code violation or public nuisance. 
(Ord. 2007-12 § 2 (Exh. A), 2007; Ord. 2004-21 § 3 (Exh. A), 2004; Ord. 2002-08 Exh. B, 2002; Ord. 2001-6 Exh. A (part), 2001) 
(Ord. No. 2012-03, § 2, 2-21-12) 
ARTICLE IV. - CRIMINAL ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES 

1.12.140 - Criminal enforcement proceedings. 
    If an enforcement officer has issued a notice of public nuisance to a responsible person and the corrective or abatement work specified in the notice has not been completed within the time stated therein, then the city may commence a criminal enforcement proceeding against the responsible person in the California court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. 2001-6 Exh. A (part), 2001) 
1.12.150 - Initiation of proceeding. 
    The city may commence a criminal enforcement proceeding by issuing a criminal citation to the responsible party for one or more code violations. Criminal citations shall only be issued by enforcement officers certified under Section 832 of the California Penal Code or a peace officer. 
(Ord. 2001-6 Exh. A (part), 2001) 
1.12.160 - Post citation procedures. 
    After the city has initiated a criminal proceeding against a responsible person, the procedures followed for release of persons arrested, notice to appear, bail and penalties for failure to appear shall be consistent with those procedures prescribed by Chapter 5C of Title 3 or Part 2 of California Penal Code commencing with Section 853.5. 
(Ord. 2001-6 Exh. A (part), 2001) 
1.12.170 - Cost recovery in criminal proceedings. 
A.  The city shall be entitled to reimbursement from each responsible person upon conviction of a code violation for its enforcement costs and any abatement costs in an amount approved by the court that were incurred by the city related to the code violation. 
B.  Upon entry of the second and each subsequent criminal conviction for violation of the same code section within a one year period, finding that the responsible person was guilty of the code violation, the court may order the responsible person to pay restitution to the city equal to three times the amount of the enforcement and abatement costs incurred by the city related to the code violation. 
C.  Pursuant to California Government Code Section 38773.5.(b), where the city makes a demand for the recovery of its attorneys' fees at the initiation of a criminal action that was commenced by the city under this chapter, the prevailing party in said action shall be entitled to recovery of that party's attorneys' fees in an amount not to exceed the amount of reasonable attorneys' fees incurred by the city in said action. 
(Ord. 2001-6 Exh. A (part), 2001) 
Article V. - Civil Enforcement Procedures 

1.12.250 - Civil proceedings. 
A.  Commencement of Action. If an enforcement officer has issued a notice of public nuisance to a responsible person and the corrective or abatement work specified in the notice has not been completed within the time stated therein, the city may commence a civil action against the responsible person in the California court of competent jurisdiction to prevent, restrain, correct or abate the code violation or public nuisance and to recover enforcement and abatement costs, attorney fees, as well as any other damages and relief to which the city may be entitled. 
B.  Notice of Pendency. Upon the commencement of a civil action, the city may record a notice of pendency of action in each case where the code violation or public nuisance affects the real property owned, leased, or possessed by the responsible party. In the event the city elects to record a notice of pendency of action, then such notice shall comply with the requirements of California Health and Safety Code Section 17985. 
C.  Relief Sought. The city may seek any order or judgment from the court against the responsible person that is reasonably likely to prevent, restrain, correct or abate the code violation or public nuisance or to compensate the city therefore including, but not limited to, any and all of following: 
1.  Injunctive relief, including temporary restraining orders, preliminary injunctions, and permanent injunctions to restrain and enjoin the responsible person from causing, permitting or continuing a public nuisance, from using or occupying any real property, buildings, dwellings or structures in violation of the code, from engaging in specified actions which are reasonably likely to lead to a violation of the code, or from any act or omission which threatens or endangers the public health, safety or welfare; 
2.  Orders requiring the correction of a code violation or abatement of a public nuisance by repairing, rehabilitating, razing, demolishing or removing any building or structure, or by grading, clearing, grubbing or cleaning any real property by removing trash and debris, by ceasing any use or activity that is in violation of the provisions of this code or by other appropriate remedy approved by the court; 
3.  Judgments for recovery of damages incurred by the city, awards of enforcement costs and any abatement costs, and reasonable attorneys' fees incurred by the city related to the code violation or public nuisance, and for such other and further relief as the court may grant. 
(Ord. 2001-6 Exh. A (part), 2001) 
1.12.260 - Cost recovery in civil actions. 
A.  The city shall be entitled to recover from each responsible person, upon entry of an order or judgment against said person for a code violation or public nuisance, its enforcement costs and any abatement costs, in an amount approved by the court, incurred by the city related to the code violation or public nuisance. 
B.  Upon entry of each subsequent civil order or judgment within a one year period, finding that the responsible person was responsible for the code violation or public nuisance, the court may order the responsible person to pay treble damages to the city equal to three times amount of the enforcement and abatement costs incurred by the city related to the code violation or public nuisance. 
C.  Pursuant to California Government Code Section 38773.5.(b), where the city makes a demand for the recovery of its attorneys' fees at the initiation of a civil action commenced by the city under this chapter, the prevailing party in said action shall be entitled to recovery of that party's attorneys' fees in an amount not to exceed the amount of reasonable attorneys' fees incurred by the city in said action. 
(Ord. 2001-6 Exh. A (part), 2001) 
Article VI. - Administrative Enforcement Procedures 

1.12.270 - Administrative proceedings. 
A.  Pursuant to California Government Code Section 53069.4, every code violation and public nuisance is hereby subject to an administrative fine, the collection of enforcement and abatement costs and, if applicable, an abatement order. The provisions of this chapter shall govern the imposition, enforcement, collection and administrative review by the city of such fines, costs and orders. 
B.  The amount of the fine for code violations or public nuisances imposed pursuant to this chapter shall be set forth in a schedule of fines established by resolution of the city council. The schedule of fines shall specify increased fines for repeat violations of the same code section by the same person within five years of the date of the administrative citation and the amount of any late payment charges imposed for the payment of a fine after its due date. 
C.  Any person who fails to pay to the city any fine or enforcement cost imposed pursuant to the provisions of this section on or before the date the fine and enforcement cost is due shall also be liable for the payment of any applicable late payment charges set forth in the schedule of administrative citation fines. 
D.  Payment of any administrative fine imposed hereunder shall not excuse or discharge any continuation or repeated occurrence of the code violation or public nuisance that is the subject of the administrative citation. 
E.  If an enforcement officer has issued a notice of public nuisance to a responsible person and the corrective or abatement work specified in the notice has not been completed within the time stated therein, the city may commence an administrative proceeding pursuant to this article against the responsible person to impose and collect the administrative fine and the enforcement costs and any abatement costs and to issue, if applicable, an abatement order. 
(Ord. 2001-6 Exh. A (part), 2001) 
1.12.280 - Initiation of proceeding. 
A.  The city may commence an administrative proceeding by issuing an administrative citation to the responsible party pertaining to one or more code violations or public nuisances. Administrative citations shall be issued by enforcement officers. 
B.  Each administrative citation shall contain the following information: 
1.  The date of the code violation(s) or public nuisance(s); 
2.  The address or a definite description of the location where the code violation(s) or public nuisance(s) occurred; 
3.  The section(s) of the code allegedly violated and a description of the code violation(s) or public nuisance(s); 
4.  The amount of each fine for each of the violation(s); 
5.  A description of the fine payment process, including a description of the time within which and the place to which the fine shall be paid; 
6.  An order prohibiting the continuation or repeated occurrence of the code violation or public nuisance described in the administrative citation; 
7.  A description of the administrative citation appeal process, including the time within which the administrative citation may be contested and the place from which an appeal may be obtained; 
8.  If applicable, a notice that the city intends to hold a hearing on the issuance of an abatement order to permit the city to enter onto the real property or into buildings, dwellings or structures for the purpose of correcting the code violation or abating the public nuisance. The notice shall also state the date, time and place of the hearing, and advise the responsible party that he has an opportunity to appear and be heard at this hearing; and 
9.  The name and signature of the citing enforcement officer. 
C.  Each administrative citation shall be accompanied by an itemized statement and invoice of the enforcement costs incurred to the date of the citation. The statement shall include a notation that additional enforcement costs and any abatement costs may be added to the statement and subsequently invoiced in the event the code violation or public nuisance is not forthwith corrected or abated. Each invoice for enforcement fees shall be in the form as on file in the city clerk's office. 
D.  Administrative citations and accompanying enforcement cost statements shall be served to the responsible person in accordance with Section 1.12.110 of this chapter. Failure to receive notice does not affect the validity of the proceedings. 
(Ord. 2001-6 Exh. A (part), 2001) 
1.12.290 - Proceedings imposing fines only. 
A.  Where the code violation or public nuisance is not of a continuing nature or does not lend itself to abatement by the city, then the city, in its discretion, may pursue the procedure provided in this section to impose, enforce and collect the fine and enforcement costs. 
B.  The responsible person cited shall have thirty (30) days from the date of the administrative citation to pay the amount of the fine and enforcement costs to the city. 
C.  The responsible person cited may contest issuance of the citation or issuance of a notice of public nuisance by filing a notice of contest or appeal with the city clerk in accordance with the city's policy within fifteen (15) days from the date of the administrative citation or notice of public nuisance, together with the filing fee as adopted by resolution of the city council. Contest hearings shall be conducted by the administrative board or hearing officer pursuant to section D below. The contest hearing shall be held not less than fifteen (15) days and not more than sixty (60) days from the date the notice of contest is filed, unless extended by agreement with the contesting party; provided, however, that no hearing to contest an administrative citation or notice of public nuisance shall be held unless the filing fee has been deposited in advance. 
D.  Where the code violation or public nuisance is related to the application of building standards as set forth in California Building Code Section 1.8.8 as may be amended from time to time, the contest hearing shall be forwarded to the administrative board for consideration. A hearing officer shall hear all other contest hearings. 
E.  The city shall provide the responsible person with written notice of the time and place of the contest hearing at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing. If the enforcement officer submits an additional written report to the administrative board or hearing officer for consideration at the hearing, a copy of the report shall be served on the responsible person with the notice of hearing. 
F.  The responsible person's failure to appear at the contest hearing shall constitute a forfeiture of any deposited amounts and be deemed a failure to exhaust the responsible person's administrative remedies. In such event, the full amount of the enforcement costs and fine shall be due immediately and the administrative citation shall be deemed a final administrative order for the purpose of California Government Code Section 53069.4. The final administrative order shall be served on the responsible person by mailing a copy of the order by certified mail postage prepaid to the responsible person at his last known address. 
G.  The administrative board or hearing officer shall hear, receive and consider testimony and documentary evidence regarding the alleged code violation or public nuisance. The administrative citation or notice of public nuisance and any additional report submitted by the enforcement officer shall constitute prima facie evidence of the respective facts contained in those documents. The contesting responsible person shall be given the opportunity to testify at the hearing and to present documentary evidence concerning the administrative citation or notice of public nuisance, and to cross-examine the citing enforcement officer. The contesting responsible person may be subject to additional questioning by the administrative board or hearing officer, and any city legal representative. The hearing shall not be subject to the formal rules of evidence or discovery. The administrative board or hearing officer may continue the hearing and request additional information from the enforcement officer or the responsible party prior to issuing a final administrative decision. 
H.  After considering all of the testimony and evidence submitted at the contest hearing, the administrative board or hearing officer shall issue a written decision, based upon a preponderance of the evidence standard, whether to uphold, modify, or cancel the administrative citation or notice of public nuisance as provided in Subsection I. The amount of any fee and the amount of the enforcement costs and shall be listed in the decision along with the reason for the decision(s) made. The written decision shall be deemed a final administrative order for the purpose of California Government Code Section 53069.4. The final administrative order shall be served on the responsible person by mailing a copy of the order by certified mail, postage prepaid, to the responsible person at his last known address. 
I.  If the administrative board or hearing officer determines after the hearing that there was no code violation or public nuisance in existence at the time the notice was issued, or that the interpretation of the applicable building standard has been determined incorrectly, as charged in the administrative citation or notice of public nuisance or that the amount of the fine or enforcement cost should be reduced, then the city shall amend the citation or notice to conform with the order to the administrative board or hearing officer decision. 
J.  The city may collect any past due administrative citation fines, enforcement costs, and late payment charges by use of all available legal means, including the use of the lien procedures provided for under Article VIII of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2001-6 Exh. A (part), 2001) 
(Ord. No. 2018-05 , § 2(Exh. B), 6-19-18) 
1.12.300 - Proceedings imposing fines and abatement orders. 
A.  Where the code violation or public nuisance is of a continuing or persistent nature or presents a significant threat or risk to the public health, safety and welfare, the city, in its discretion, may pursue the procedure provided in this section to impose, enforce and collect the fines, enforcement and abatement costs and to obtain an abatement order. 
B.  The administrative citation shall provide the responsible person with written notice that the city intends to hold a hearing concerning the imposition of an administrative fine and enforcement and abatement cost and the granting of an abatement order permitting the city to enter onto the real property or into the buildings or structures involved for the purpose of correcting the code violation or abating the nuisance. The notice shall specify the date, time and place of the hearing. The abatement hearing shall be conducted by the hearing board. The abatement hearing shall be held not less than fifteen (15) days and not more than sixty (60) days from the date of the administrative citation. 
C.  At least ten days prior to the abatement hearing, the city shall provide the responsible person with any written report issued by the enforcement officer concerning the code violation or public nuisance along with the proposed scope of the abatement order. 
D.  The hearing board shall hear, receive and consider testimony and documentary evidence regarding the alleged code violation or public nuisance and the necessary scope of the abatement order. The administrative citation and any additional report submitted by the enforcement officer shall constitute prima facie evidence of the respective facts contained in those documents. The responsible person shall be given the opportunity to testify at the hearing, to present evidence concerning the administrative citation and to cross-examine the citing enforcement officer. The hearing shall not be subject to the formal rules of evidence or discovery. The hearing board may continue the hearing and request additional information from the enforcement officer or the responsible party prior to issuing a final administrative decision. 
E.  After considering all of the testimony and evidence submitted at the abatement hearing, the hearing board shall issue a written order to uphold or cancel the administrative citation, fine and abatement order, determine the amount of the enforcement cost and likely abatement cost and list in the decision the reason for that decision. The hearing board shall also determine and state the scope of the abatement order. The written decision of the hearing board shall be deemed a final administrative order for the purpose of California Government Code Section 53069.4. The final administrative order shall be served on the responsible person by posting the order in a conspicuous place on the property and by mailing a copy of the order to the responsible party by certified mail, postage prepaid, at his last known address. 
F.  If the hearing board determines after the hearing that the person charged in the administrative citation was not responsible for the code violation or public nuisance or that there was no code violation or public nuisance as charged in the administrative citation, then the citation shall be canceled. The hearing board shall also have the authority to reduce fines or enforcement fees based on the facts submitted at the hearing. 
G.  If, within thirty (30) days from the date of mailing of the hearing board's final administrative order to the responsible person, the code violation or public nuisance has not been corrected or abated and the fine and enforcement costs (exclusive of likely abatement costs) have not been paid to the city, then the city shall be authorized to enter onto the real property or into the buildings, dwellings or structures for the purpose of correcting the code violation or abating the nuisance. In carrying out the correction or abatement under the order, the city may take such actions, including, but not limited to, repair, rehabilitation, demolition, clearing, grubbing, grading, trenching, building, constructing and other work as may be reasonably necessary to complete the correction or abatement. 
H.  After the city has acted upon an abatement order, the enforcement officer shall prepare an itemized statement and invoice of the actual abatement costs incurred by the city. The statement shall be mailed to the responsible party by certified mail, postage prepaid, to his last known address. The responsible party shall be obligated to pay the abatement costs unless the responsible party files an appeal of the costs with the city clerk within fifteen (15) days of the mailing of the statement. The appeal shall be heard by the hearing board and shall proceed in the same manner as a contest hearing under Section 1.12.290 provided that the hearing board shall have no authority to consider or rescind the administrative citation, the abatement order, the fine or enforcement costs during this appeal. 
I.  The city may collect any past due administrative citation fines, enforcement fees and late payment charges by use of all available legal means, including the use of the lien procedures provided for under Article VIII of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2001-6 Exh. A (part), 2001) 
1.12.310 - Termination of proceedings. 
    In the event that the responsible person corrects the code violation or abates the public nuisance in accordance with the administrative citation or abatement order prior to the expiration of the abatement period set forth therein, then the proceedings shall be terminated upon the city's inspection and confirmation that compliance with the applicable codes and ordinances has occurred. Such action shall not affect the right of the city to claim or recover unpaid enforcement costs as provided for in this chapter. 
(Ord. 2001-6 Exh. A (part), 2001) 
1.12.320 - Hesperia city council advisory committee. 
A.  The city council advisory committee (hereinafter, "Committee") shall have no power or authority to bind or obligate the city or any officer or department thereof for any money, debt, undertaking or obligation of any kind in excess of the appropriations, which the city council may have made for the purpose of the committee in any fiscal year. 
B.  The committee shall have no power or authority to bind or obligate the city or any officer or department thereof for any money, debt, undertaking or obligation of any kind in excess of the appropriations which the city council may have made for the purpose of the committee in any fiscal year. 
C.  Except as otherwise provided in this chapter or by law, the committee shall have power to and shall provide for its own organization, adopt rules and regulations for the transaction of business before it, keep proper records of its official acts and proceedings, and designate the time and place for the regular meetings of the committee. 
D.  The committee is authorized to act as the local appeals board and housing appeals board under this chapter, and as required by California Building Code section 1.8.8, et seq., and to hold such hearings and to issue such orders as are appropriate under this chapter. All actions of the committee taken under this chapter shall be by the majority vote of a quorum of the committee members. 
(Ord. 2001-6 Exh. A (part), 2001) 
(Ord. No. 2018-05 , § 2(Exh. B), 6-19-18) 
Article VII. - Summary Enforcement Procedures 

1.12.330 - Authority to abate. 
A.  The summary abatement of code violations and public nuisances is hereby authorized, in accordance with the procedures set forth in this article, where the enforcement officer, based on the facts then known, determines that any condition or violation of the code or other situation presents an imminent danger or hazard or is imminently injurious to the public health or safety. 
B.  No person shall remain in or enter any building, dwelling or structure which has been posted with a notice to vacate or a "Do Not Enter - Unsafe to Occupy" sign by an enforcement officer, except that entry may be made to repair, demolish or remove such building, dwelling or structure with permission of the city building official. 
(Ord. 2001-6 Exh. A (part), 2001) 
1.12.340 - Summary procedures. 
A.  Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter to the contrary, summary abatement shall be conducted in accordance with the following procedures: 
1.  The enforcement officer shall document the facts then known which support his determination that a condition presents an imminent danger or hazard or is imminently injurious to the public health or safety. 
2.  The enforcement officer shall attempt to make telephonic or personal contact with the responsible person. In the event such contact is made, the enforcement officer shall orally, or in writing, require the immediate abatement of the imminently dangerous, hazardous or injurious public nuisance, or order the vacation of the buildings, dwellings or structures as provided for in Section 1.12.350 of this chapter, so as to preclude harm to any life or property. 
3.  If the enforcement officer is unable to make contact as herein above noted or if the responsible person, after notification by the enforcement officer, does not abate the public nuisance or vacate the buildings, dwellings or structures within the required period, then the enforcement officer is authorized to take all actions deemed reasonably necessary to correct the code violation or abate the public nuisance with the use of city forces or its agents or representatives. 
4.  The enforcement officer shall keep an itemized account of the enforcement and abatement costs incurred by the city in correcting the code violation or abating the public nuisance and serve the appropriate administrative citation and enforcement and abatement cost statement and invoice on the responsible party pursuant to Section 1.12.290 of this chapter after the correction or abatement is completed. 
B.  As an alternative to the procedure provided in Section 1.12.340(A), the city may, at its discretion, utilize the procedures provided for under the most recent version of the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings. 
C.  The responsible person shall be liable for payment of all enforcement and abatement costs incurred by the city, pursuant to Article VIII of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2001-6 Exh. A (part), 2001) 
1.12.350 - Notice to vacate. 
A.  In accordance with the procedures provided in Section 1.12.340 of this chapter, whenever a building, dwelling or structure is in such condition to make it imminently dangerous, hazardous or injurious to the life, limb, property or the safety of the public or of the occupants, it shall be ordered to be vacated. Any building, dwelling or structure whereby improper maintenance has rendered it unsanitary or unhealthful such that it is unfit for human habitation, shall be vacated until the unsanitary or unhealthful conditions are abated. For purposes of this section connection to necessary utilities such as water, electric, gas and sewer (or functional, approved septic system) shall be required to be considered sanitary and healthful and to make a building, dwelling or structure fit for human habitation. 
B.  The enforcement officer shall issue a notice to vacate in the form as on file in the city clerk's office. The notice to vacate shall be posted on the building or structure in a conspicuous manner. Promptly thereafter, the enforcement officer shall mail a copy of the notice to the responsible person and each tenant if addresses for same are reasonably obtainable, by certified mail, postage prepaid. In addition to the notice to vacate, the enforcement officer shall post on each exit on the building, dwelling or structure that is required to be vacated, a sign substantially in the following form: 
Do Not Enter 
Unsafe To Occupy 
It is a violation of City Ordinance to occupy this building or to remove or 
deface this notice. 
___________ 
Building Official  Date 
No person shall remain in or enter any building which has been so posted, except that entry may be made to repair, demolish, or remove such building with permission of the City building official. 
C.  When the cause for the notice to vacate has been abated, the enforcement officer shall promptly remove any posted notice to vacate or "Do Not Enter - Unsafe to Occupy" sign, and responsible person and/or their tenants and occupants may be allowed to reoccupy the building, dwelling or structure even if further code violations or public nuisances exist provided that none render the building, dwelling or structure unsanitary, unhealthful or unsafe such that it is unfit for human habitation or imminently dangerous, hazardous or injurious to the health and safety of the occupant. 
(Ord. 2001-6 Exh. A (part), 2001) 
Article VIII. - Accounting and Recovery of Costs 

1.12.360 - Accounting of enforcement and abatement costs. 
A.  Pursuant to California Health and Safety Code Section 17951, enforcement and abatement costs shall be charged to the responsible person for the costs directly related to investigating, enforcing and abating a code violation or public nuisance. This section is enacted solely for the purpose of defraying enforcement costs and not for general revenue purposes. A fee rate for the staff time of each city official, agent or representative who may participate in an investigation or enforcement procedure shall be established and approved by resolution of the city council. 
B.  The city shall keep and maintain the following records reflecting enforcement and abatement costs. 
1.  The enforcement officer primarily responsible for an enforcement procedure shall keep an account of all enforcement costs and any abatement costs incurred by the city or its agents or representatives in investigating, enforcing, correcting and abating the subject code violation or public nuisance for which an enforcement procedure was commenced. If more than one lot or parcel of land is involved in the enforcement procedure, then the enforcement officer shall also keep an account of the enforcement and abatement costs incurred concerning each separate lot or parcel of land where the work is done. 
2.  Each investigating or inspecting enforcement officer shall keep an account of all of his enforcement time and incidental expenses incurred for each enforcement procedure and provide the enforcement officer primarily responsible for that enforcement procedure with an itemized statement thereof on a monthly basis. 
3.  The enforcement officer primarily responsible for an enforcement procedure shall render an itemized bill or statement for all of the enforcement costs and any abatement costs actually incurred by the city pertaining to that matter. The enforcement officer shall provide such itemized bill or statement at the times provided for in this chapter. 
C.  Upon the expiration of the period stated in the notice of public nuisance all enforcement costs and any abatement costs actually incurred by the city in connection with a code violation or public nuisance until its correction or abatement with all required city approvals and inspections, shall be charged to the responsible person in accordance with the provisions of the enforcement procedure selected by the city for that matter. 
D.  Abatement costs shall be assessed at the conclusion of the abatement, provided, however, in the case of an abatement by any method which takes more than six months, costs may be assessed at any time after six months, but in no event more than two times a year. 
(Ord. 2001-6 Exh. A (part), 2001) 
1.12.370 - Alternative methods for recovery of costs. 
A.  Recordation of Nuisance Abatement Lien. 
1.  Pursuant to California Government Code Section 38773.1, a nuisance abatement lien procedure is adopted to collect enforcement costs and any abatement costs. A lien may be recorded on the responsible person's real property when an invoice, order or judgment has not been paid within thirty (30) days of the date of the invoice, order or judgment and timely appeal, if applicable, has not been received by the city. 
2.  Prior to recording a lien, a notice shall be given to the owner of record of the parcel of land on which the public nuisance is maintained, based on the last equalized assessment roll or the supplement roll, whichever is more current. The notice shall be served in the same manner as a summons in a civil action in accordance with Article 3 (commencing with Section 415.10) of Chapter 4 of Title 5 of Part 2 of the Code of Civil Procedure. If the responsible person, after diligent search, cannot be found, the notice may be served by posting a copy thereof in a conspicuous place upon the property for a period of ten days and publication thereof in a newspaper of general circulation published in San Bernardino County pursuant to Section 6062 of Government Code. 
3.  After notice is given in accordance with the above, a nuisance abatement lien shall be recorded in the San Bernardino County recorder's office and shall thereafter constitute a lien on the real property for the enforcement costs and abatement costs. From the date of recording, the lien shall have the force, effect and priority of a judgment lien. 
4.  A lien recorded pursuant to this section shall specify the amount of the lien, the name of the agency on whose behalf the lien is imposed, the date of the abatement order, the street address, the legal description and the assessor's parcel number of the parcel on which the lien is imposed and the name and address of the recorded owner of the parcel. 
5.  In the event the lien is discharged, released or satisfied, either through payment or foreclosure, notice of the discharge containing the same information as the notice of lien shall be recorded in San Bernardino County recorder's office by the governmental agency. 
6.  The city may foreclose on a nuisance abatement lien by a judicial foreclosure action. 
B.  Special Assessment of Abatement Costs. 
1.  As an alternative to the nuisance abatement lien, the city declares unpaid enforcement costs and any abatement costs a special assessment against the parcel of land upon which nuisance is found. The assessment may be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary municipal taxes are collected and shall be subject to the same penalties and the same procedures and sale in case of delinquency as provided for ordinary municipal taxes. All laws applicable to the levy, collection and enforcement of municipal taxes shall be applicable to the special assessment procedure to collect the abatement and related administrative costs. 
2.  The enforcement officer may take all appropriate actions pursuant to this section to recover unpaid abatement costs at such time as this chapter allows the recordation of a nuisance abatement lien. 
(Ord. 2001-6 Exh. A (part), 2001) 
ARTICLE IX. - LICENSE AND PERMIT REVOCATION PROCEDURES 

1.12.380 - Suspension and revocation of licenses and permits. 
A.  Licenses. All licenses issued under the provisions of this code shall be in compliance with all applicable laws and ordinances of the city, the State of California and the United States of America. 
B.  Grounds for Suspension or Revocation. Any license or permit granted through the provisions of this title may be suspended or revoked by the department issuing the permit or license if it is determined either: 
1.  That it was fraudulently obtained or issued in error; or 
2.  That the information provided in the application was incomplete, incorrect or false in any material respect, or that there was an omission of a material fact; or 
3.  That the license holder is operating its business in violation of any statute, ordinance or law; or 
4.  That the revocation is necessary to protect the health, safety or welfare of the public. 
C.  Appeal Procedure. Prior to any suspension or revocation of license or permit, the issuing department shall, by certified mail, postage prepaid, give the license or permit holder ten days notice of the city's intent to suspend or revoke such license or permit. Within ten days of the date of such notice, the license or permit holder may file a written request with the city clerk to appear before the hearing board, and when a hearing is thereafter scheduled by the city clerk and notice given to the license or permit holder thereof by certified, mail postage prepaid, the license holder may appear and show cause before the hearing board why such license or permit should not be suspended or revoked. Upon the failure of the license or permit holder to file a written request for a hearing within said period, or if after the hearing of the hearing board the hearing board finds good and sufficient cause for suspension or revocation, the license or permit shall be suspended or revoked. No refund of any license or permit fee shall be made following suspension or revocation. Suspension or revocation of a license or permit shall be effective upon action of the hearing board as herein described. 
(Ord. 2001-6 Exh. A (part), 2001) 
( Ord. No. 2013-09, § 7, 11-5-13 ) 
Cross reference- Permit expiration, Section 15.04.070. 
Title 2 - ADMINISTRATION AND PERSONNEL 
Chapters: 
Chapter 2.04 - CITY COUNCIL 
Sections: 

2.04.010 - Compensation of members. 
A.  The ordinance codified in this Section 2.04.010, is enacted pursuant to the provisions of Section 36516 of the Government Code of the state of California, authorizing the city council to provide by ordinance that each member of the city council shall receive a prescribed salary, the amount of which shall be based upon the population of the city as determined by estimates made by the State Department of Finance. 
B.  As of July 1, 1988, the latest estimate of population of the city made by the Secretary of State is approximately sixty thousand (60,000). 
C.  Each member of the city council shall receive as salary the sum of three hundred dollars ($300.00) per month, as prescribed in Section 36516 of the Government Code of the state for cities in the fifty thousand (50,000) to seventy-five thousand (75,000) population group. 
D.  Following any new and later authorized estimate of population or census placing the city in a population group other than that set forth in subsection (B) of this section, the salary payable to each member of the council shall be increased or decreased accordingly to equal the sum prescribed for that population group in said Section 36516 of the Government Code of the state; provided, however, the salary so increased or decreased shall become payable only on and after the date upon which one or more members of the council become eligible therefore by virtue or beginning a new term of office following the next succeeding general municipal election held in the city. 
E.  The salaries prescribed in this section shall be exclusive of any amounts payable to each member of the city council as reimbursement for actual and necessary expenses incurred by a member of the city council in the performance of official duties for the city. 
(Ord. 9 §§ 1-5, 1988) 
2.04.020 - Meetings. 
    Regular meetings of the city council of the City of Hesperia shall be held without further notice at 9700 Seventh Avenue, Council Chambers, Hesperia, California, or at such other location as may be designated by resolution. 
(Ord. 177 § 1, 1993) 
(Ord. No. 2019-04 , § 3, 4-16-19) 
Chapter 2.08 - CITY MANAGER 
Sections: 

2.08.010 - Office created. 
    The office of the city manager is created and established. The city manager shall be appointed by the city council wholly on the basis of his administrative and executive ability and qualifications and shall hold office for and during the pleasure of the city council. 
(Ord. 2 § 1, 1988) 
2.08.020 - Residence. 
    Residence in the city at the time of appointment of a city manager shall not be required as a condition of appointment nor at anytime thereafter unless otherwise prescribed for in the city manager's employment agreement. 
(Ord. 298 § 2, 2000: Ord. 2 § 2, 1988) 
2.08.030 - Eligibility. 
    No member of the city council shall be eligible for appointment as city manager until one year has elapsed after such city council member shall have ceased to be a member of the city council. 
(Ord. 2 § 3, 1988) 
2.08.040 - Bond. 
    The city manager and acting city manager shall furnish a corporate surety bond to be approved by the city council in such sum as may be determined by the city council, and shall be conditioned upon the faithful performance of the duties imposed upon the city manager and acting city manager as herein prescribed. Any premium for such bond shall be a proper charge against the city. 
(Ord. 2 § 4, 1988) 
2.08.050 - Acting city manager. 
    The assistant city manager or deputy city manager shall serve as acting city manager during any temporary absence or disability of the city manager. In the event there is no assistant city manager or deputy city manager, the city manager, by filing a written notice with the city clerk, shall designate a qualified city employee to exercise the power and perform the duties of city manager during his/her temporary absence or disability. In the event the city manager's absence or disability extends over a two-month period, the city council may, after the two-month period, appoint an acting city manager. 
(Ord. 295 § 1, 2000: Ord. 2 § 5, 1988) 
2.08.060 - Compensation. 
    The city manager shall receive such compensation as the city council shall from time to time determine. In addition, the city manager shall be reimbursed for all actual and necessary expenses incurred by him/her in the performance of his/her official duties. 
(Ord. 2 § 6, 1988) 
2.08.070 - Powers and duties. 
    The city manager shall be the administrative head of the government of the city under the direction and control of the city council, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. He/she shall be responsible for the efficient administration of all the affairs of the city which are under his/her control. In addition to his/her general powers as administrative head, and not as a limitation thereon, it shall be his/her duty and he/she shall have the powers set forth in the following subsections. 
A.  Law Enforcement. It shall be the duty of the city manager to enforce all laws and ordinances of the city and to see that all franchises, contracts, permits and privileges granted by the city council are faithfully observed. 
B.  Authority Over Employees. It shall be the duty of the city manager, and he/she shall have the authority to control, order and give directions to all heads of departments and to subordinate officers and employees of the city under his/her jurisdiction through their department heads. 
C.  Power of Appointment and Removal. It shall be the duty of the city manager to, and he/she shall appoint, remove, promote and demote any and all officers and employees of the city, except the city attorney. 
D.  Administrative Reorganization of Offices. It shall be the duty and responsibility of the city manager to conduct studies and effect such administrative reorganization of offices, positions or units under his/her direction as may be indicated in the interest of efficient, effective and economical conduct of the city's business. 
E.  Ordinances. It shall be the duty of the city manager and he/she shall recommend to the city council for adoption such measures and ordinances as he/she deems necessary. 
F.  Attendance at City Council Meetings. It shall be the duty of the city manager to attend all meetings of the city council unless at his/her request he/she is excused therefrom by the mayor individually or the city council, except when his/her removal is under consideration. 
G.  Financial Reports. It shall be the duty of the city manager to keep the city council at all times fully advised as to the financial condition and needs of the city. 
H.  Budget. It shall be the duty of the city manager to prepare and submit the proposed annual budget and the proposed annual salary plan to the city council for its approval. 
I.  Expenditure Control and Purchasing. It shall be the duty of the city manager to see that no expenditures shall be submitted or recommended to the city council, except on approval of the city manager or his/her authorized representative. The city manager, or his/her authorized representative, shall be responsible for the purchase of all supplies for all the departments or divisions of the city. 
J.  Investigations and Complaints. It shall be the duty of the city manager to make investigations into the affairs of the city and any department or division thereof, and any contract or the proper performance of any obligation to the city. Further, it shall be the duty of the city manager to investigate all complaints in relation to matters concerning the administration of the city government and in regard to the service maintained by public utilities in the city. 
K.  Public Buildings. It shall be the duty of the city manager and he/she shall exercise general supervision over all public buildings, and all other public property which are under control and jurisdiction of the city council. 
L.  Hours of Employment. It shall be the duty of the city manager to devote his/her entire time to the duties of his/her office and in furthering the interest of the city. 
M.  Additional Duties. It shall be the duty of the city manager to perform such other duties and exercise such other powers as may be delegated to him from time to time by ordinance or resolution or other official action of the city council. 
(Ord. 2 § 7 (§§ 7.1-7.2, 7.15), 1988) 
2.08.080 - Internal relations. 
A.  Council-Manager Relations. The city council and its members shall deal with the administrative services of the city only through the city manager, except for the purpose of inquiry, and neither the city council nor any member thereof shall give orders or instructions to any subordinates of the city manager. The city manager shall take his/her orders and instructions from the city council only when sitting in a duly convened meeting of the city council and no individual councilmember shall give any orders or instructions to the city manager. 
B.  Departmental Cooperation. It shall be the duty of all subordinate officers and the city attorney to assist the city manager in administering the affairs of the city efficiently, economically and harmoniously. 
C.  Attendance at Commission Meetings. The city manager may attend any and all meetings of the planning commission and any other commissions, boards or committees created by the city council, upon his/her own volition or upon direction of the city council. At such meetings which the city manager attends, he/she shall be heard by such commissions, boards or committees as to all matters upon which he/she wishes to address the members thereof, and he/she shall inform said members as to the status of any matter being considered by the city council, and he/she shall cooperate to the fullest extent with the members of all commissions, boards or committees appointed by the city council. 
(Ord. 2 § 8, 1988) 
2.08.090 - Removal procedure. 
A.  Removal of City Manager. The removal of the city manager may be effected with or without cause, but only by a majority vote of the whole city council as then constituted, convened in a regular council meeting. 
B.  Limitation on Removal. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (A) of this section, the city manger shall not be removed from office, during or within a period of one hundred twenty (120) days next succeeding any general municipal election held in the city at which election a member of the city council is elected or when a new city councilmember is appointed; the purpose of this provision is to allow any newly elected or appointed member of the city council or a reorganized city council to observe the actions and ability of the city manager in the performance of the powers and duties of his/her office. After the expiration of the one hundred twenty (120) day period aforementioned, the provisions of subsection (A) of this section as to the removal of the city manager shall apply and be effective. 
(Ord. 268 § 1, 1998; Ord. 2 § 9, 1988) 
2.08.100 - Agreements on employment. 
    Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as a limitation on the power or authority of the city council to enter into any supplemental agreement with the city manager delineating additional terms and conditions of employment not inconsistent with any provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2 § 10, 1988) 
Chapter 2.12 - OFFICES OF CODE ENFORCEMENT AND ANIMAL CONTROL 
Sections: 

2.12.010 - Code enforcement office and animal control office established-Powers and duties. 
A.  There are established the office of code enforcement and the office of animal control, which offices shall respectively provide for code enforcement and animal control services in the city. All code enforcement and animal control personnel (excluding clerical and administrative support personnel) are authorized to issue citations, i.e., notice to correct and/or notice to appear, to any person violating: 
1.  Any ordinance of the city; 
2.  Any ordinance or code adopted by ordinance of the city; 
3.  Any standing or parking regulation established by the California Vehicle Code. 
B.  This section does not authorize the arrest or taking into custody of any person, nor does it authorize the carrying or use of any firearm in the performance of duty. 
    Exception: Animal control officers, the animal control supervisor, and animal control technicians which have completed PC 832 training are specifically authorized to carry and use gas- or air-operated capture guns, either rifle or pistol, to subdue animals which threaten public safety or in the interest of animal welfare. 
(Ord. 264 § 2, 1997; Ord. 47 §§ 1, 3, 1989) 
Chapter 2.16 - PLANNING COMMISSION 
Sections: 

2.16.010 - Planning commission-Established. 
    There is created and established in the city a planning commission. 
(Ord. 146 § 1, 1992) 
2.16.020 - Planning agency designated. 
    The planning commission shall be the planning agency of the city. 
(Ord. 146 § 2, 1992) 
2.16.030 - Planning commission-Composition-Member appointment. 
    The composition of the planning commission and appointment of members to the planning commission shall be determined by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. 2005-01 § 2, 2005) 
2.16.040 - Planning commission-Compensation. 
    Members of the planning commission may receive a monthly salary as established by resolution of the city council; provided, however, that nothing in this chapter shall preclude reimbursement for actual and necessary expenses incurred by a member of the planning commission in the performance of official duties for the city. 
(Ord. 146 § 4, 1992) 
2.16.050 - Planning commission-Terms of members-Vacancies. 
    The terms of planning commission members and the filling of vacancies of planning commission members shall be determined by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. 2005-01 § 3, 2005) 
2.16.060 - Planning commission-Removal of member. 
    The procedure for removing a planning commission member shall be determined by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. 2005-01 § 4, 2005) 
2.16.070 - Planning commission-Powers, functions and duties. 
    The powers, functions and duties of the planning commission shall be set forth in the statutes of the state of California, as well as in applicable ordinances and resolutions of the city. 
(Ord. 2005-01 § 5, 2005) 
2.16.080 - Planning commission-Meetings. 
    Regular meetings of the planning commission shall be held at such time and place as is determined by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. 146 § 8, 1992) 
Chapter 2.20 - EMERGENCY SERVICES 
Sections: 

2.20.010 - Purpose. 
    The declared purposes of this chapter are to provide for the preparation and carrying out of plans for the protection of persons and property within this city in the event of an emergency, the direction of the emergency organization and the coordination of the emergency functions of this city with all other public agencies, corporations and affected private persons. 
(Ord. 45 § 1, 1989) 
2.20.030 - Disaster council membership. 
    The Hesperia Disaster Council is created and shall consist of the following: 
A.  The mayor, who shall be chairman; 
B.  The city manager, who is the director of emergency services; 
C.  The fire chief, who is the assistant director of emergency services; 
D.  Police chief; 
E.  Superintendent of the Hesperia School District. 
(Ord. 45 § 3, 1989) 
2.20.040 - Disaster council powers and duties. 
    It shall be the duty of the city disaster council, and it is empowered, to develop and recommend for adoption by the city council emergency and mutual aid plans and agreements and such ordinances and resolutions and rules and regulations as are necessary to implement such plans and agreements. The disaster council shall meet upon call of the chairman, or in his absence from the city or inability to call such meeting, upon call of the director of emergency services. 
(Ord. 45 § 4, 1989) 
2.20.050 - Director of emergency services. 
A.  There is created the office of director of emergency services. The city manager shall be the director of emergency services. 
B.  There is created the office of assistant director of emergency services. The deputy city manager of public safety (fire chief) shall be designated as the assistant director of emergency services. 
C.  There is further created the office of emergency services coordinator, who shall be appointed by the assistant director of emergency services. 
(Ord. 45 § 5, 1989) 
2.20.060 - Powers and duties of the director and assistant director of emergency services. 
A.  The director is empowered to: 
1.  Request the city council to proclaim the existence or threatened existence of a "local emergency" if the city council is in session, or to issue such proclamation if the city council is not in session. Whenever a local emergency is proclaimed by the director, the city council shall take action to ratify the proclamation within seven days thereafter, or the proclamation shall have no further effect. 
2.  Request the Governor to proclaim a "state of emergency," when, in the opinion of the director, the locally available resources are inadequate to cope with the emergency. 
3.  Control and direct the effort of the emergency organization of this city for the accomplishment of the purposes of this chapter. 
4.  Direct cooperation between and coordination of services and staff of the emergency organization of this city, and resolve questions of authority and responsibility that may arise between them. 
5.  Represent this city in all dealings with public or private agencies on matters pertaining to emergencies as defined herein. 
6.  In the event of the proclamation of a "local emergency" as provided in this chapter, the proclamation of a "state of emergency" by the Governor or the director of the State Office of Emergency Services, or the existence of a "state of war emergency," the director is empowered: 
a.  To make and issue rules and regulations on matters reasonably related to the protection of life and property as affected by such emergency; provided, however, that such rules and regulations be confirmed at the earliest practicable time by the city council; 
b.  To obtain vital supplies, equipment and such other properties found lacking and needed for the protection of life and property and to bind the city for the fair value thereof and, if required immediately, to commandeer the same for public use; 
c.  To require emergency services of any city officer or employee and, in the event of the proclamation of a local emergency, a "state of emergency," in the county in which this city is located or the existence of a "state of war emergency" to command the aid of as many citizens of this community as he deems necessary in the execution of his duties. Such persons shall be entitled to all privileges, benefits and immunities as are provided by state law for registered disaster service workers, (Gov. Code § 8657); 
d.  To requisition necessary personnel or material of any city department or agency, and; 
e.  To execute all of his ordinary power as city manager, all of the special powers conferred upon him by this chapter or by resolution or emergency plan pursuant hereto adopted by the city council, all powers conferred upon him by any statute, by any agreement approved by the city council, and by any other lawful authority. 
B.  The director of emergency services shall designate the order of succession to that office, to take effect in the event the director is unavailable to attend meetings and otherwise perform his duties during an emergency. Such order of succession shall be designated as follows: 
1.  Fire chief; 
2.  Police chief; 
3.  Second in command of the fire department; 
4.  Second in command of the police department. 
C.  The assistant director of emergency services shall, under supervision of the director and with the assistance of emergency service chiefs, develop emergency plans and manage the emergency programs of the city; and shall have such other powers and duties as may be assigned by the director. 
D.  The emergency services coordinator under the direct supervision of the director and the assistant director of emergency services shall assist in the development of emergency plans and emergency programs for the city; and shall have such other powers and duties as may be assigned or delegated by the director or assistant director of emergency services. 
(Ord. 250 Exh. A (part), 1998; Ord. 45 § 6, 1989) 
2.20.070 - Emergency organization. 
    All officers and employees of this city, together with those volunteer forces enrolled to aid them during an emergency, and all groups, organizations and persons who may by agreement or operation of law, including persons impressed into service under the provisions of Section 2.20.080, shall be charged with duties incident to the protection of life and property in this city during such emergency, shall constitute the emergency organization of the city. 
(Ord. 45 § 7, 1989) 
2.20.080 - Emergency plan. 
    The director of emergency services is responsible for the development of the city emergency plan, which plan shall provide for the effective mobilization of all of the resources of this city, both private and public, to meet any condition constituting a local emergency, state of emergency, or state of war emergency; and shall provide for the organization's powers and duties, services and staff of the emergency organization. Such plan shall take effect upon adoption by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. 45 § 8, 1989) 
2.20.090 - Expenditures. 
    Any expenditures made in connection with emergency activities; including mutual aid activities, shall be deemed conclusively to be for the direct protection and benefit of the inhabitants and property of the city. 
(Ord. 45 § 9, 1989) 
2.20.100 - Punishment of violations. 
    It is a misdemeanor for any person during an emergency to: 
A.  Willfully obstruct, hinder, or delay any member of the emergency organization in the enforcement of any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter, or in the performance of any duty imposed upon him by virtue of this chapter; 
B.  Do any act forbidden by any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter, if such act is of such a nature as to give or be likely to give assistance to the enemy, or to imperil the lives or property of inhabitants of this city, or to prevent, hinder, or delay the defense or protection thereof; 
C.  Wear carry or display without authority any means of identification specified by the emergency agency of the state or local agency. 
(Amended during 1997 codification; Ord. 45 § 10, 1989) 
2.20.110 - Safety assessment program. 
A.  Safety Assessment Program Coordinator. The city building official shall be named as safety assessment program (SAP) coordinator and shall be assigned to work under the operations section chief. 
B.  The safety assessment program coordinator shall utilize the office of the building official for SAP activities. Should facilities at city hall not be habitable after the event, the facilities at 11011 Santa Fe, housing code enforcement activities, may serve as an alternate site. 
C.  Placards. 
1.  The attached "Inspected" (green-Attachment 1), "Restricted Use" (yellow-Attachment 2), and "Unsafe" (red-Attachment 3) placards are hereby adopted for use in the City of Hesperia. 
2.  Placards may be placed by City of Hesperia Building Inspectors (including plans examiners and contract staff) and deputized building inspectors. Non-deputized building inspectors shall use generic placards not bearing the city logo. 
3.  Placards may be changed with approval of the SAP coordinator when an engineering evaluation of the building determines that the original posting was either too restrictive or not restrictive enough, when temporary measures were applied and the building posting could be changed to something less restrictive, or when evaluation by a deputized building inspector indicates that the posting should be changed. 
4.  Buildings posted as "Unsafe" (red) shall not be entered by residents. When, in the opinion of the building official or operations section chief, staffing resources are such that city or district staff may be free to escort residents into buildings posted as unsafe, residents may be allowed to recover personal items. In each case, the city/district representative has the authority to deny access if conditions appear imminently dangerous. 
5.  Placards shall not be removed unless the following: 
a.  "Inspected" placards shall not be removed until the SAP coordinator makes a public announcement to that effect. 
b.  "Restricted Use" placards shall not be removed until an engineering evaluation determines that the posting may be changed to "Inspected" and the SAP coordinator has publically announced (as in 5.a.) or that permitted repairs have been made and the city building inspector has approved the repairs. 
c.  "Unsafe" placards shall not be removed unless permitted demolition or repairs have been made and the city building inspector has approved the repairs. 
D.  Inspection Priorities. 
1.  In general, the inspection of city facilities after a city-wide event, such as a major earthquake, shall follow the priorities below. Smaller, more localized events, may be limited by the operations section chief or SAP coordinator to a quadrant or sub-region of the city. 
2.  Priority one would include essential services facilities (fire and police) and major city facilities (city hall, animal control, Mojave Yard, etc). 
3.  Priority two would include parks, schools, hotels, motels, and church facilities that might be necessary for shelters. 
4.  Priority three would include commercial, industrial, and office buildings in order to restore the city's economy. 
5.  Priority four would include large residential apartments. 
6.  Other residential would be inspected in priority five. 
7.  Other structures not intended for human occupancy, but potentially hazardous, such as walls, signs, barns, stables, etc., would be priority six. 
8.  Full safety evaluations would be performed initially in the priority one and two buildings while windshield surveys would be first performed in the other priorities to determine the resources necessary to fully survey the city. 
(Ord. No. 2008-23, § 2(Exh. A), 12-2-08) 
Editor's note- The placards attached to Ordinance No. 2008-23 as Attachments 1, 2 and 3 are available in the office of the city clerk. 
Chapter 2.24 - PERSONNEL SYSTEM 
Sections: 

2.24.010 - Adoption of personnel system. 
    In order to establish an equitable and uniform system for dealing with personnel matters, and to comply with applicable laws relating to the administration of the personnel process, the following personnel system is adopted. 
(Ord. 14 § 1, 1988) 
2.24.020 - Definitions. 
    The terms used to administer the personnel system shall be defined in the personnel rules. 
(Ord. 14 § 2, 1988) 
2.24.030 - Administration. 
    The city manager shall administer the city personnel system and may delegate any of the powers and duties to a personnel director or may delegate the appointing authority granted by the city council to any other officer or employee of the city or may recommend that such powers and duties be performed under contract as provided in Section 2.24.130. The city manager shall: 
A.  Act as the appointing authority for the city; 
B.  Administer all the provisions of this chapter and of the personnel rules not specifically reserved to the city council; 
C.  Prepare and recommend to the city council personnel rules and revisions and amendments to such rules; 
D.  Prepare or cause to be prepared a position classification plan, including class specifications, and revisions of the plan; 
E.  Have the authority to discipline employees in accordance with this chapter and the personnel rules of the city; 
F.  Provide for the publishing or posting of notices of costs for positions in the competitive service; the receiving of applications therefor; the conducting and grading of tests; the certification of a list of all persons eligible for appointment to the appropriate position in the competitive service; and performing any other duty that may be required to administer the personnel system. 
(Ord. 14 § 3, 1988) 
2.24.040 - Competitive service. 
    The provisions of the chapter shall apply to all offices, positions and employments in the service of the city, except: 
A.  Elective officers; 
B.  The city manager and any assistant city manager, deputy city manager or assistant to the city manager; 
C.  The city attorney and any assistant to the city attorney; 
D.  Members of appointive boards, commission and committees; 
E.  The city clerk; 
F.  All department heads; 
G.  Persons engaged under contract to supply expert, professional, technical or any other services; 
H.  Volunteer personnel, such as volunteer firemen; 
I.  All council-appointed city officers; 
J.  Emergency employees who are hired to meet the immediate requirements of an emergency condition, such as extraordinary fire, flood, or earthquake which threatens life or property; 
K.  Employees, other than those listed elsewhere in this section, who are not regularly employed in permanent positions. "Regularly employed in permanent positions" means an employee hired for an indefinite term into a budgeted position, who is regularly scheduled to work no less than one thousand forty (1,040) hours per year, and has successfully completed the probationary period and has been retained as provided in this chapter and the personnel rules; 
L.  Any position primarily funded under a state or federal employment program; 
M.  Employees not included in the competitive service under this section shall serve at the pleasure of their appointing authority. 
(Ord. 295 § 2, 2000: Ord. 14 § 4, 1988) 
2.24.050 - Adoption and amendment of rules. 
    Personnel rules shall be adopted by resolution of the city council. The rules may establish regulations governing the personnel system, including: 
A.  Preparation, installation, revision, and maintenance of a position classification plan covering all positions in the competitive service, including employment standards and qualifications for each class; 
B.  Appropriate announcement of the selection process and acceptance of applications for employment; 
C.  Preparation and conduct of tests and the establishment and use of resulting employment lists containing names of persons eligible for appointment; 
D.  Certification and appointment of persons from employment lists, and the making of provisional appointments; 
E.  Establishment of probationary testing periods; 
F.  Evaluation of employees during the probationary testing period and thereafter; 
G.  Transfer, promotion, demotion, reinstatement, disciplinary action and layoff of employees in the competitive service; 
H.  Separation of employees from the city service; 
I.  The establishment and maintenance of adequate personnel records for purposes of accounting and legal requirements; 
J.  The establishment of any necessary appeal procedures. 
(Ord. 14 § 5, 1988) 
2.24.060 - Appointments. 
A.  Appointments to vacant positions in the competitive service shall be made in accordance with the personnel rules. Appointments and promotions shall be based on merit and fitness to be ascertained so far as practicable by competitive examination. Examinations may be used and conducted to aid in the selection of qualified employees and shall consist of selection techniques which will test fairly the qualifications of candidates such as achievement and aptitude tests, written tests, personal interview, performance tests, physical agility tests, evaluation of daily work performance, work samples or any combinations of these or other tests. The probationary period shall be considered an extension of the examination process. Physical, medical and psychological tests may be given as a part of any examination. 
B.  In any examination the city manager or his/her designee may include, in addition to competitive tests, a qualifying test or tests, and set minimum standards therefor. 
C.  The appointing authority of employees in the competitive service is the city manager. The city manager may delegate the appointing authority to any other officer or employee of the city. 
(Ord. 14 § 6, 1988) 
2.24.070 - Probationary period. 
A.  All regular appointments, including promotional appointments, shall be for a probationary period of not less than six months or longer as determined by the personnel rules. During the probationary period, the employee may be rejected at any time without the right of appeal or hearing. 
B.  An employee rejected during the probationary period from a position to which he has been promoted shall be reinstated to a position in the class from which he was promoted, unless he is discharged from the city service as provided in the personnel rules. If no vacancy exists in such position, he shall be placed on a reemployment list as provided in the personnel rules. 
C.  An employee in the competitive service promoted or transferred to a position not included in the competitive service shall be reinstated to a position in the class from which he was promoted or transferred if action is taken to reject him, unless he is discharged in the manner provided in this chapter and the personnel rules for positions in the competitive service. If no vacancy exists in such a position, he shall be placed on a reemployment list as provided in the personnel rules. 
(Ord. 14 § 7, 1988) 
2.24.080 - Status of present employee. 
    Any person holding a position included in the competitive service who, on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, shall have served continuously in such position, or in some other position in the competitive service, for a period equal to the probationary period prescribed in the rules for his class, shall assume regular status in the competitive service in the position held on such effective date without qualifying test, and shall thereafter be subject in all respects to the provisions of this chapter and the personnel rules. 
(Ord. 14 § 8, 1988) 
2.24.090 - Demotion, dismissal, reduction in pay, suspension, reprimand. 
    The city manager or any appointing power shall have the authority to demote, discharge, reprimand, reduce in pay, or suspend, any regular employee for cause in accordance with procedures included in the personnel rules. 
(Ord. 14 § 9, 1988) 
2.24.100 - Right of appeal. 
A.  Any employee in the competitive service shall have the right to appeal a demotion, reduction in pay, suspension, or discharge for disciplinary or medical reasons, except in those instances where the right of appeal is specifically prohibited by this chapter or the rules adopted thereunder. 
B.  All appeals shall be processed in accordance with the requirements and procedures as set forth in the personnel rules adopted pursuant to the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
(Ord. 14 § 10, 1988) 
2.24.110 - Lay-off and reemployment. 
    Lay-off and reemployment actions shall follow the process outlined in the personnel rules. 
(Ord. 14 § 11, 1988) 
2.24.120 - Political activity. 
    The political activities of city employees shall conform to pertinent provisions of state law and any local provision adopted pursuant to state law. 
(Ord. 14 § 12, 1988) 
2.24.130 - Contracts for special services. 
    The city manager shall consider and make recommendations to the city council regarding the extent to which the city should contract for the performance of technical services in connection with the establishment or operation of the personnel system. The city council may contract with any qualified person or public or private agency for the performance of all or any of the following responsibilities and duties imposed by this chapter: 
A.  The preparation of personnel rules and subsequent revisions and amendments thereof; 
B.  The preparation of a position classification plan, and subsequent revisions and amendments thereof; 
C.  The preparation, conduct and grading of competitive tests; 
D.  The conduct of employee training programs; 
E.  Special and technical services of advisory or informational character on matters relating to personnel administration. 
(Ord. 14 § 13, 1988) 
2.24.140 - Reasonable accommodation policy. 
A.  The city of Hesperia is committed to prevent all forms of unlawful discrimination from occurring, including but not limited to, on the basis of race, religion, color, national origin, ancestry, gender, sexual orientation, disability, medical condition and age. 
B.  The city is also committed to prevent unlawful discrimination on the basis of any qualified disability as defined under applicable California state or federal law. The city's policy is to provide a reasonable accommodation to any individual with such qualified disability, as may be appropriate under the circumstance. A reasonable accommodation may, depending upon the circumstances, include a reasonable accommodation to allow a person to keep an animal or animals. 
C.  An individual with a qualified disability who requests that the city provides a reasonable accommodation must submit such request to the city. Additionally, the individual's healthcare provider must submit a signed letter on professional letterhead to the city upon the city's request, which indicates that the person has a qualified disability as defined under applicable California state and federal law. 
(Ord. 2005-08 Exh. A, 2005) 
Chapter 2.28 - COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION 
Sections: 

2.28.010 - Community development commission-Establishment. 
    There is created and established in the city a community development commission. 
(Ord. No. 2011-005, § 2, 4-19-11) 
2.28.020 - Community development commission-Findings. 
A.  There is a need for the Hesperia Community Development Commission to function within the city; and 
B.  The Hesperia Community Development Commission shall function on behalf of the Hesperia Community Redevelopment Agency, and certain nonprofit corporations as may be designated by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2011-005, § 2, 4-19-11) 
2.28.030 - Community development commission-Composition and terms. 
    The city council declares itself to be the commission and their terms of office shall be concurrent with their terms of office as city council members. 
(Ord. No. 2011-005, § 2, 4-19-11) 
2.28.040 - Community development commission-Powers, functions, and duties. 
A.  The Hesperia Community Development Commission is authorized to transact business and exercise powers pursuant to Section 34100 et seq. of the California Health and Safety Code. 
B.  The Hesperia Community Development Commission shall govern and sit as the board of directors of the city's non-profit corporation(s), as they may exist from time to time; and possess all the powers, authorities, rights, and privileges thereto including entering into contractual agreements for administrative support and general operations. 
C.  Pursuant to Sections 34141 and 34149 the community development commission shall have additional powers regarding community development as follows: 
    To own, maintain, develop, manage, or dispose of real property assets vested in its name subject to the conditions and restrictions set forth upon the instrument(s) transferring said property to it. Initially, the real property assets shall be those commercial and industrial properties identified in Exhibit A of City Council Resolution No. 2011-024. There shall be no limitation on the number of, individual or portfolio value of the real properties held by the community development commission. 
    To apply for, implement, and administer private and public grants that support the overall mission of the community development commission, specifically economic development, affordable housing, community revitalization, education, etc. 
(Ord. No. 2011-005, § 2, 4-19-11) 
2.28.050 - Community development commission-Meetings. 
    Regular meetings of the Hesperia Community Development Commission shall be held at the same time and place as the city council meetings, or as prescribed by law. 
(Ord. No. 2011-005, § 2, 4-19-11) 
2.28.060 - Community development commission-Compensation. 
    Compensation of each commissioner shall be seventy-five dollars ($75.00) for each meeting of the Hesperia Community Development Commission attended by that commissioner. No commissioner shall receive compensation for attending more than two (2) meetings of the Hesperia Community Development Commission in any calendar month. 
(Ord. No. 2011-005, § 2, 4-19-11) 
Title 3 - REVENUE AND FINANCE 
Chapters: 
3.20 - Fee and Service Charge Revenue/Cost Comparison System 
Chapter 3.04 - TRANSFER OF ASSESSMENT AND TAX COLLECTION DUTIES TO COUNTY 
Sections: 

3.04.010 - Assessor and tax collector. 
    Pursuant to the authority granted by Section 51501 of the Government Code of the state of California, the assessment and tax collection duties performed by the city assessor and tax collector are transferred to the assessor and tax collector of the county of San Bernardino. 
(Ord. 5 § 1, 1988) 
Chapter 3.08 - PURCHASING SYSTEM 

3.08.010 - Adoption of purchasing system. 
    A purchasing system is adopted in order to establish efficient procedures for the purchase of supplies, equipment, and services; to secure for the city supplies, equipment, and services at competitive costs commensurate with quality needed and with due consideration to disposability; to exercise financial control over purchases; to clearly define authority for the purchasing function; to assure the quality of purchases and to buy without favor or prejudice. 
(Ord. 222 § 2 (part), 1995) 
( Ord. No. 2014-09, § 1, 5-6-14 ) 
3.08.020 - Definitions. 
    "Authorization limits," "open market limit," or "informal bid limit" means such limits established by city council. 
    "Department approval" means the approval of purchases by the department director, as outlined by resolution of the city council. The department director may delegate approval of purchases to division managers and supervisors, so long as the approvals adhere to the amounts set forth by resolution of the city council. 
    "General services" means all services that are not deemed a professional service. 
    "Lowest responsible, responsive bidder" means the person, firm, partnership, or corporation submitting the lowest price for the supplies, materials, equipment, or services that meet or exceed the specifications, delivery terms and conditions, and other requirements included in the invitation to bid and has demonstrated skill, quality, capacity, and experience necessary to perform the contract satisfactorily. 
    "Professional services" means the services of attorneys, physicians, architects, engineers, consultants, auditors, specialized printers, or other individuals or organizations possessing a high degree of professional, unique, specialized, or technical skill/expertise, not adaptable to competitive bidding, or where the service involves a contract for special activities, negotiations for the acquisition of land, insurance, bonds, or other service of a similar nature to the above, engaged for a particular project or series of projects. 
    "Purchases" means the city's acquisitions of supplies, equipment, property and services. 
    "Purchasing supervisor" means the city manager or his/her designee to provide the administration and/or enforcement of this chapter. 
    "Supplies" and "equipment" means all articles, goods, or property furnished to, or used by, any city department. 
( Ord. No. 2014-09, § 1, 5-6-14 ) 
3.08.030 - Centralized purchasing division. 
    It is the intent of this chapter to create a centralized purchasing system. The city manager will manage the purchasing functions and shall be responsible for the function of procurement of equipment, materials, supplies, and services for the city. 
(Ord. 222 § 2 (part), 1995) 
( Ord. No. 2014-09, § 1, 5-6-14 ) 
3.08.035 - Exemptions from centralized purchasing. 
A.  Open Market Purchases. The functional section may procure goods, general services, and supplies and equipment for the city without resorting to either the formal bid or informal bid procedures with regard to purchases in amounts established as the open market limit by resolution of the city council. The purchasing supervisor shall maintain lists of providers capable of supplying such goods, services, and supplies and equipment. All technology-related equipment or software purchases shall follow the process established by the city manager to ensure compatibility with established city technology. 
B.  Exemption. The following items are exempt from centralized purchasing and will require the approval pursuant to the authorization limits set forth by resolution of the city council. For amounts exceeding the authorization limits, the purchase of non-commodity items approved by the city council in the current budget shall not require further city council approval: 
1.  Training and education, which includes conferences, conventions, courses, seminars, memberships, staff workshops, certifications, and subscriptions/publications. 
2.  Refundable employee expenses, which includes advances, meal allowances, miscellaneous reimbursements, and travel expenses. 
3.  General expenses, which includes, but not limited to, payroll deductions, licenses, advertising, insurance premiums, damage claims, petty cash replenishment, tax remittances, refunds, postage, freight charges, debt service related payments, fuel, and charges to or from other government agencies. 
4.  Utilities, which includes the payment of water, sewer, electricity, natural gas, and telecommunication expense. 
(Ord. 2001-4 § 1 (part), 2001) 
( Ord. No. 2014-09, § 1, 5-6-14 ) 
3.08.040 - Purchasing supervisor. 
    The city manager may delegate the duties of that position to subordinate employees, herein called the "purchasing supervisor." The purchasing supervisor shall direct and supervise the city's purchasing program. The purchasing supervisor shall establish methods and procedures for the efficient and economical functioning of the purchasing program. 
(Ord. 222 § 2 (part), 1995) 
( Ord. No. 2014-09, § 1, 5-6-14 ) 
3.08.050 - Purchasing supervisor-Powers and duties. 
    The purchasing supervisor shall have the authority to: 
A.  Purchase or contract for supplies, materials, equipment, property, and services required by the requesting department in accordance with the purchasing procedures prescribed by this chapter; 
B.  Negotiate and recommend execution of contracts for the purchase of supplies, services, property, and equipment; 
C.  Prepare and recommend citywide purchasing policies and procedures consistent with the municipal code setting forth procedures for the purchase of supplies, services, property, and equipment for the city; 
D.  Recommend the transfer of surplus or unused supplies and equipment between departments as needed and the sale of all supplies and equipment which cannot be used by any department or which become unsuitable for city use; 
E.  Maintain a vendor's list, vendor's catalog file and records needed for the efficient operation of purchasing. 
(Ord. 222 § 2 (part), 1995) 
( Ord. No. 2014-09, § 1, 5-6-14 ) 
3.08.055 - Contracts. 
    The city manager is authorized to sign written contracts made or entered into by the city, provided such written contracts and conveyances do not exceed the established authorization limits. 
(Ord. 2001-4 § 1 (part), 2001) 
( Ord. No. 2014-09, § 1, 5-6-14 ) 
3.08.060 - Requisitions. 
    All departments shall submit requests to the purchasing supervisor by standard requisition form or by other means as may be established by purchasing procedures for the supplies, materials, equipment, property, and services as required for their operations and purposes and within the limits of funds appropriated therefore. 
(Ord. 222 § 2 (part), 1995) 
( Ord. No. 2014-09, § 1, 5-6-14 ) 
3.08.065 - Encumbrance of funds. 
    Except in cases of emergency as defined in Section 3.08.070(A)(1), the purchasing supervisor shall not issue any purchase order/requisition, authorize the execution of any contract or enter any contract for purchasing of supplies, services, property, or goods unless there exists an unencumbered appropriation in the fund against which such purchase is to be charged. 
(Ord. 2001-4 § 1 (part), 2001) 
( Ord. No. 2014-09, § 1, 5-6-14 ) 
3.08.070 - Bidding-Generally. 
A.  Purchasing of general services, supplies, and equipment shall be by bid process pursuant to Sections 3.08.080 and 3.08.090. However, bidding may be dispensed with upon adequate, specific documentation when one of the following conditions pertains: 
1.  Emergency Purchase. When, in the sole view of the city manager, an emergency exists and the procurement of any and all goods/services is necessary to properly mitigate the emergency, may direct that emergency procurement to be made. For purposes of an emergency purchase, an emergency is defined as an emergency operations center (EOC) activation period initiated by the city manager. All purchases made under such emergency authority shall be subject to ratification by the city council at a subsequent public meeting; 
2.  Sole Source. So long as the authorization limits set forth by city council are adhered to, the bidding procedures of this chapter may be waived for the following: 
a.  The commodity or service can be obtained from only one responsible and responsive source; 
b.  The commodity is required to match or be compatible with other furnishings, material, or equipment presently on hand and is to be purchased from the supplier of such on-hand items; 
c.  The city manager or city council has ordered a standardized type of commodity or quality of product. 
3.  Piggyback Agreement. When the purchase of goods or services is beneficial to the interest of the city and is from a supplier who has been awarded a specific item or items in a contract resulting from a formal competitive bid process by another local governmental agency within the State of California within the previous three hundred sixty-five (365) days; 
4.  Cooperative Purchasing. When such purchases are based on any master agreement, cooperative agreement, multiple award schedule, or other types of agreements entered into by the State of California or the federal government. Examples include, but are not limited to, the California Multiple Award Schedules (CMAS), the Western State Contracting Alliance (WSCA), and the Federal General Services Administration (GSA) Contracts; 
5.  Governmental Purchase. When purchasing from or selling to another governmental agency and such action is beneficial to the interests of the city, the bidding procedures may be waived; 
6.  City Council Override. When the city council determines by resolution it would be in the best interest of the city to dispense with bidding; provided, however, that the city council shall state the basis of its determination; 
7.  Unforeseen Circumstances. When there is a breakdown in essential machinery, essential services, or when unforeseen circumstances arise including delays by contractors, delays in transportation, and unanticipated volume of work, which requires the immediate attention of a professional or immediate service/repair in order to protect public health, safety or welfare; 
8.  Technology Purchase. When there is to be a contract for the purchase of telecommunications, computer, and/or networking hardware and software, the purchase of "such items" (telecommunications, computer and/or networking hardware and software) will be done pursuant to regulations and procedures established by the city manager to ensure compatibility with current city infrastructure. 
B.  Additional Requirements and Prohibitions. 
1.  Any person, firm, partnership, or corporation that is awarded a contract must secure a city business license when required to possess the same pursuant to Title 5 of the Hesperia Municipal Code. 
2.  No employee, elected or appointed official of the city shall be financially interested in any contract made by them in their official capacity, or by any body or board of which they are members (See: California Government Code Section 1090, et seq.) or violative of the conflict of interest provisions of the city and/or the Political Reform Act (See: California Government Code Section 87100, et seq.). 
3.  Splitting orders of supplies, materials, equipment or services into smaller or separate orders for the purpose of evading the competitive bidding provisions of this chapter are prohibited. 
4.  Contract amendments or changes to purchase orders that exceed either the maximum authorization limit set forth by the city council or the original authorization as granted by city council will require subsequent approval of the city council before the contract amendment and/or change order is executed. 
5.  Employees, volunteers, and elected and appointed officials of the city are advised to be knowledgeable of all laws, rules and regulations concerning conflict of interest; disclosure/reporting requirements; and the acceptance of anything of value from any individual or business including, but not limited to, vendors, business clients, and the public. 
6.  Recycled Goods. In the procurement of goods for the city, a preference shall be given to buy recycled goods whenever reasonably possible. Recycled goods are defined and provided for in such state legislation as the State Assistance for Recycling (STAR) Markets Act of 1989 (commencing with the California Public Contracts Code Section 12150), the California Integrated Waste Management Act of 1989 (commencing with the California Public Resources Code Section 40000), and Environmentally Preferable Purchasing (AB 498). A Sustainable Purchasing policy will be adopted by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. 2001-4 § 1 (part), 2001; Ord. 222 § 2 (part), 1995) 
( Ord. No. 2014-09, § 1, 5-6-14 ) 
3.08.080 - Formal bid procedure. 
A.  Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, purchases of supplies, equipment, or services that exceed the informal bid limit, as established by resolution, shall follow the formal bid procedures and will result in a written contract with the lowest responsible, responsive bidder, as the case may be, pursuant to the procedures prescribed in this section. 
1.  Published Notices. Notices inviting bids shall be published at least ten days before the date of the opening of the bids. Notices shall be published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation, or shall be posted in at least three places in the city pursuant to city council resolution. 
2.  Bidder's List. The purchasing supervisor shall also solicit bids from responsible prospective suppliers whose names are on the bidder's list or who have made a written request that their names be added to the bidder's list. 
B.  Bidder's Security. When deemed necessary by the purchasing supervisor, bidder's security may be prescribed in the public notice inviting bids. Bidders shall be entitled to return of bid security upon completion of the contract. However, if a successful bidder fails or refuses to execute the contract within ten days after the notice of award of the contract has been mailed, unless explicitly stated in the terms of the contract, the bidder shall forfeit the bid security. The city may, on refusal or failure of the successful bidder to execute the contract, award it to the next lowest responsible, responsive bidder, with the bidder's security being applied to the amount of the contract price differential between the lowest bid and the second lowest bid, with the surplus, if any, returned to the lowest bidder. If the city rejects the remaining bids presented and readvertises, the amount of the lowest bidder's security may be used to offset the cost of receiving new bids and the surplus, if any, shall be returned to the lowest bidder. 
C.  Bid Opening Procedure. Sealed bids shall be submitted to the purchasing supervisor and shall be clearly identified as requested in the request for bid document. Bids shall be opened in public at the time and place stated in the public notice. A tabulation of all bids received shall be available for public inspection during regular business hours after the bid opening. 
D.  Rejection of Bids. The city may reject any and all bids presented, readvertise for bids or award a contract after negotiation for the most reasonable cost under existing conditions. The right to reject any and/or all bids is expressly reserved to the city and said decision shall be final. 
E.  Determination of Lowest Responsible, Responsive Bidder. Upon opening and tabulation of all bids received to determine the low bidder, the purchasing supervisor shall thereafter determine the lowest responsible, responsive bidder by applying the following criteria: 
1.  For purposes of determining the lowest responsible, responsive bidder, there shall be deducted from the bid(s) submitted by a local bidder all sales taxes which will be apportioned to and received by the city; 
2.  The capacity, quality and skill of the bidder to provide the service or commodity required and to comply with all specified requirements in the bid document; 
3.  The bidder's record of performance of previous contracts or services; previous failure to perform to city requirements may disqualify the bidder; 
4.  Whenever the purchasing supervisor determines that a bidder is not responsible pursuant to this section and the specifications of the notice inviting bids, the purchasing supervisor shall notify the bidder of said determination, in writing. 
F.  Award of Contracts. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, contracts shall be awarded to the lowest responsible, responsive bidder. Contracts which exceed the appropriated amount, or which are not budgeted, shall not be awarded except upon approval of the city council. 
G.  Tie Bids. If two or more bids received are for the same total amount or unit price, quality and service being equal, and if the public interest will not permit the delay of readvertising for bids, the city may, at its discretion, award the bid to a vendor located within the city limits. Should a tie continue to exist, a request for additional bids, only from the tie low bidders will be requested, whereby, the lowest bid will be accepted. 
H.  Performance Security. A performance bond, certificate of deposit or cash may be required before entering into a contract, in such amount as is deemed reasonably necessary to protect the interests of the city. If performance security is required, the acceptable type and amount thereof shall be described in the notice inviting bids and, if a bond, the form of the bond shall be as approved by the City Attorney. 
(Ord. 2001-4 § 1 (part), 2001; Ord. 222 § 2 (part), 1995) 
( Ord. No. 2014-09, § 1, 5-6-14 ) 
3.08.085 - Professional service agreement procedure. 
    When there is to be a contract for professional services, except for city attorney services, the city manager is authorized to solicit request for proposals/qualifications or to proceed in such other fashion for professional services, whenever the city manager determines in his/her sole discretion that the best interests of the city would be fully served by proceeding in such a manner. The award of professional services contracts shall be made by the purchasing supervisor, as approved by the city manager, when the same have been budgeted for and sufficient funds have been appropriated. 
    Each professional agreement shall: (1) be in writing, (2) include the nature and scope of services, total amount, and time for performance; (3) include appropriate insurance and indemnification provisions; and (4) be approved on a form approved by the city attorney, (5) garner approval for amounts in excess of the limits set forth by resolution of the city council; and (6) to be completely executed with signatures of the city manager and the contracting party. 
    A consultant that is contracted with the city, and is engaged in service on city property shall hold the city harmless, and maintain property damage, general liability, and workers' compensation insurance in the amounts approved by the city manager and the city's insurance provider, as well as sign all applicable contract forms approved by the city attorney. 
( Ord. No. 2014-09, § 1, 5-6-14 ) 
3.08.090 - Informal bid procedure. 
    Purchases of supplies, equipment and services of a value within the informal bid limit, shall follow the informal bid process pursuant to the procedure prescribed in this section and without observing the procedure described in Section 3.08.080, unless otherwise identified. 
A.  Minimum Number of Bids. Informal bid purchases shall, whenever possible, be based on at least three bids and shall be awarded to the lowest responsible, responsive bidder. 
B.  Solicitation of Informal Bids. The purchasing supervisor or requesting department shall solicit informal bids by written requests to prospective vendors. 
C.  Informal Bids. Informal bids shall be submitted, in writing, to the purchasing supervisor, who shall keep a record of all such bids, in accordance with the city's records retention policy, open to public inspection after the submission of bids or the placing of an order. 
D.  The purchasing supervisor shall establish lists, by category or type, of persons, firms, partnerships or corporations capable of and willing to submit bids for goods, services, or supplies and shall invite submittals for placement on said lists. Any bid submitted during the recruitment period shall be considered, even if no notice was previously provided to the bidder. 
E.  Notwithstanding any other term or provision of this section, the provisions of Section 3.08.080(D) through (H) shall be applicable to informal bids. 
(Ord. 222 § 2 (part), 1995) 
( Ord. No. 2014-09, § 1, 5-6-14 ) 
3.08.095 - Bid protests. 
    Any person, firm, company, vendor, contractor, or other individual/group that unsuccessfully bids on a city contract may file a protest in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
A.  Persons Entitled to File Bid Protests. Only a bidder on a contract or a bidder's authorized representative may file a bid protest on a contract. A subcontractor of a party filing a bid on a contract may not submit a bid protest. 
B.  Form of Bid Protest. Bid protests shall be in writing; shall provide the name, address, electronic mail address, telephone and fax numbers of the protesting bidder; and shall identify the contractor bid request number to which the bid protest pertains. The bid protest shall identify and explain the factual and legal grounds for the protest, and shall include any written materials that the protesting bidder wishes to have considered in determining the protest. Any grounds not raised in the written protest are deemed waived by the protesting bidder. Bid protests shall be addressed and delivered to the city clerk's office. Any bid protest that is not submitted as provided herein shall be invalid and shall not be considered. 
C.  Submission of Bid Protest to City. After bids are received and opened by the city, city staff shall provide each bidder with notice of the city staff's preliminary recommendation for award of the contract. Any bid protest shall be received by the city clerk no later than five calendar days after the city notifies the bidders of the recommendation for award. The effective date of notice by mail is the postmark date. The effective date of the notice electronically is the date of the transmission. If the fifth calendar day does not fall on a business day, the deadline to submit a protest shall be extended to 5:00 p.m. on the next business day. 
D.  Investigation by City. Upon receipt of the filed bid protest, the purchasing supervisor shall prepare a written response to the bid protest. The purchasing supervisor will review all the facts and make a determination. 
E.  Appeal to City Manager. In instances where the city manager has delegated the role of the purchasing supervisor to a subordinate staff member, an appeal of the purchasing supervisor's decision on the bid protest may be made by the protesting bidder to the city manager by filing a written notice of appeal with the city clerk within five calendar days after the date of notice of the purchasing supervisor's decision regarding the bid protest. If an appeal is timely filed and subsequently has not been withdrawn by the protesting bidder or by operation of the provision of this section, the city manager shall consider the bid protest and make a determination. 
F.  Appeal to City Council. An appeal of city manager's decision on the bid protest may be made by the protesting bidder to the city council by filing a written notice of appeal with the city clerk within five calendar days after the date of notice of the city manager's decision regarding the bid protest. If an appeal is timely filed and subsequently has not been withdrawn by the protesting bidder or by operation of the provisions of this section, the city council shall consider the bid protest at a noticed, public meeting. The city council may hear the bid protest as part of the city council's consideration of the award of the contract to which the bid protest relates or may hear the bid protest as a separate item, provided that the city council shall decide the bid protest prior to awarding the contract, unless the city council exercises its discretion to reject all bids. 
G.  City Council's Decision. The scope of the bid protest considered by the city council shall be limited to the issues set forth in the bid protest timely filed with the city clerk. The city council may take any action on the bid protest that is authorized by law, including adoption of city staff's recommended determination of the bid protest, adoption of a determination different from that recommended by city staff, or the rejection of all bids without deciding the bid protest. The decision of the city council on a bid protest shall be the final administrative action on the protest and shall exhaust the protesting bidder's administrative remedies. 
(Ord. 2001-4 § 1 (part), 2001) 
( Ord. No. 2014-09, § 1, 5-6-14 ) 
3.08.100 - Open market procedure. 
    The purchasing supervisor may procure goods, services and supplies for the city without resort to either the formal bid or informal bid procedures with regard to purchases in amounts established as within the open market procedure by resolution. The purchasing supervisor shall maintain lists of providers capable of supplying such goods, services and supplies and shall rotate the use thereof. 
(Ord. 222 § 2 (part), 1995) 
3.08.110 - Bidding for public works projects. 
    Public works projects, as defined by the California Public Contract Code shall be bid, advertised and awarded in accordance with California Public Contract Code. 
(Ord. 222 § 2 (part), 1995) 
( Ord. No. 2014-09, § 1, 5-6-14 ) 
3.08.120 - Inspection and testing. 
    The purchasing supervisor, shall have authority to require chemical or physical tests of samples submitted with bids and samples or deliveries, which are necessary to determine their quality and conformance with the specifications. The department responsible for receiving the requested services, supplies, and equipment must inspect and ensure their conformance with the specifications set forth in the contract and bid documents. Such inspection and testing may include offsite travel as approved by the city manager. 
(Ord. 222 § 2 (part), 1995) 
3.08.130 - Disposition of surplus supplies and equipment. 
    Departments shall submit to the purchasing supervisor, on such forms as the purchasing supervisor shall prescribe, reports showing all supplies and equipment which are no longer used or which have become obsolete or worn out. 
A.  When, after a reasonable effort has been made to obtain competitive bids, no offers are received for any item of city-owned property so declared to be surplus, the purchasing supervisor is authorized to dispose of such item for the highest scrap value that can be obtained therefore and if a reasonable effort to do so produces no opportunity to sell the same for scrap, the purchasing supervisor may cause its destruction or any other disposition thereof. 
B.  The city may sell obsolete or surplus property to any other governmental agency at an established "fair market value" without other bids. 
C.  The city may, in its sole and absolute discretion, donate surplus personal property to any agency or entity, which is exempt from federal income tax, with the approval of the city council. 
(Ord. 222 § 2 (part), 1995) 
( Ord. No. 2014-09, § 1, 5-6-14 ) 
3.08.140 - Penalties for violation. 
    It is unlawful for any person, firm, partnership or corporation to violate or to fail to comply with any federal or state law as well as any county and/or local ordinance. Violation or failure to comply with such laws and ordinances may result in immediate termination of any and all contracts as well as being precluded from doing business with the city for a period of five years. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; Ord. 222 § 4, 1995) 
( Ord. No. 2014-09, § 1, 5-6-14 ) 
Chapter 3.10 - UNIFORM TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY TAX 
Sections: 

3.10.010 - Short title. 
    This chapter shall be known as the Uniform Transient Occupancy Tax of the city of Hesperia. 
(Ord. 271 § 2 (part), 1998) 
3.10.020 - General provisions. 
A.  Reference to Ordinance or Statute. Whenever any reference is made to any portion of this chapter, or of any other ordinance, or to any statute, such reference shall apply to all amendments and additions thereto now or hereafter made. 
B.  Tenses. The present tense includes the past and future tenses. 
C.  Genders. Each gender includes the other two genders. 
D.  Number. The singular number includes the plural and the plural the singular. 
(Ord. 2001-7 Exh. A (part), 2001: Ord. 271 § 2 (part), 1998) 
3.10.030 - Imposition of tax. 
A.  Tax Imposed. For the privilege of occupancy in any hotel, each transient is subject to and shall pay a tax in the amount of ten percent of the rent charged by the operator. 
B.  Payment by Transient. The transient shall pay the tax to the operator of the hotel at the time the rent is paid. If the rent is paid in installments, a proportionate share of the tax shall be paid with each installment. The unpaid tax shall be due upon the transient's ceasing to occupy space in the hotel. If, for any reason the tax due is not paid to the operator of the hotel, the tax collector may require the transient to pay such tax directly to the tax collector. 
C.  Exemptions. If a proper claim for exemption is made, a tax shall not be imposed upon: 
1.  Any person as to whom, or any occupancy as to which, it is beyond the power of the city to impose the tax herein provided; 
2.  Any federal or state of California officer or employee when on official business; 
3.  Any officer or employee of a foreign government who is exempt by reason of express provision of federal law or international treaty; 
4.  Any occupancy of a hotel which is used exclusively for religious, educational, charitable or welfare purposes, such as church lodges, camps and retreats, Boy Scout and Girl Scout grounds, fresh air camps, and similar sites, shall be exempt from this tax, and the operators of such hotels are not required to register as provided for under Section 3.10.040. However, it shall be the duty of the operator of any such hotel to furnish the tax collector with such information as the tax collector deems necessary to establish or retain such exempt status. Transients occupying such hotels are not required to furnish individual exemption claims. 
D.  Claim of Exemption. The tax collector shall prepare and furnish to the operators of hotels, who have registered as required by Section 3.10.040, forms by which transients may claim exemption from the payment of the tax. An exemption shall not be granted to any transient except upon a claim therefor made at the time rent is collected and under penalty of perjury upon the form supplied by the tax collector. 
E.  Operator's Duties. Each operator shall collect the tax imposed by this section to the same extent and at the same time as the rent is collected from every transient. The amount of tax shall be separately stated from the amount of the rent charged, and each transient shall receive a receipt for payment from the operator. The operator of a hotel shall not advertise or state in any manner, whether directly or indirectly, that the tax or any part thereof will be assumed or absorbed by the operator, or that it will not be added to the rent, or that, if added, any part will be refunded except in the manner hereinafter provided. 
F.  Records. Every operator liable for the collection and payment to the city of any tax imposed by this article shall keep and preserve, for not less than three years, all records which may be necessary to determine the amount of such tax for the collection of, and payment of, to the city he may be or may become liable. The tax collector may inspect these records at any reasonable time. The operator shall make such records available at any reasonable time requested by the tax collector. 
(Ord. 2006-17 § 2, 2006; Ord. 271 § 2 (part), 1998) 
3.10.040 - Registration. 
A.  Operator Must Register. Within thirty (30) days after commencing business, each operator of any hotel renting occupancy to transients shall register the said hotel with the tax collector. Upon such registration, the tax collector shall issue to such operator a transient occupancy registration certificate. 
B.  Posting of Certificate. The operator shall post, and at all times keep posted in a conspicuous place on the premises of the hotel, the transient occupancy registration certificate. 
C.  Contents of Certificate. The transient occupancy certificate shall, among other things, state the following: 
1.  The name of the operator; 
2.  The address of the hotel; 
3.  The date upon which the certificate was issued; 
4.  The certificate shall read as follows: 
"This Transient Occupancy Registration Certificate signifies that the person named on the face hereof has fulfilled the requirements of the Uniform Transient Occupancy Tax Ordinance by registering with the Tax Collector for the purpose of collecting from transients the Transient Occupancy Tax and remitting said tax to the Tax Collector. This certificate does not authorize any person to conduct any unlawful business or to conduct any lawful business in an unlawful manner, nor to operate a hotel without strictly complying with all local applicable laws, including but not limited to those requiring a permit from any board, commission, department or office of this City. This certificate does not constitute a permit." 
(Ord. 271 § 2 (part), 1998) 
3.10.050 - Reporting and remitting. 
A.  Operator Must Report. Each operator, on or before the last day of the month following the close of the calendar quarter, or at the close of any other reporting period which may be established by the tax collector, shall make a rerum to the tax collector, on forms provided by him of the total rents charged and received and the mount of tax collected for transient occupancies. 
B.  Payment of the Tax. At the time the return is filed, the operator shall remit the full amount of the tax collected to the tax collector. The tax collector may establish shorter, longer, or other reporting periods for any certificate holder if he deems it necessary or expedient in order to insure collection of the tax. The tax collector may require further information in the return. Returns and payments are due immediately upon cessation of business for any reason. 
C.  Taxes Held in Trust. Every operator shall hold in trust for the account of the city until payment thereof is made to the tax collector, all taxes collected by such operator. 
(Ord. 271 § 2 (part), 1998) 
3.10.060 - Penalties and interest. 
A.  Original Delinquency. Any operator who fails to remit any tax imposed by this section within the time required shall pay a penalty of ten percent of the amount of the tax in addition to the amount of the tax. 
B.  Continued Delinquency. Any operator who fails to remit any delinquent remittance on or before a period of thirty (30) days following the date on which the remittance first became delinquent shall pay a second delinquency penalty of ten percent of the amount of the tax in addition to the amount of the tax and the ten percent penalty first imposed. 
C.  Fraud. If the tax collector determines that the nonpayment of any remittance due under this section is due to fraud, a penalty of twenty-five (25) percent of the amount of the tax shall be added thereto in addition to the penalties stated in Sections 3.10.060(A) and (B). 
D.  Interest. In addition to the penalties imposed, any operator who fails to remit any tax imposed by this section shall pay interest at the rate of one-half of one percent per month or fraction thereof on the amount of the tax, exclusive of penalties, from the date on which the remittance first became delinquent until paid. 
E.  Penalties Merged with Tax. Every penalty imposed and such interest as accrues under the provisions of this section shall become a part of the tax herein required to be paid. 
F.  Failure to Collect and Report Tax. Determination of tax collector. If any operator shall fall or refuse to collect said tax and to make, within the time provided in this section, any report and remittance of said tax or any portion thereof required by this section, the tax collector shall proceed in such manner as he may deem best to obtain facts and information on which to base his estimate of the tax due. As soon as the tax collector shall procure such facts and information as he is able to obtain upon which to base the assessment of any tax imposed by this section and payable by any operator who has failed or refused to collect the same and to make such report and remittance, he shall proceed to determine and assess against such operator the tax, interest and penalties provided for by this section. 
G.  Notice. If the tax collector makes a determination pursuant to this section, he shall give a notice of the amount so assessed, either by serving such notice personally or by depositing it in the United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the operator so assessed at his last known place of business. 
H.  Application for Hearing. Within ten days after the serving upon any operator of such notice, such operator may apply in writing to the tax collector for a hearing on the amount assessed. If application by the operator for a hearing is not made within the time prescribed, the tax, interest and penalties, if any, determined by the tax collector shall become final and conclusive and immediately due and payable. 
I.  Hearing by Tax Collector. If such application is made, the tax collector shall give not less than five days' written notice in the manner prescribed herein to the operator to show cause at a time and place fixed in said notice why said amount specified therein should not be fixed for such tax, interest and penalties. At such hearing, the operator may appear and offer evidence why such specified tax, interest and penalties should not be fixed. After such hearing, the tax collector shall determine the proper tax to be remitted and shall thereafter give written notice to the person in the manner prescribed herein of such determination and the amount of such tax, interest and penalties. The amount determined to be due shall be payable after fifteen (15) days unless an appeal is taken as provided in Section 3.10.070. 
(Ord. 271 § 2 (part), 1998) 
3.10.070 - Appeal. 
A.  Notice of Appeal. Any operator deeming himself aggrieved by any decision of the tax collector with respect to the amount of the tax, interest and penalties, if any, may appeal to the council by filing a notice of appeal with the city clerk within fifteen (15) days of the serving or mailing of the determination of the tax due. 
B.  Notice of Hearing. Upon the filing of a notice of appeal, the council shall fix a time and place for hearing such appeal and the city clerk shall give not less than five days' notice in writing, either personally or by United States mail, postage prepaid, to the last known address of the operator. 
C.  Appointment of Referee. The council may appoint a referee to take testimony at any hearing provided for in this section, and to report his findings and recommendations to the council. Neither the tax collector nor any officer or employee in the office of the tax collector may be appointed referee. 
D.  Compensation of Referee. If the council appoints a city officer or city employee to act as referee, he shall serve as such without any additional compensation. All time spent as a referee shall be considered as time spent by such officer or employee in performing the duties of his position. 
E.  Conduct of Hearing. At the time set for the hearing or at the date to which the hearing may be continued by the council or referee, the council or referee shall hear the appellant and any other competent witnesses and decide whether the determination of the tax collector was correct or not and, if not, what tax, interest, or penalties, if any are due to the city from the appellant. The Council or referee may place any witness, including the appellant, under oath. 
F.  Decision on Appeal. The council shall determine from the evidence or from the report of the referee, what tax, interest, or penalties, if any, are due to the city from the appellant. This decision shall be final and conclusive. The city clerk shall serve a copy of the decision upon the appellant as provided in Section 3.10.070(B). Any amount due shall be immediately due and payable upon the service of the said notice. 
(Ord. 271 § 2 (part), 1998) 
3.10.080 - Refunds. 
    Whenever the amount of any tax, interest or penalty has been overpaid or paid more than once or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city under this chapter, the operator so paying may have such amount applied to subsequent taxes due or it may be refunded as provided in this section if, within three years after the date of payment the operator files with the tax collector in writing, a claim therefor. In such claim the operator shall state, under penalty of perjury, the specific grounds and specific facts upon which the claim is founded. The claims shall be on forms furnished by the tax collector. 
A.  Credit to Operator. An operator may take as credit against subsequent taxes, the amount overpaid, paid more than once, or erroneously or illegally collected or received when it is established in a manner prescribed by the tax collector that the person from whom the tax was collected was not a transient and the amount of the tax so collected has either been refunded to the transient or credited to rent subsequently payable by the transient to the operator. 
B.  Refund to Operator. When an operator establishes a right to a credit as provided in this section, and also shows to the satisfaction of the tax collector either that he no longer is operating a hotel in the city or will cease such operation before the credit can be applied, and files a proper claim therefor, in lieu of such credit the city shall refund to such operator the amount overpaid, paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected or received. 
C.  Refund to Guest. A transient or other guest of a hotel may obtain a refund of taxes overpaid or paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city by filing a claim in the manner provided in this section, if the tax was paid by the transient or other guest directly to the tax collector, or if the transient or other guest has paid the tax to the operator, and establishes to the satisfaction of the tax collector that the transient or other guest has been unable to obtain a refund from the operator who collected the tax. 
D.  Written Records. A refund shall not be paid pursuant to this section unless the claimant establishes his right thereto by written records showing that he is entitled thereto. 
(Ord. 271 § 2 (part), 1998) 
3.10.090 - Civic actions. 
A.  Debt Due from Transient. Any tax required to be paid by any transient under the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a debt owed by the transient to the city. 
B.  Debt Due from Operator. Any tax collected from a transient by an operator pursuant to the provisions of this chapter which has not been paid to the city shall be deemed a debt owed by the operator to the city. 
C.  Actions to Collect. The tax collector, in the name of the city, as plaintiff, may bring suit for the recovery of this section. 
D.  Responsibility. Any tax required to be paid by any transient under the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a debt owed by the transient to the city. Any such tax collected by an operator which has not been paid to the city shall be deemed a debt owed by the operator to the city. Any person owing money to the city under the provisions of this chapter shall be liable to an action brought in the name of the city for the recovery of such amount. 
E.  Recording Certificate-Lien. If any amount required to be paid to the city under this chapter is not paid when due, the tax collector may, within three years after the amount is due, file for record in the office of San Bernardino County recorder a certificate specifying the amount of tax, penalties and interest due, the name and address as it appears on the records of the tax collector of the operator liable for the same and the fact that the tax collector has complied with all provisions of this chapter in the determination of the amount required to be paid. From the time of the filing for record, the amount required to be paid together with penalties and interest constitutes a lien upon all real property in the city owned by the operator or afterwards and before the lien expires acquired by him. The lien has the force, effect and priority of a judgment lien and shall continue for ten years from the time of filing of the certificate unless sooner released or otherwise discharged. 
F.  Priority and Lien of Tax. The amount required to be paid by any operator under this chapter with penalties and interest shall be satisfied first in any of the following cases: 
1.  Whenever the person is insolvent. 
2.  Whenever the person makes a voluntary assignment of his assets. 
3.  Whenever the estate of the person in the hands of executors, administrators or heirs is insufficient to pay all debts due from the deceased. 
4.  Whenever the estate and effects of an absconding, concealed or absent person required to pay any amount under this chapter are levied upon by process of law. This chapter does not give the city a preference over any recorded lien which attached prior to the date when the amounts required to be paid became a lien. 
    The preference given to the city by this section shall be subordinate to the preference given to claims for personal services by Sections 1204 and 1206 of the Code of Civil Procedure. 
G.  Seizure and Sale. At any time within three years after any operator is delinquent in the payment of any amount, the tax collector may forthwith collect the amount in the following manner: 
    The tax collector shall seize any property, real or personal, of the operator and sell the property, or a sufficient part of it, at public auction to pay the amount due together with any penalties and interest imposed for the delinquency and any costs incurred on account of the seizure and sale. Any seizure made to collect occupancy taxes due shall be only of property of the operator not exempt from execution under the provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure. 
H.  Successor's Liability-Withholding by Purchaser. If any operator liable for any amount under this chapter sells out his business or quits the business, his successor or assignee shall withhold sufficient of the purchase price to cover such amount until the former owner produces a receipt from the tax collector showing that it has been paid or a certificate stating that no amount is due. 
I.  Liability of Purchaser-Release. If the purchaser of a hotel fails to withhold from the purchase price as required, he shall become personally liable for the payment of the amount required to be withheld by him to the extent of the purchase price, valued in money. Within thirty (30) days after receiving a written request from the purchaser for a certificate, or within thirty (30) days from the date the former owner's records are made available for audit, whichever period expires the later, but in any event not later than sixty (60) days after receiving the request, the tax collector shall either issue the certificate or mail notice to purchaser at his address as it appears on the records of the tax collector of the amount that must be paid as a condition of issuing the certificate. Failure of the tax collector to mail the notice will release the purchaser from any further obligation to withhold from the purchase price as above provided. The time within which the obligation of the successor may be enforced shall start to run at the time the operator sells his business or at the time that the determination against the operator becomes final, whichever event occurs the later. 
(Ord. 271 § 2 (part), 1998) 
3.10.100 - Violations-Penalty. 
A.  Misdemeanor. Every person is guilty of a misdemeanor who: 
1.  Fails or refuses to register as required by this chapter. 
2.  Fails or refuses to furnish any return required to be made, or fails or refuses to furnish a supplemental return or other data required by the tax collector. 
3.  Renders a false or fraudulent return. 
4.  If required by this chapter to make, render, sign or verify any report or claim, makes any false or fraudulent report or claim with intent to defeat or evade the determination of any amount due. 
5.  Collects the tax due pursuant to this chapter from any transient and fails to pay the same to the city. 
6.  Violates in any way any other provision of this chapter. 
B.  Punishment. Violation of any provisions of this section is punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment in the county jail for not more than six months or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. 271 § 2 (part), 1998) 
Chapter 3.12 - REAL PROPERTY TRANSFER TAX 
Sections: 

3.12.010 - Short title. 
    This chapter shall be known as the "Real Property Transfer Tax Ordinance of the City of Hesperia." It is adopted pursuant to the authority contained in Part 6.7 (commencing with Section 11901) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state of California. 
(Ord. 7 § 1, 1988) 
3.12.020 - Imposition. 
    There is imposed on each deed, instrument or writing by which any lands, tenements, or other realty sold within the city shall be granted, assigned, transferred or otherwise conveyed to, or vested in, the purchaser or purchasers, or any other person or persons, by his or their direction, when the consideration or value of the interest or property conveyed (exclusive of the value of any lien or encumbrances remaining thereon at the time of sale) exceeds one hundred dollars ($100.00), a tax at the rate of twenty-seven and one-half cents ($0.275) for each five hundred dollars ($500.00) or fractional part thereof. 
(Ord. 7 § 2, 1988) 
3.12.030 - Payment. 
    Any tax imposed pursuant to Section 3.12.020 shall be paid by any person who makes, signs or issues any document or instrument subject to the tax, or whose use or benefit the same is made, signed or issued. 
(Ord. 7 § 2, 1988) 
3.12.040 - Exemptions. 
    The tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply to: 
A.  Instruments given to secure a debt (Revenue and Taxation Code Section 11921); 
B.  Instruments of the United States or agencies or instrumentalities thereof (Revenue and Taxation Code Section 11922); 
C.  Conveyances under reorganization or adjustment plans (Revenue and Taxation Code Section 11923); 
D.  Exemptions required by Revenue and Taxation Code Sections 11927, 11928 and 11929; 
E.  Conveyances under order of Securities and Exchange Commission (Revenue and Taxation Code Section 11924); 
F.  Transfers of certain partnership property (Revenue and Taxation Code Section 11925); 
G.  Instruments taken in lieu of foreclosure (Revenue and Taxation Code Section 11926); 
As these sections of the Revenue and Taxation Code may be from time to time amended. 
(Ord. 250 Exh. A (part), 1998; Ord. 7 § 4, 1988) 
3.12.050 - Administration. 
    The county recorder shall administer this chapter in conformity with the provisions of Part 6.7 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code and the provisions of any county ordinances adopted pursuant thereto. 
(Ord. 7 § 5, 1988) 
3.12.060 - Claims for refund. 
    Claims for refund of taxes imposed pursuant to this chapter shall be governed by the provisions of Chapter 5 (commencing with Section 5096) of Part 9 of Division 1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state of California. 
(Ord. 7 § 6, 1988) 
Chapter 3.16 - SALES AND USE TAX 
Sections: 

3.16.010 - Short title. 
    This chapter shall be known as the "Uniform Local Sales and Use Tax Ordinance." 
(Ord. 8 § 1, 1988) 
3.16.020 - Rate. 
    The rate of sales tax and use tax imposed by this chapter shall be one percent. 
(Ord. 8 § 2, 1988) 
3.16.030 - Operative date. 
    This chapter shall be operative on July 1, 1988. 
(Ord. 8 § 3, 1988) 
3.16.040 - Purpose. 
    The city council declares this chapter is adopted to achieve the following, among other, purposes, and directs that the provisions hereof be interpreted in order to accomplish those purposes: 
A.  To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which complies with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code; 
B.  To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which incorporates provisions identical to those of the Sales and Use Tax Law of the state of California insofar as those provisions are not inconsistent with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code; 
C.  To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which imposes a tax and provides a measure therefore that can be administered and collected by the State Board of Equalization in a manner that adapts itself as fully as practicable to, and requires the least possible deviation from the existing statutory and administrative procedures followed by the State Board of Equalization in administering and collecting the California State Sales and Use Taxes; 
D.  To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which can be administered in a manner that will, to the degree possible consistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, minimize the cost of collecting city sales and use taxes and at the same time minimize the burden of recordkeeping upon persons subject to taxation under the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 8 § 4, 1988) 
3.16.050 - Contract with state. 
    Prior to the operative date of this chapter, this city shall contract with the State Board of Equalization to perform all functions incident to the administration and operation of the sales and use tax ordinance; provided, that if this city shall not have contracted with the State Board of Equalization prior to the operative date, it shall nevertheless so contract and in such a case the operative date shall be the first day of the first calendar quarter following the adoption of this chapter. 
(Ord. 8 § 5, 1988) 
3.16.060 - Sales tax. 
    For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail, a tax is imposed upon all retailers in the city at the rate stated in Section 3.16.020 of the gross receipts of the retailer from the sale of all tangible personal property sold at retail in this city on and after the operative date. 
(Ord. 8 § 6, 1988) 
3.16.070 - Place of sale. 
    For the purposes of this chapter, all retail sales are consummated at the place of business of the retailer unless the tangible personal property sold is delivered by the retailer or his agent to an out-of-state destination or to a common carrier for delivery to an out-of-state destination. The gross receipts from such sales shall include delivery charges, when such charges are subject to the state sales and use tax, regardless of the place to which delivery is made. In the event a retailer has no permanent place of business in the state or has more than one place of business, the place or places at which the retail sales are consummated shall be determined under rules and regulations to be prescribed and adopted by the State Board of Equalization. 
(Ord. 8 § 7, 1988) 
3.16.080 - Use tax. 
    An excise tax is imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in this city of tangible personal property purchased from any retailer on and after the operative date for storage, use or other consumption in this city at the rate stated in Section 3.16.020 of the sales price of the property. The sales price shall include delivery charges when such charges are subject to state sales or use tax regardless of the place to which delivery is made. 
(Ord. 8 § 8, 1988) 
3.16.090 - Adoption of provisions of state law. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this chapter and except insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, all of the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code are adopted and made a part of this chapter as though fully set forth herein. 
(Ord. 8 § 9, 1988) 
3.16.100 - Limitations on adoption of state law. 
    In adopting the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, wherever the state of California is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the name of this city shall be substituted therefor. The substitution, however, shall not be made when the word "State" is used as part of the title of the State Controller, the State Treasurer, the State Board of Control, the State Board of Equalization, the State Treasury, or the Constitution of the State of California; the substitution shall not be made when the result of that substitution would require action to be taken by or against the city, or any agency thereof rather than by or against the State Board of Equalization, in performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of this chapter; the substitution shall not be made in those sections, including, but not necessarily limited to, sections referring to the exterior boundaries of the state of California, where the result of the substitution would be to provide an exemption from this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not otherwise be exempt from this tax while such sales, storage, use or other consumption remain subject to tax by the state under the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, or to impose this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not be subject to tax by the state under the provisions of that Code: the substitution shall not be made in Sections 6701, 6702 (except in the last sentence thereof), 6711, 6715, 6737, 6797 or 6828 of the Revenue and Taxation Code; and the substitution shall not be made for the word "State" in the phrase "retailer engaged in business in this State" in Section 6203 or in the definition of that phrase in Section 6203. 
(Ord. 8 § 10, 1988) 
3.16.110 - Permit not required. 
    If a seller's permit has been issued to a retailer under Section 6067 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, an additional seller's permit shall not be required by this chapter. 
(Ord. 8 § 11, 1988) 
3.16.120 - Exclusions and exemptions. 
A.  The amount subject to tax shall not include any sales or use tax imposed by the state of California upon a retailer or consumer. 
B.  The storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property, the gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to tax under a sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code by any city and county, county, or city in this state shall be exempt from the tax due under this chapter. 
C.  There are exempted from the computation of the amount of the sales tax the gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the city in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government. 
D.  In addition to the exemptions provided in Sections 6366 and 6366.1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, the storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government is exempted from the use tax. 
(Ord. 8 § 12, 1988) 
3.16.130 - Amendments. 
    All subsequent amendments of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code which are not inconsistent with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code shall automatically become part of this chapter. This chapter also shall be deemed to adopt by reference the provisions of Sections 7202 to 7203, inclusive, of the Revenue and Taxation Code, as now in effect or as later amended, which are required to be included in this chapter. 
(Ord. 8 § 13, 1988) 
3.16.140 - Enjoining collection forbidden. 
    No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall issue in any suit, action or proceeding in any court against the state or this city, or against any officer of the state or this city, to prevent or enjoin the collection under this chapter, or Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected. 
(Ord. 8 § 14, 1988) 
3.16.150 - Penalties. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; Ord. 8 § 15, 1988) 
3.16.160 - Effective date. 
    This chapter relates to taxes for the usual and current expenses of the city and shall take effect immediately pursuant to the provisions of California Government Code Section 36937(d). 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; Ord. 8 § 17, 1988) 
Chapter 3.18 - CANNABIS BUSINESS TAX 
Sections: 

3.18.010 - Definitions. 
    The following definitions apply to this chapter unless the context clearly denotes otherwise. 
    Terms not defined herein shall be given the definitions set forth in Business and Professions Code 26001. 
A.  "Cannabis" means all parts of the plant Cannabis sativa Linnaeus, Cannabis indica, or Cannabis ruderalis, whether growing or not; the seeds thereof; the resin, whether crude or purified, extracted from any part of the plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant, its seeds, or resin. 'Cannabis' also means the separated resin, whether crude or purified, obtained from cannabis. 'Cannabis' does not include the mature stalks of the plant, fiber produced from the stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of the plant, any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the mature stalks (except the resin extracted therefrom), fiber, oil, or cake, or the sterilized seed of the plant which is incapable of germination. Cannabis includes medicinal cannabis. For the purpose of this chapter, "cannabis" does not mean "industrial hemp" as defined by the Food and Agricultural Code § 81000 or the Health and Safety Code § 11018.5. 
B.  "Cannabis products" means cannabis that has undergone a process whereby the plant material has been transformed into a concentrate, including but not limited to, concentrated cannabis, or an edible or topical product containing cannabis or concentrated cannabis and other ingredients. Cannabis products include medicinal cannabis products. 
C.  "City" means the City of Hesperia. 
D.  "Commercial cannabis activity" or "commercial cannabis operation" includes the cultivation, possession, manufacture, processing, storing, laboratory testing, labeling, transporting, distribution, delivery or sale of cannabis or a cannabis product, except as set forth in Section 16.16.455 ("Personal Cultivation of Cannabis") of this Code or as preempted by state law. 
E.  "Cultivation" means any activity involving the planting, growing, harvesting, drying, curing, grading, or trimming of cannabis. 
F.  "Delivery" means the commercial transfer of cannabis or cannabis products to a customer, and includes the use of any technology platform owned and controlled by the same person making such use. 
G.  "Distribution" means the procurement, sale, and transport of cannabis and cannabis products between entities licensed for and/or engaged in commercial cannabis activities. 
H.  "Distributor" means a person engaged in distribution. 
I.  "Edible cannabis product" means manufactured cannabis that is intended to be used, in whole or in part, for human consumption, including, but not limited to, chewing gum, but excluding products set forth in Division 15 (commencing with Section 32501) of the Food and Agricultural Code. An edible cannabis product is not considered food as defined by the Health and Safety Code § 109935 or a drug as defined by the Health and Safety Code § 109925. 
J.  "Finance director" means the city's finance director, and includes his/her designee(s). 
K.  "Location" means any parcel of land, whether vacant or occupied by a building, group of buildings, or accessory buildings, and includes the buildings, structures, yards, open spaces, lot width, and lot area. 
L.  "Manufacture" or "manufacturing" means to compound, blend, extract, infuse, extract or otherwise make or prepare a cannabis product, including manufactured cannabis. 
M.  "Manufactured cannabis" means raw cannabis that has undergone a process whereby the raw agricultural product has been transformed into a concentrate, an edible product, or a topical product. 
N.  "Manufacturer" means a person that conducts the production, preparation, propagation, or compounding of manufactured cannabis, cannabis or cannabis products, or cannabis products either directly or indirectly or by extraction methods, or independently by means of chemical synthesis or by a combination of extraction and chemical synthesis at a fixed location that packages or repackages cannabis or cannabis products or labels or relabels its container. 
O.  "Marijuana" has the same definition as provided for "cannabis" in this chapter. 
P.  "Operation" means a "commercial cannabis operation" as defined by this chapter. 
Q.  "Permit," or "local permit" means an official document granted by the city that specifically authorizes a person to conduct commercial cannabis activity in the city. 
R.  "Person" means any individual, firm, co-partnership, joint venture, association, corporation, limited liability company, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, syndicate, cooperative, collective or any other group or combination acting as a unit. 
S.  "Proceeds" means total amount of gross revenue actually received or receivable by a commercial cannabis operation from all sales of goods of any kind, including but not limited to cannabis and cannabis products; the total amount of compensation actually received or receivable for the performance of any act or service whatever nature it may be, including but not limited to commercial cannabis activity, from which a charge is made or credit allowed, whether such service is done singly and/or as part of or in connection with the sale of materials; goods, wares or merchandise; discounts, rents royalties, fees, commissions, dividends or other gains. Proceeds includes all receipts, cash, credits and property of any kind or nature, consideration of any nature, without any deduction therefrom on account of the cost of property sold, the cost of materials used, labor or services costs, interest paid or payable or losses or other expenses or deduction whatsoever. Excluded from proceeds are any taxes required by law to be added to the purchase and collected from the consumer or purchaser, such part of the sales price of any property returned by the purchaser to the seller as refunded by the seller by way of cash or credit allowances or return of refundable deposits previously included in proceeds. Proceeds may also exclude such other amounts that may be permitted by the finance director as not being included in proceeds pursuant to administrative rulings or instructions provided by the finance director. "Proceeds" is intended to include all gross revenue of the commercial operation whether for commercial cannabis activities or other activities (e.g., revenue from sales of other goods at the location). 
T.  "Retailer" means a person engaged in the retail sale or delivery of cannabis or cannabis products to a customer. A retailer may be a storefront or non-storefront retailer. 
U.  "Space utilized as cultivation area" shall mean any space or ground, floor or other surface area (whether horizontal or vertical) which is used during the cannabis germination, seedling, vegetative, pre-flowering, flowering and/or harvesting phases, including without limitation any space used for activities such as growing, planting, seeding, germinating, lighting, warming, cooling, aerating, fertilizing, watering, irrigating, topping, pinching, cropping, trimming, curing or drying cannabis or any such space available for or used for storing any products, supplies or equipment related to any such activities, no matter where such storage may take place or such storage space may be located. Space used as cultivation area shall include space used to cultivate cannabis plants on platforms and stack them in multiple layers on top of each other (i.e., vertical cultivation). Space utilized as cultivation area shall be calculated in square feet and measured using clearly identifiable and/or apparent boundaries, including all of the space within the boundaries. Such space may be noncontiguous but each unique area included in the total calculation shall be separated by an identifiable and/or apparent boundary, including but not limited to, interior walls, shelves, and greenhouse walls, nursery wall or canopy walls, hoop house walls, garden benches, hedgerows, fencing, garden beds, or garden plots. Space used as cultivation area includes space which is immediately available for the activities described herein even if not being used at the time of determination. The building official or the principal planner of the city or his/her designee shall determine the space utilized as cultivation area during the initial term of the operation, and at least annually thereafter. 
V.  "Tax" means the commercial cannabis tax and commercial cannabis cultivation tax imposed by this chapter. 
W.  "Term" means such term or period of time as may be designated by the finance director for reporting or payment of tax, provided, however, that if no such term is designated, term shall mean a calendar month (meaning that the annual tax shall be divided by twelve (12) for the appropriate fiscal year). Notwithstanding the foregoing, the term for payment of tax may be set on a monthly, quarterly, semi-annual or annual basis by the finance director. Taxes may be prorated to the extent the finance director provides for a term other than that specified above, to the extent a commercial cannabis operation commences on a date other than the first date of a term, upon cessation of the business, or for other appropriate reasons. 
X.  "Testing laboratory" refers to a laboratory, facility, or entity that offers or performs tests on cannabis or cannabis products; "Testing" includes the activity of laboratory testing of cannabis and cannabis products. 
(Ord. No. 2018-08, § 1, 11-6-18) 
3.18.020 - Tax. 
A.  Commercial Cannabis Tax (non-cultivation). Every person conducting a commercial cannabis operation other than cultivation in the city, regardless of whether such operation has a valid permit pursuant to this Code, shall pay, on a per-term basis, a commercial cannabis tax (non-cultivation) of not less than one percent and not more than six percent of the proceeds of the commercial cannabis operation. 
B.  Commercial Cannabis Cultivation Tax. Every person conducting a commercial cannabis operation involving cultivation in the city, regardless of whether such operation has a valid permit pursuant to this Code, shall pay a maximum commercial cannabis cultivation tax of no more than fifteen dollars ($15.00) per square foot per fiscal year (July 1 to June 30) for space utilized as cultivation area. Taxes imposed on space utilized as cultivation area shall be adjusted annually on July 1 of each year, commencing July 1, 2020, after the date of imposition based on changes in the Consumer Price Index ("CPI") for all urban consumers in the Riverside-San Bernardino-Ontario areas (or similar index) as published by the United States Government Bureau of Labor Statistics for the prior calendar year; provided, however, no adjustment shall decrease any maximum tax imposed by this chapter. 
C.  Purpose of Tax. The revenue generated by the commercial cannabis tax and the commercial cannabis cultivation tax may be spent for unrestricted general revenue purposes. 
D.  Intent of Tax. The taxes provided for in this chapter do not authorize any commercial cannabis operation or use that is not otherwise expressly allowed by this Code. The taxes provided for in this chapter are intended to both allow the city to levy the taxes on commercial cannabis operations and uses that are authorized or allowed in the city as of the date of enactment of this chapter and to provide the city with the ability to levy the taxes on potential future commercial cannabis operations and uses that may after enactment of this chapter be allowed in the city by local ordinance or initiative. The taxes imposed by this chapter are in addition to all other applicable taxes imposed by this Code, including, but not limited to, the sales and use tax imposed by Chapter 3.16 of Title 3 and the business license fees imposed by Chapter 5.04 of Title 5. 
E.  Automatic Maximum Rates. The tax rates of the commercial cannabis tax (non-cultivation) and the commercial cannabis cultivation tax shall automatically be set at the maximum rates specified in this chapter each July 1 unless established otherwise at a lower rate by resolution or ordinance of the city council. 
F.  Authority to Levy Tax at Lower than Maximum Authorized Rate. The city council may, at any time, by resolution or ordinance and without voter approval, levy the tax at any rate lower than the maximum rate authorized by this chapter; provided, however: (i) the maximum tax rate permitted to be levied without further voter approval shall be and remain the maximum tax rate set forth in this chapter; and (ii) the commercial cannabis tax (non-cultivation) shall not be levied at a rate lower than one percent. 
G.  Future Exemptions, Exceptions, Penalties and Interest Permitted. The city council may establish exemptions, incentives, or other reductions, and penalties and interest charges or determinations of tax due for failure to pay the tax in a timely manner, as otherwise allowed by this Code or California law. No action by the city council under this section shall prevent it from later increasing the tax or removing any exemption, incentive, or reduction, and thereby restoring the maximum tax specified in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2018-08, § 1, 11-6-18) 
3.18.030 - Operation of Tax. 
A.  Failure to pay the taxes set forth in this chapter shall be subject to penalties, interest charges, and determinations of tax due as set forth in this chapter and as the city council may establish, and the city may use any or all other enforcement remedies provided for in this Code, or pursuant to state law. 
B.  The payment of the tax required pursuant to this chapter shall not be construed as authorizing the conduct or continuance of any illegal business or of a legal business in an illegal manner. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to authorize commercial cannabis operations. 
C.  Taxes provided for hereunder are not sales or use taxes and shall not be calculated or assessed as such. The taxes shall not be separately identified or otherwise specifically assessed or charged to any individual, consumer or customer; rather, the taxes are imposed upon the commercial cannabis operation. 
D.  The finance director shall promulgate rules, regulations, and procedures to implement and administer this chapter to ensure the efficient and timely collection of the tax imposed by this chapter, including without limitation, formulation and implementation of penalties and interest to be assessed for failure to pay the tax as provided. 
(Ord. No. 2018-08, § 1, 11-6-18) 
3.18.040 - Returns and Remittances. 
    The tax shall be due and payable as follows: 
A.  Each person owing tax, within forty-five (45) days (or such other period as may be established by the finance director) after the conclusion of each term, shall prepare and submit a tax return to the finance director. The tax return shall include all information necessary to determine the amount of tax owed for the subject term, including the proceeds of the commercial cannabis operation (for all operations other than cultivation) and the total square footage of space utilized as cultivation area, for cultivation operations. At the time the tax return is filed, the full amount of the tax owed for the preceding term shall be remitted to the city. Where the term is set on an annual basis, the finance director may require prorated payments or estimated tax payments on more frequent intervals during the term, as such intervals may be established by the finance director. 
B.  All tax returns shall be completed on forms provided by the finance director. 
C.  Tax returns and payments for all outstanding taxes owed the city are immediately due to the finance director upon cessation of business of a commercial cannabis operation for any reason or upon sale of a commercial cannabis operation. 
D.  Whenever any payment, statement, report, request or other communication received by the finance director is received after the time prescribed by this section for the receipt thereof, but is in an envelope bearing a postmark showing that it was mailed on or prior to the date prescribed in this section for the receipt thereof, or whenever the finance director is furnished substantial proof that the payment, statement, report, request, or other communication was in fact deposited in the United States mail on or prior to the date prescribed for receipt thereof, the finance director may regard such payment, statement, report, request, or other communication as having been timely received. If the due date falls on a date the city hall is closed, or on a Saturday, Sunday, or federal holiday, the due date shall be the next regular business day on which the city hall is open to the public following the due date. 
E.  Unless otherwise specified in this chapter, taxes shall be deemed delinquent if not paid on or before the due date pursuant to this section. 
F.  The finance director is not required to send a delinquency or other notice or bill to any person subject to payment of tax pursuant to this chapter, and failure to send such notice or bill shall not affect the validity of any tax or penalty due under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2018-08, § 1, 11-6-18) 
3.18.050 - Failure to pay tax. 
    Any person who fails or refuses to pay any tax required to be paid pursuant to this chapter on or before the due date shall pay penalties and interest as follows: 
A.  A penalty of no more than twenty-five (25) percent of the amount of tax remaining unpaid (in addition to the amount of unpaid tax), plus interest on the unpaid tax calculated from the due date of the tax at a rate not to exceed twelve (12) percent per year (or one percent per month), and these penalties and interest rates will automatically be set at the maximum amounts unless established otherwise as a lower amount by resolution of the city council. 
B.  Whenever a check is submitted in payment of a tax and the check is subsequently returned unpaid by the bank upon which the check is drawn, and the check is not redeemed prior to the due date, the taxpayer will be liable for the tax amount due plus penalties and interest as provided for in this section, as well as any other amount allowed under state law. 
C.  The tax due shall be that amount due and payable from the operative date of this chapter. 
D.  The finance director may waive the penalties of up to twenty-five (25) percent each imposed upon any person if: 
1.  The person provides evidence satisfactory to the finance director that failure to pay timely was due to circumstances beyond the control of the person and occurred notwithstanding the exercise of ordinary care and the absence of willful neglect, and the person paid the delinquent tax and accrued interest owed the city prior to applying to the finance director for a waiver. 
2.  The waiver provisions specified in this subsection shall not apply to interest accrued on delinquent tax, and a waiver shall be granted no more than once during any twenty-four (24) month period for any given payor of commercial cannabis tax (non-cultivation), and no more than once during any five year period for any given payor of commercial cannabis cultivation tax. 
(Ord. No. 2018-08, § 1, 11-6-18) 
3.18.060 - Refunds and Claims. 
A.  No refund or claim shall be made of any tax collected pursuant to this chapter, except as provided in this section. 
B.  No refund of any tax collected pursuant to this chapter shall be made because of the discontinuation, dissolution, or other termination of an operation. 
C.  Any person entitled to a refund of taxes paid pursuant to this chapter may elect in writing to have such refund applied as a credit against cannabis business taxes for the next term. 
D.  Whenever the amount of any tax, penalty, or interest has been overpaid, paid more than once, or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city under this chapter, such amount may be refunded to the claimant who paid the tax, provided that a written claim for refund is filed with the finance director if the claim is equal to or less than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) and the city council if the claim is more than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00). Refund claims must be filed as set forth above within one year of the subject tax payment pursuant to Government Code Section 911.2. Each person requesting a refund or making a claim shall file the claim as provided herein. The submission of a written claim, which shall be acted upon by the finance director if less than or equal to five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) or the city council if more than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), shall be a prerequisite to suit thereon. (See Section 935 of the California Government Code). The finance director, or the city council where the claim is in excess of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), shall act upon the refund claim within the time period set forth in Government Code Section 912.4. If the city council fails or refuses to act on a refund claim within the time prescribed by Government Section 912.4, the claim shall be deemed to have been rejected by the city council on the last day of the period within which the city council was required to act upon the claim as provided in Government Code Section 912.4. The finance director or city clerk or other officer charged with such duty shall give notice of the action in a form that substantially complies with that set forth in Government Code Section 913. To the extent allowed by law, nothing herein shall permit the filing of a claim on behalf of a class or group of taxpayers unless each member of the class has submitted a written claim as provided by this Section 3.18.060. 
E.  The finance director shall have the right and authority to examine and audit all the books and business records of the claimant in order to determine the eligibility of the claimant to the claimed refund. No claim for refund shall be allowed if the claimant therefor refuses to allow such examination of claimant's books and business records after request by the finance director to do so. The authorization herein shall extend to any agent hired by the city to audit the books, including an independent auditor. 
F.  In the event that the tax was erroneously paid and the error is attributable to the city, the entire amount of the tax erroneously paid shall be refunded to the claimant. If the error is attributable to the claimant, the city shall retain the amount set forth in this chapter from the amount to be refunded to cover expenses. 
G.  The finance director shall initiate a refund of any tax which has been overpaid or erroneously collected whenever the overpayment or erroneous collection is revealed by a city audit of tax receipts. In the event that the tax was erroneously paid and the error is attributable to the city, the entire amount of the tax erroneously paid shall be refunded to the claimant. If the error is attributable to the claimant, the city shall retain the amount set forth in this chapter from the amount to be refunded to cover expenses. 
(Ord. No. 2018-08, § 1, 11-6-18) 
3.18.070 - Enforcement. 
A.  It shall be the duty of the finance director to enforce each and all of the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  For purposes of administration and enforcement of this chapter generally, the finance director, with the assistance of the city attorney, may from time to time promulgate administrative rules and regulations. 
C.  The finance director shall have the power to audit and examine all books and records of operations as well as persons engaged in the conducting of an operation, including both state and federal income tax returns, California sales tax returns, logs, receipts, bank records, or other evidence documenting the proceeds of the operation and/or space utilized as cultivation area, or persons engaged in the conduct of an operation, for the purpose of ascertaining the amount of tax, if any, required to be paid by the provisions of this chapter, and for the purpose of verifying any statements or any item thereof when filed by any person pursuant to this chapter. If such operation or person, after written demand by the finance director, refuses to make available for audit, examination or verification such books, records, or equipment as the finance director requests, the finance director may, after full consideration of all information within the finance director's knowledge concerning the operation and activities of the person so refusing, make a determination of tax due in the manner provided in Section 3.18.080. 
D.  The finance director shall have the power to enter upon the premises upon reasonable notice to the commercial cannabis operation at least once per term for the purposes of determining space utilized as cultivation area, to review items requested in subsection C of this section or as otherwise needed for enforcement of this chapter. 
E.  The conviction and punishment of any person for failure to pay the required tax shall not excuse or exempt such person from any civil action for the tax debt unpaid at the time of such conviction. No civil action shall prevent a criminal prosecution for any violation of the provisions of this chapter or of any state law requiring the payment of all taxes. 
F.  Any person violating any provision of this chapter or any regulation or rule passed in accordance herewith, or knowingly or intentionally misrepresenting to any officer or employee of the city any material fact, either concerning the operation and administration of this chapter, or as provided for in this chapter, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the city attorney/prosecutor, in his or her discretion, may elect to charge and prosecute any violation as an infraction in lieu of a misdemeanor or to not charge and prosecute at all. 
(Ord. No. 2018-08, § 1, 11-6-18) 
3.18.080 - Debts; deficiencies; determinations; hearings. 
A.  The amount of any tax, penalties, and interest imposed by this chapter shall be deemed a debt to the city, and any person conducting an operation without also making payment to the city of the taxes, penalties and interest imposed by this chapter shall be liable in an action in the name of the city in any court of competent jurisdiction for the full amount of the tax, and penalties and interest owed by such operation. 
B.  If the finance director is not satisfied that any statement filed as required by this chapter is correct, or that the amount of tax is correctly computed, the finance director may compute and determine the amount to be paid and make a deficiency determination upon the basis of the facts contained in the statement or upon the basis of any information in his or her possession or that may come into his or her possession. One or more deficiency determinations of the amount of tax due for a period or periods may be made. When a person ceases or discontinues an operation, a deficiency determination may be made at any time within three years thereafter as to any liability arising from engaging in such business whether or not a deficiency determination is issued prior to the date the tax would otherwise be due. 
C.  Under any of the following circumstances, the finance director may make and give notice of a determination of the amount of tax owed by a person under this chapter: 
1.  If the person has not filed any statement or return required by this chapter. 
2.  If the person has not paid any tax due under the provisions of this chapter. 
3.  If the person has not, after demand by the finance director, filed a corrected statement or return, or furnished to the finance director adequate substantiation of the information contained in a statement or return already filed, or paid any additional amount of tax due under this chapter. 
4.  If the finance director determines that the nonpayment of any tax due under this chapter is due to fraud, a penalty of twenty-five (25) percent of the amount of the tax shall be added thereto in addition to penalties and interest otherwise stated in this chapter. 
5.  The notice of determination shall separately set forth the amount of any tax known or estimated by the finance director, after consideration of all information within his or her knowledge concerning the business and activities of the person assessed, to be due under this chapter, and such notice shall include the amount of any penalties or interest accrued on each amount to the date of the notice of determination. 
6.  The notice of determination shall be served upon the person either by handing it to him or her personally, or by a deposit of the notice in the United States mail, postage prepaid thereon, addressed to the person at the address of the location of the business appearing on the face of the business tax certificate issued under this Code or to such other address as such person shall register with the finance director for the purpose of receiving notices provided under this chapter; or, should the person have no business tax certificate issued and should the person have no address registered with the finance director for such purpose, then to such person's last known address. For the purposes of this section, a service by mail is complete at the time of deposit in the United States mail. 
D.  Within ten days after the date of service of a notice of determination of the amount of tax owed by a person under this chapter, or other determination of the finance director pursuant to subsection (5), the person may apply in writing to the finance director for a hearing on the determination. If application for a hearing before the city is not timely made, the tax assessed by the finance director shall become final. The procedures for such a hearing shall be conducted as required by law and as follows: 
1.  The city council delegates its authority to conduct such a hearing on the determination to an independent hearing officer. The compensation of the hearing officer shall not depend on any particular outcome of the appeal. The hearing officer shall have full authority and duty to preside over the hearing on the determination in the manner set forth herein and as required by law. 
2.  Within thirty (30) days of the receipt of any such application for hearing, the finance director shall cause the matter to be set for hearing before the independent hearing officer, unless a later date is agreed to by the finance director and the person requesting the hearing. 
3.  Notice of the hearing shall be given by the finance director to the person requesting the hearing not later than five days prior to the date of the hearing. For good cause, the hearing officer may continue the administrative hearing from time to time. At the hearing, the applicant may appear and offer evidence to show why the determination of the finance director should not be confirmed and fixed as the tax due or the other determination of the finance director pursuant to subsection (5). In conducting the hearing, the hearing officer shall not be limited by the technical rules of evidence. Failure of the person who applied for a hearing on the determination to appear shall not affect the validity of the proceedings or order issued thereon. 
4.  Upon conclusion of the hearing, or no later than ten days after the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer shall determine and reassess the proper tax to be charged or make such other determination as provided in subsection (5) and shall give written notice to the person in the manner prescribed in this chapter for giving notice of determination, and the hearing officer shall submit its decision and the record to the city clerk. The decision of the hearing officer shall be final. 
5.  The provisions of this section apply to any decision, deficiency determination, assessment, or other decision or ruling of the finance director, except decisions made pursuant to Section 3.18.060 (Refunds and Claims). Any person aggrieved by any decision subject to this section shall comply with the hearing procedure of this section. Pursuant to Government Code Section 935(b), compliance with this section shall be a prerequisite to a suit thereon. To the extent allowed by law, nothing herein shall permit the filing of a claim or action on behalf of a class or group of taxpayers. 
(Ord. No. 2018-08, § 1, 11-6-18) 
3.18.090 - City council authority to amend. 
    The city council has the right and authority to amend this chapter, to further its purposes and intent (including but not limited to amendment for more efficient administration as determined by the city council), in any manner that does not increase a tax rate, or otherwise constitute a tax increase for which voter approval is required by Article XIII C of the California Constitution, pursuant to Elections Code Section 9217. 
(Ord. No. 2018-08, § 1, 11-6-18) 
Chapter 3.20 - FEE AND SERVICE CHARGE REVENUE/COST COMPARISON SYSTEM 
Sections: 

3.20.010 - Findings and intent. 
A.  Pursuant to Article XIIIB of the California Constitution, it is the intent of the city council to require the ascertainment and recovery of costs reasonably borne from fees, charges and regulatory license fees levied therefore in providing the regulation, products or services hereinafter enumerated in this chapter. 
B.  The fee and service charge revenue/cost comparison system set forth in this chapter provides a mechanism for ensuring that fees adopted by the city for services rendered do not exceed the reasonable estimated cost for providing the services for which the fees are charged. 
C.  The adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter is exempt from the California Environmental Quality Act (Public Resources Code Sections 2100 et seq.), because it approves and sets forth a procedure for determining fees for the purpose of meeting the operating expenses of city departments, as set forth in Public Resources Code Section 21080 (b)(8)(1). 
(Ord. 107 § 1, 1991) 
3.20.020 - Delegation of authority and direction to manager. 
A.  The city manager is delegated the authority and directed to provide documents to the city council to implement its herein enumerated policy to adjust fees and charges to recover the percentage of costs reasonably borne as established in this chapter, in providing the regulation, product or service enumerated in this chapter in the percentage of costs reasonably borne and on the schedule of rate review and revision as hereinafter established in this chapter. 
B.  The city manager is delegated authority to issue executive orders defining terms, setting out administrative fee collection and financial procedures, definitions, and establishing effective dates of all fees set by the city council by resolution. The city manager shall provide for effective dates for fees set by the city council which are as early as is practically feasible considering administrative impediments. All executive orders shall be originated and signed by the affected department head, shall be signed by the finance director certifying that the financial requirements of this chapter are complied with, and shall be signed by the city manager connoting the effective date of the executive order and new or revised rated structure, procedure or definition. 
C.  "Costs reasonably borne" shall be as defined in Section 3.20.030. In adjusting fees and charges, the city manager shall act in an administrative and ministerial capacity and shall consider only the standards and criteria established by this chapter, and the procedures set hereby and by applicable state law. All executive orders issued hereunder shall comply in all respects with this chapter and the several schedules of fees and rates as set by the city council by resolution. 
(Ord. 107 § 2, 1991) 
3.20.030 - "Costs reasonably borne" defined. 
    "Costs reasonably borne," as used and ordered to be applied in this chapter are to consist of the following elements: 
A.  All applicable direct costs including, but not limited to salaries, wages, overtime, employee fringe benefits, services and supplies, maintenance and operation expenses, contracted services, special supplies, and any other direct expense incurred; 
B.  All applicable indirect costs including, but not restricted to building maintenance and operations, equipment maintenance and operations, communications expenses, computer costs, printing and reproduction, vehicle expenses, insurance, debt service, and like expenses when distributed on an accounted and documented rational proration system; 
C.  Fixed asset recovery expenses, consisting of depreciation of fixed assets, and additional fixed asset expense recovery charges calculated on the current estimated cost of replacement, divided by the approximate life expectancy of the fixed asset. A further additional charge to make up the difference between book value depreciation not previously recovered and reserved in cash and the full cost of replacement, also shall be calculated and considered a cost so as to recover such unrecovered costs between book value and cost of replacement over the remaining life of the asset; 
D.  General overhead, expressed as a percentage, distributing and charging the expenses of the city council, city attorney, city administration, city clerk, city treasurer, economic development, finance department, personnel office, and city promotion, and all other staff and support service provided to the entire city organization. Overhead shall be prorated between tax-financed services and fee-financed services on the basis of said percentage so that each of taxes and fees and charges shall proportionately defray such overhead costs; 
E.  Departmental overhead, expressed as a percentage, distributing and charging the cost of each department head and his or her supporting expenses as enumerated in subsections (A), (B), (C), and (F) of this section; 
F.  Debt service costs, consisting of repayment of principal, payment of interest, and trustee fees and administrative expenses for all applicable bond, certificate, note or securities issued or loans of whatever nature or kind. Any required coverage factors or required or established reserves beyond basic debt service costs also shall be considered a cost if required by covenant within any securities ordinance, resolution, indenture or general law applicable to the city. 
(Ord. 107 § 3, 1991) 
3.20.040 - Schedule of fees and service charges. 
A.  The city manager, finance director and each city department head, under the direction of the city manager, shall review annually the fees and service charges listed following, and provide an adjusted fee or charge schedule to the city council for its consideration so as to recover the listed percentage of costs reasonably borne necessary to provide the listed regulation, product or service. 
Regulation, Product or Service Percentage of Costs Reasonably Borne To Be Recovered I. Development Services: 1. Building Plan Check effective 07/01/91 - 100% 2. Building Inspection ..... 100% 3. Municipal Code Enforcement ..... 0% 4. Lot Grading Plan Check/Inspection ..... 66% Effective 07/01/91 - 85% Effective 01/01/92 - 100% 5. Special Inspector Training ..... 100% 6. Professional Report Review ..... 100% 7. General Plan Amendment ..... 100% 8. Zone Change Review ..... 100% 9. Zoning Code Amendment Review ..... 100% 10. Conditional Use Review ..... 73% Effective 01/01/92 - 100% 11. Variance Review ..... 100% 12. Home Occupation Review and Special 
Use Permit; Dependent Housing/Exotic 
Animals Renewal Review ..... 100% 13. Specific Plan Review ..... 69% Effective 01/01/92 - 100% 14. Environmental Impact Staff Review ..... 90% 15. Tentative Tract Map Review ..... 100% 16. Tentative Parcel Map Review ..... 100% 17. Development Agreement Prep/Review ..... 100% 18. Lot Line Adjustment Review/Lot Merger ..... 100% 20. Special Event Review ..... 100% 21. Temporary Use Review ..... 100% 22. Certificate of Occupancy ..... 100% 23. Certificate of Compliance Review ..... 100% 24. Appeal Processing ..... 100% 24A. Public Hearing Processing ..... 100% 25. Project Revision Request 
Review ..... 60%-100% Effective 01/01/92 - 100%-100% 26. Site Plan Review (P.P.D.) ..... 100% 27. Project Extension Review ..... 100% 27A. Planning Commission 
Determination ..... 50% Effective 01/01/92 - 100% 27B. Minor Exception Review ..... 44% Effective 01/01/92 - 100% 27C. Nonconforming Use Alteration Request ..... 44% Effective 01/01/92 - 100% 28. Zoning Information Inquiry Response ..... 24% Effective 07/01/91 - 50% Effective 01/01/92 - 100% 28A. Reversion to Acreage ..... 100% 28B. Prezoning ..... 100% 28C. Annexation ..... 100% 28D. Preliminary Review ..... 100% 28E. Political Signs ..... 100% 29. Final Subdivision Map Processing ..... 100% 30. Final Parcel Map Processing ..... 100% 31. Construction Review/Inspection ..... 100% 32. Wide/Overload Permit Review ..... 100% 33. Public Improvement Plan Check ..... 100% 34. Grading Plan Check ..... 100% 37. PW Construction Inspection ..... 100% 38. Street Vacation Review ..... 60% Effective 01/01/92 - 100% 39. Special Traffic Marking ..... 100% 40. Analysis of Legal Document ..... 100% II. Public Safety Services: 46. Animal Regulation ..... 63% 50. Hazard Abatement ..... 100% 50A. Inspection Outside Normal Hours ..... 100% 50B. Organic Coatings Applications ..... 100% 50C. Public Fireworks Displays ..... 100% 50D. Radioactive Materials Storage or Use ..... 100% 50E. Reinspections (One Reinspection Free, Applies to Second and Subsequent Reinspections) ..... 100% 50F. Rifle Range Permit ..... 100% 50G. Special Event Inspection ..... 100% 51. Hazardous Waste Spill Clean-up ..... 100% 52. Fire Hazard Inspection ..... 100% 52A. Aircraft Refueling Vehicle ..... 100% 52B. Aircraft Repair Hanger ..... 100% 52C. Airports, Helicopters, Helistops and Heliports Permits ..... 100% 52D. Automobile Wrecking Yard ..... 100% 52E. Bowling Pin or Bowling Alley Refinishing ..... 100% 52F. Burning Bonfire in a Public Place ..... 100% 52G. Candles and Open Flames in Assembly Area ..... 100% 52H. Covered Mall ..... 100% 52I. Dust Producing Operations (See Woodworking Shops) ..... 100% 52J. Excavations Near Flammable or Combustible Liquid Pipelines ..... 100% 52K. Fruit Ripening ..... 100% 52L. Fumigation or Thermal Insecticidal Fogging ..... 100% 52M. High Piled Combustible Stock ..... 100% 52N. Junk Yards ..... 100% 520. Liquefied Petroleum Gasses ..... 100% 52P. Lumber Yards ..... 100% 52Q. Magnesium Working ..... 100% 52R. Motor Vehicle Repair Garage ..... 100% 52S. Nitrate Film ..... 100% 52T. Open-Flame Devices in Marinas ..... 100% 52U. Ovens, Industrial Baking or Drying ..... 100% 52V. Tank Vehicles ..... 100% 52W. Tire Recapping ..... 100% 52X. Waste Material Handling Plant ..... 100% 52Y. Welding and Cutting Operations (Includes Permanent Welding Shop or On-site Welding) ..... 100% 52Z. Woodworking Plant Permits ..... 100% 53. State Regulated Inspection ..... 100% 53A. Christmas Tree Lot Permit ..... 100% 53B. Haunted House Permit ..... 100% 53C. High Rise Permit (Over Three Stories) ..... 100% 53D. Places of Assembly-State Regulated ..... 100% 53E. Private School Permits (Church/Schools Exempt) ..... 100% 53F. State/County Clearance Inspections Required Under T-19 CRC ..... 100% 53G. Tents and Air-Supported Structures ..... 100% 54. Fire Alarm Malfunction Response (After Written Notification) ..... 100% 55. Sale of Fire Reports ..... 100% 56. Fire Protections System Review/Inspection ..... 100% 56A. Plans Review Alarm System ..... 100% 56B. Plans Review Fire Flow Test ..... 100% 56C. Plans Review Special Extinguishing System ..... 100% 56D. Plans Review Spray Booth ..... 100% 56E. Plans Review Sprinkler System (Residential and Nonresidential) ..... 100% 56F. Plans Review Standpipe System ..... 100% 56G. Structural Plans Review and Inspections ..... 100% 56H. Tenant Improvement Plans Review and Inspections ..... 100% 56I. Tentative Tract Review, 1-1000 Dwellings per Tract ..... 100% 56J. Precise Plan of Design Review (Building Areas) ..... 100% 56K. Parcel Maps ..... 100% 56L. Preliminary Presubmittal Review ..... 100% 57. Hood/Duct Review/Inspection ..... 100% 59. Post Fire Investigation ..... 100% III. Maintenance Services: 65. Contractor Emergency Services ..... 100% IV. Finance and Administrative Services: 66. Returned Check Processing ..... 100% 68. Sale of Printed Materials ..... 100% 70. Agenda and Minute Mailing ..... 100%  
B.  The services as listed in this section shall be as defined in that certain document entitled "Cost Control System For The City of Hesperia" dated January 5, 1990, as produced by Management Services Institute, Incorporated, of Anaheim, California. 
C.  All fees and charges set pursuant to this chapter and section shall take effect ten days after the city manager signs an executive order stipulating that all provisions of the ordinance codified in this chapter have been complied with, and no written appeal has been filed. 
D.  The schedule of frequency of rate adjustments may be varied by the city manager to adjust revenues sufficient to meet debt service coverage requirements of any bond, certificate or ordinance, resolution, indenture, contract, or action under which securities have been issued by the city which contain any coverage factor requirement. 
E.  The city manager may vary the review schedule listed in this section if, in the judgment of the city manager and a directly affected and requesting department head, a gross inequity would be perpetrated by not revising the rate schedule. Any such rate revision which deviates from the review schedule as set herein shall be reported to the city council at its next succeeding meeting. 
(Ord. 107 § 4, 1991) 
3.20.050 - Provision of data. 
    Pursuant to the California Government Code, at least ten days prior to the required public hearing set out herein, the city manager shall make available to the public appropriate data indicating the cost, or estimated cost required to support the fees and charges for which changes are proposed to be made or fees or charges imposed. The city manager also shall provide a summary of the present fee and charge schedules and those proposed at such annual public hearing. A general explanation of such changes also shall be published per the requirements of Government Code Section 6062a. 
(Ord. 107 § 6, 1991) 
3.20.060 - Appeal to city council. 
A.  Any person who feels that any fee or charge determined and set is in excess of the percentage of costs reasonably borne to be recovered as set out in this chapter, or that such fee or charge has been reviewed prior to or has not been reviewed within the review schedule as set out herein, may appeal in writing to the city council. 
B.  No fee or charge for which an appeal has been filed shall take effect until heard by the city council. Such appeal shall be placed on the agenda of the next ensuing council meeting after receipt of such appeal, and heard at the next ensuing council meeting. Such appealed fee or charge shall take effect immediately upon hearing by the city council unless ordered otherwise by the city council by ordinance amending this chapter. 
(Ord. 107 § 7, 1991) 
Chapter 3.24 - CLAIMS AGAINST CITY 
Sections: 

3.24.010 - Purpose. 
    The city desires to adopt procedures relative to the fiscal affairs of the city and to provide for the payment of its debts as they come due. The city therefore determines to adopt the ordinance codified in this chapter and to provide for its codification when the Hesperia Municipal Code is prepared. 
(Ord. 6 § 1, 1988) 
3.24.020 - General. 
    The provisions of this chapter recognize the general claim procedures applicable to local public agencies, including this city, are governed by the provisions of Chapter 1 of Division 3.6 of the Government Code of the State, commencing with Section 900 and following. 
(Ord. 6 § 2, 1988) 
3.24.030 - Special claims procedures. 
    Pursuant to the authority contained in Section 935 of the Government Code of the State, the following claims procedures are established for those claims against the city for money or damages not now governed by state or local laws: 
A.  Employee Claims. Notwithstanding the exceptions contained in Section 905 of the Government Code of the State, all claims by public officers or employees for fees, salaries, wages, overtime pay, holiday pay, compensating time off, vacation pay, sick leave pay, and any other expenses or allowances claimed due from the city, when a procedure for processing such claims is not otherwise provided by state or local laws, shall be presented within the time limitations and in the manner prescribed by Sections 910 through 915.2 of the Government Code of the State. Such claims shall further be subject to the provisions of Section 945.4 of the Government Code of the State relating to the prohibition of suits in the absence of the presentation of claims and actions thereon by the council. 
B.  Contract and Other Claims. In addition no the requirements of subsection (A) of this section, and notwithstanding the exemptions set forth in Section 905 of the Government Code of the State, all claims against the city for damages or money, when a procedure for processing such claims is not otherwise provided by state or local laws, shall be presented with the time limitations and in the manner prescribed by Sections 910 through 915.2 of the Government Code of the State. Such claims shall further be subject to the provisions of Section 945.4 of the Government Code of the State relating to the prohibition of suits in the absence of the presentation of claims and action thereon by the council. 
(Ord. 6 § 3, 1988) 
3.24.040 - Filing. 
    All claims or demands against the city shall be filed with the city clerk and shall then be presented to the administrative services director for processing. The administrative services director shall perform any and all functions with respect to the consideration and action of denial or rejection of claims, as set forth in Resolution 89-14 or as may be amended. 
(Ord. 250 Exh. A (part), 1998; Ord. 6 § 4, 1988) 
3.24.050 - Claims covered by insurance. 
    All claims filed with the city clerk, which claims are covered by insurance, shall be presented to the administrative services director for processing. The administrative services director shall perform any and all functions with respect to the consideration and action of denial or rejection of claims, as set forth in Resolution No. 89-14 or as may be amended. 
(Ord. 250 Exh. A (part), 1998; Ord. 6 § 5, 1988) 
3.24.060 - Purchases, supplies or services. 
A.  All demands, invoices or claims for purchases, supplies or services included within budgetary appropriations shall be presented in writing to the city manager. All such demands, invoices or claims shall be fully itemized and verified as just and correct by the claimant or his authorized agent. 
B.  Each demand shall bear the number of the purchase order issued to the materials or services rendered. 
C.  Such demands, invoices, or claims shall be audited by the director of finance, who shall prepare a register of audited demands. The affidavit of the director of finance shall be attached to such register, certifying to the accuracy of the register. 
D.  Such demands, invoices or claims shall be approved by the city manager and finance committee consisting of two designated members of the city council. 
E.  All claims approved shall be paid by checks drawn upon the city treasury signed by the person(s) designated by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. 6 § 6, 1988) 
Chapter 3.28 - SPECIAL GAS TAX STREET IMPROVEMENT FUND 
Sections: 

3.28.010 - Fund established-Purpose. 
    To comply with the provisions of Section 2113 of the Streets and Highways Code and to avail itself of its benefits of Sections 2106 and 2107 thereof, there is created in the city treasury a special fund to be known as the "Special Gas Tax Street Improvement Fund." 
(Ord. 3 § 1, 1988) 
3.28.020 - Deposit and disposition of monies. 
A.  All monies received by the city from the state of California under the provisions of the Streets and Highway Code for the acquisition of real property or interests therein, or for engineering, or for the construction, maintenance or improvement of streets or highways by the city, and all interest received from the investment thereof, shall be paid into said fund. 
B.  All monies in said fund shall be expended exclusively for the purpose authorized by and subject to the provisions of the Streets and Highways Code. 
(Ord. 3 §§ 2, 3, 1988) 
3.28.030 - Effective date-Necessity of provisions. 
    The city of Hesperia has just been incorporated and has no funds whatsoever to provide for maintenance and improvement of city streets. It is necessary the city acquire funds for such purposes and without delay. The ordinance codified in this chapter is therefore necessary for the protection of the public health, welfare and general safety and shall take effect immediately upon its adoption as an urgency measure pursuant to Sections 36934 and 36937(b) of the Government Code. 
(Ord. 3 § 4, 1988) 
Chapter 3.32 - COST RECOVERY SYSTEM FOR BOOKING FEE COLLECTIONS 
Sections: 

3.32.010 - Authority of scope. 
    The ordinance codified in this chapter is adopted pursuant to Government Code Section 29550.1, et seq., as the same may now exist or hereafter be amended. 
(Ord. 259 § 1 (I), 1997) 
3.32.020 - Purpose. 
    The proceeds from this program shall be used to reimburse the city's general fund for costs charged by the county to the city for booking or other processing of persons arrested and other costs incurred in connection therewith. 
(Ord. 259 § 1 (II), 1997) 
3.32.040 - Cost recovery system. 
    The city manager is authorized to enter into an agreement with an outside agency to provide for the recovery of the city's costs and the charges imposed by the county. 
(Ord. 259 § 1 (IV), 1997) 
3.32.050 - Amount of fees collected. 
    Fees collected shall be limited to those provided under Government Code Section 29550.1, et seq. The actual cost of recovery over and above the criminal justice administrative fees shall be charged to the person convicted if applicable. 
(Ord. 259 § 1 (V), 1997) 
Title 5 - BUSINESS LICENSES AND REGULATIONS 
Chapters: 
Chapter 5.04 - BUSINESS LICENSES GENERALLY 
Sections: 

5.04.010 - Purpose and authority. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to establish regulations that will protect the general public health, safety and welfare under the authority granted to governments by the Constitution of the state of California. 
(Ord. 197 Exh. A (SBCC § 41.0101), 1994) 
5.04.030 - License required. 
    It is unlawful for any person to commence, transact or operate any business within the city without first having procured a business license from the city and paying all fees as required by this title. It is unlawful for any person to operate with an expired, suspended or revoked license at any time or to violate or fail to comply with any provisions of this title. 
(Ord. 197 Exh. A (SBCC § 41.0103), 1994) 
5.04.040 - Exemptions. 
A.  All persons who apply for a business license pursuant to this title for the sole purpose of conducting, managing or carrying on a charitable activity from which profit is neither directly or indirectly derived shall be exempt from paying a license fee. 
B.  Any public utility operating in the city which is required to make payments under a franchise agreement with the city is exempt from the business license fees imposed by this title in compliance with applicable federal and state law. 
(Ord. 197 Exh. A (SBCC § 41.0104), 1994) 
5.04.050 - Applications. 
    Every person desiring to obtain a business license shall submit a complete business license application to the collector, together with all required fees and supporting documentation. 
A.  An application for a license under this title shall require the following information: 
1.  Business start date; 
2.  Business name; 
3.  Business address; 
4.  Business telephone number; 
5.  Federal employer identification number (if business is a partnership or corporation), or owner's name and social security number (for all others); 
6.  Type of business activity; 
7.  Ownership Type. Sole proprietorship, partnership, or corporation. If sole proprietorship, owner's full name shall be included; 
8.  A declaration under penalty of perjury that the foregoing is, to the best of applicant's knowledge and belief, true and correct, and that applicant has read the application and understands all the conditions as stated therein. 
B.  Information provided in the application will become a matter of public record and will be subject to disclosures, with the exception of Social Security or federal employer identification numbers. 
(Ord. 210 § 1, 1995: Ord. 197 Exh. A (SBCC § 41.0105), 1994) 
5.04.060 - Contents of license. 
    The city collector shall issue to any person having met the requirements of this title a license which shall contain the following: 
A.  The name of the person to which the license is issued; 
B.  The name and address of the business; 
C.  The expiration date of the license. 
(Ord. 197 Exh. A (SBCC § 41.0106), 1994) 
5.04.070 - Investigation fee, license fee, renewal fee and late fee. 
    The investigation fees, license fees, renewal fees and late fees for this title are as follows: 
A.  Investigation Fee: 
Investigation Fee 1. Junk dealer or pawnbroker $ 100.00 2. Pool and billiard halls 100.00 3. Theaters 100.00 4. Massage parlor 200.00 5. Dance halls 100.00 6. Adult entertainment business 200.00 7. Home occupations 35.00  
B.  License Fees. The city business license fee shall be fifty dollars ($50.00) annually. 
C.  Renewal Fee. The renewal fee shall be the same as the annual license fee. 
D.  Late Fee. Any business license not secured within sixty (60) days of notification by the city shall be assessed a late fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00). Any business without a business license shall be subject to the penalties outlined in Section 5.04.210. 
(Ord. 250 Exh. A (part), 1998; Ord. 218 § 5, 1995; Ord. 197 Exh. A (SBCC § 41.0107), 1994) 
5.04.080 - No license issued where applicant is indebted to city for any unpaid license fees. 
    No license for any succeeding, current or unexpired license period, shall knowingly be issued to any person who at the time of making application for any license or renewal thereof is indebted to the city for any unpaid license fee; provided, that the collector or his or her duly authorized representative may enter into an agreement with any person indebted to the city for the nonpayment of license fees for any past license period, agreeing with such person that such person may pay delinquent license fees (including any penalties and interest) for any past license period, in equal installments extending over a period not to exceed one year. In such agreement, the debtor shall acknowledge his or her debt to the city and agree, in case default be made in the payment of any installment agreed to be paid thereunder, that the whole amount to be paid shall become immediately due and payable, and that in case suit be brought to enforce the collection of the amount agreed to be paid under such agreement, that the debtor will pay all costs of suit, including attorney's fees incurred by the city. In case such agreement is executed and all other provisions of this title are complied with, licenses for any current or ensuing license period may be issued to any such person paying the fee prescribed for the current or ensuing license period, together with penalties thereon, if any. 
(Ord. 197 Exh. A (SBCC § 41.0108), 1994) 
5.04.090 - License fee a debt. 
    The amount of any license fee imposed by this title and of any penalty thereon, shall be deemed a debt to the city. Any person commencing or operating any business without having a license to do so shall be liable in an action by the city in any court of competent jurisdiction for the amount of license fee imposed by this chapter with respect to such business. 
(Ord. 197 Exh. A (SBCC § 41.0109), 1994) 
5.04.100 - Errors in issuance of licenses. 
    No error or mistake on the part of the person issuing the license or in the determination or statement of the amount of any license fee shall prevent or prejudice the collection by or for the city of the amount actually due from anyone commencing or operating any business subject such license. Any license issued in error is void. 
(Ord. 197 Exh. A (SBCC § 41.0110), 1994) 
5.04.110 - Transferability. 
    No license issued to a business, owner or location shall be transferred to another business, owner or location, except that a valid license holder may move his/her place of business following the submission of a revised application showing the revised place of business. The revised location is subject to the same criteria as an original license. Any license requiring a site investigation shall be subject to a new investigation fee. 
(Ord. 246 § 1, 1996: Ord. 197 Exh. A (SBCC § 41.0111), 1994) 
5.04.120 - Refunds. 
    No license fee paid under provisions of this title shall be refundable unless it is determined by the city collector that they were collected in error. 
(Ord. 197 Exh. A (SBCC § 41.0112), 1994) 
5.04.130 - Compliance with other city ordinances. 
    The business license issued pursuant to the provisions of this title constitutes a receipt for the license fee paid and is a requirement, not a permit, to transact or carry on any business activity within the city. Payment of fees or possession of a license shall not exempt the holder from conforming with all other codes and ordinances adopted by the city. 
(Ord. 197 Exh. A (SBCC § 41.0113), 1994) 
5.04.140 - Effect of chapter on past actions. 
    Unless specifically provided, adoption of this title shall not be construed to affect prosecution for violation of any ordinance prior to the adoption of the ordinance codified in this title. 
(Ord. 197 Exh. A (SBCC § 41.0114), 1994) 
5.04.150 - License duration and date payable. 
    All licenses shall be annual licenses and shall be due and payable on or before the date the business commences. All licenses shall be renewed annually on the anniversary of the effective date of the initial or prior license. The effective date shall be based upon the first letter of the business name and shall be established as follows: 
First Letter Of Business Name Effective Date Each Year A, B, C, or D January 1 E, F, G, or H March 1 I, J, K, or L May 1 M, N, O, or P July 1 Q, R, S, or T September 1 U, V, W, X, Y, or Z November 1  
    In order to initiate the program, the first year's license may be set for a longer or shorter duration than following years. A business applying for its initial license shall pay the pro-rated portion of an annual license if it would be six months or more to the scheduled effective date or the full annual license fee plus the pro-rated portion if it would be less than six months to the scheduled effective date. 
(Ord. 197 Exh. A (SBCC § 41.0115), 1994) 
5.04.160 - License renewal. 
    The business owner or responsible party shall be responsible for annual renewal of the business license. The business owner or responsible party shall complete the renewal form, and pay all required fees prior to the effective date. 
(Ord. 197 Exh. A (SBCC § 41.0116), 1994) 
5.04.170 - Posting and keeping license. 
    All businesses shall display business licenses in the following manner: 
A.  License holders conducting business at a fixed place of business in the city shall keep the license posted in a conspicuous place on the business premises; 
B.  License holders without a fixed place of business in the city shall keep the original license in his/her immediate possession while conducting business within the city; 
C.  License holders with one or more vehicles operating in the city shall keep a duplicate copy of the original license in each such vehicle. 
(Ord. 197 Exh. A (SBCC § 41.0117), 1994) 
5.04.180 - Two or more businesses. 
    Any person conducting two or more businesses shall be required to provide licenses for each business. Separate fees shall be charged at the regular fee rate. 
(Ord. 197 Exh. A (SBCC § 41.0118), 1994) 
5.04.190 - Branch establishments. 
    Any business conducted with branch establishments shall be licensed as if each branch were a separate business. The fee shall be computed for each branch establishment as a separate and independent business. Warehouses and distributing plants used in conjunction with and incidental to a business shall not be considered as a separate place of business. 
(Ord. 197 Exh. A (SBCC § 41.0119), 1994) 
5.04.200 - Revocation. 
A.  All licenses issued under the provisions of this title shall be in compliance with all applicable laws of the state of California and the United States of America. Any license granted through the provisions of this title may be revoked by the collector if it is determined either: 
1.  That it was fraudulently obtained or issued in error; or 
2.  That the information provided in the application was incomplete, incorrect or false in any material respect, or that there was an omission of a material fact; or 
3.  That the license holder is operating its business in violation of any statute, ordinance or law; or 
4.  That the revocation is necessary to protect the health, safety or welfare of the public, subject to the provisions of subsection (B) of this section. 
B.  Prior to any revocation of license, the collector shall, by first class mail postage prepaid, give the license holder ten days notice of his or her intent to revoke such license. Within ten days of the date of such notice, the license holder may file a written request with the city clerk to appear before the city council, and when a hearing is thereafter scheduled by the city clerk and notice given to the license holder thereof by first class mail postage prepaid, the license holder may appear and show cause before the city council why such license should not be revoked. Upon the failure of the license holder to file a written request to appear within ten days, or in the event the city clerk does not receive the license holder's written request for a hearing within said period, or if after the hearing of the council, the council finds good and sufficient cause for revocation, the license shall be revoked. No refund of any license shall be made following revocation. Revocation of a license shall be effective upon action of the city council as herein described. 
(Ord. 197 Exh. A (SBCC § 41.0120), 1994) 
5.04.210 - Penalty for violation. 
    It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to violate any provision or to fail to comply with any of the requirements of this title adopted hereby. Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this title or the codes adopted hereby or failing to comply with any of its requirements shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; Ord. 197 Exh. A (SBCC § 41.0121), 1994) 
5.04.220 - Civil and criminal procedures available. 
    The violation of any of the provisions of this title or the codes adopted hereby shall constitute a public nuisance and may be abated by the city through civil process by means of restraining order, preliminary or permanent injunction, or in any other manner provided by law for the abatement of such nuisance. All persons violating this title may also be prosecuted for the commission or maintenance of a public nuisance at any time as permitted by law. 
(Ord. 197 Exh. A (SBCC § 41.0122), 1994) 
Chapter 5.08 - BINGO 
Sections: 

5.08.020 - License required. 
    No person other than an eligible organization may conduct bingo games. Such eligible organizations shall not conduct bingo games without first having secured a license to conduct such games from the city. 
(Ord. 197 Exh. A (SBCC § 41.0131(b)), 1994) 
5.08.030 - License application. 
A.  Applicants for a bingo license shall file a written, signed and acknowledged application with the collector including all information required by Section 5.04.050. In addition to the information required by Section 5.04.050 the following information shall be provided: 
1.  The dates, hours and location where the bingo games will be operated; 
2.  The name or names of the person or persons having the management or supervision of said games; 
3.  Whether food and beverages will be available; 
4.  Such other reasonable information as may be required as to the identity or character of the applicant, manager or members of applicant operating the games. 
B.  The application shall be accompanied by a copy of the tax exempt status determination issued by the State Franchise Tax Board to the applicant organization showing the applicant organization is exempt under the provisions of Sections 23701(a), 23701(b), 23701(d), 23701(e), 23701(f), 23701(g), and 23701(l) of the California Revenue and Taxation Code. 
C.  The applicant shall submit with the application a declaration under penalty of perjury of a duly authorized officer or representative of the organization, which states that the applicant organization owns or leases the property on which the bingo games are to be held and that such property is used by such organization for an office or for purposes for which the organization is organized. Said declaration shall also indicate that the proceeds of such games will only be used for charitable purposes, except as provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. 197 Exh. A (SBCC § 41.0131(c)), 1994) 
5.08.040 - Investigation. 
    After receiving the application, the collector shall refer the application to the building, planning, fire and police departments for investigation. The departments shall make reports of their findings, together with a recommendation as to whether or not the applicant shall be granted a license, to the collector within ten working days after the application was referred. The license shall be issued for a specified location. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; Ord. 197 Exh. A (SBCC § 41.0131(d)), 1994) 
5.08.050 - Operation of bingo game. 
    A bingo game shall be conducted only on property owned or leased by the eligible organization and used by it for an office or for performance of the purposes for which the organization is organized. The property owned or leased by the organization need not be used or leased exclusively by such organization. The bingo game shall be operated and staffed only by members of the licensed organization which organized the game. Such members shall not receive a profit, wage or salary from any bingo game. Only the organization licensed to conduct a bingo game shall operate such game or participate in the promotion, supervision or any other phase of such game. Bingo games shall not be held on more than ten days in each calendar month nor for more than five hours in any twenty-four (24) hour period. No bingo shall be permitted between the hours of two a.m. and six a.m. 
(Ord. 197 Exh. A (SBCC § 41.0131(e)), 1994) 
5.08.060 - Financial interest. 
    No person except the eligible organization licensed to conduct a bingo game shall hold a financial interest in such game. 
(Ord. 197 Exh. A (SBCC § 41.0131(f)), 1994) 
5.08.070 - Profits. 
A.  Nonprofit Organizations Under Revenue and Taxation Code Section 23701(d). All profits derived from a bingo game by organizations exempt from payment of the bank and corporation tax by Section 23701(d) of the California Revenue and Taxation Code shall be kept in a special fund or account and shall not be commingled with any other fund or account. Such profits shall be used only for charitable purposes. 
B.  Other Licensed Organizations. With respect to other licensed organizations authorized to conduct bingo games, all proceeds derived from a bingo game shall be kept in a special fund or account and shall not be commingled with any other fund or account. Such proceeds shall be used only for charitable purposes, except as follows: 
1.  Such proceeds may be used for prizes; 
2.  A portion of such proceeds, not to exceed twenty (20) percent of the proceeds after the deduction for prizes, or two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) per month, whichever is less, may be sued for rental of property, overhead, and administrative expenses. 
C.  Records. Records required by this chapter shall be retained by licensee for a period of three years. Licensee's records shall be available for inspection by the chief of police or designee or city officials upon demand. It is unlawful and a violation of this chapter to fail to retain these records or make same available for inspection upon demand. 
(Ord. 250 Exh. A (part), 1998; Ord. 197 Exh. A (SBCC § 41.0131(g)), 1994) 
5.08.080 - Participation limited to those present. 
    No person shall be allowed to participate in a bingo game, unless the person is physically present at the time and place in which the bingo game is being conducted. 
(Ord. 197 Exh. A (SBCC § 41.0131(h)), 1994) 
5.08.090 - Bingo game open to public. 
    All bingo games shall be open to the public, not just to the members of the licensed organization. 
(Ord. 197 Exh. A (SBCC § 41.0131(i)), 1994) 
5.08.100 - Value of prizes. 
    The total value of prizes awarded during the conduct of any bingo game shall not exceed two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) in cash or kind, or both, for each separate game which is held. 
(Ord. 197 Exh. A (SBCC § 41.0131(j)), 1994) 
5.08.110 - Minors prohibited from participation. 
    No minor shall be allowed to participate in any bingo game. 
(Ord. 197 Exh. A (SBCC § 41.0131(k)), 1994) 
5.08.120 - Display of license. 
    Every licensee shall display the license issued by the city in a conspicuous place in the premises where the bingo games are conducted. 
(Ord. 197 Exh. A (SBCC § 41.0131(l)), 1994) 
5.08.130 - License not transferable. 
    Each license issued hereunder shall be issued to an eligible organization and for a specific location and shall in no event be transferable from one organization or location to another. 
(Ord. 197 Exh. A (SBCC § 41.0131(m)), 1994) 
5.08.140 - Disciplinary action-Grounds. 
    In addition to the provisions of Section 5.04.200, the following shall be considered grounds for denial, revocation or other disciplinary action: 
A.  Made any inaccurate, false, misleading or fraudulent statements, has failed to fully disclose all required information in an application or to provide all required documentation in support thereof; or 
B.  Violated any provision of this title or of any statute relating to the permitted activity; or 
C.  Been convicted of a felony or any crime involving moral turpitude; or 
D.  A bad moral character, intemperate habits or a bad reputation for truth, honesty or integrity; or 
E.  Committed any unlawful, false, fraudulent, deceptive or dangerous act while conducting permitted bingo games; or 
F.  Conducted the permitted bingo game in a manner contrary to the peace, health, safety and general welfare of the public; or 
G.  Failed to comply with zoning, building, fire and environmental health services regulations of the city. 
(Ord. 197 Exh. A (SBCC § 41.0131(n)), 1994) 
Chapter 5.12 - DANCE HALLS 
Sections: 

5.12.010 - License required. 
    It is unlawful for any person to commence or operate or permit the operation of a public dance or a public dance hall without first obtaining a license to do so pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. 197 Exh. A (SBCC § 41.0130(a)), 1994) 
5.12.020 - Application and reasons for denial of license. 
    Application for such license shall be made to the collector in writing and shall state the names and addresses of the persons having authority and control over the location and the owners of the location and the place where the dance, or dance hall is to be conducted. Upon receipt of such application, together with the license fee, as in this title provided, the collector shall thoroughly investigate the application and shall deny the same if: 
A.  The applicant, whether an individual, any partner, corporate officer or director, has been convicted of a felony or of any crime involving moral turpitude; 
B.  The structures or real property where the applicant intends to conduct business pursuant to a license do not comply with all applicable laws or are injurious to the public health or safety; or 
C.  The applicant has previously had a dance hall license forfeited, suspended or revoked under the provisions of chapter or any similar ordinance. 
(Ord. 197 Exh. A (SBCC § 41.0130(b)), 1994) 
5.12.030 - Issuance and posting of license. 
A.  Upon approval of such license by the collector, the collector shall issue a license to the applicant; such license shall set forth the name of the applicant and the place where the dance or dance hall is to be conducted. Each license shall be nontransferable, shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises in respect to which it is issued and shall be exhibited to any law enforcement officer or city official upon demand. 
B.  Each license issued hereunder is separate and distinct and no person shall seek to exercise the privileges granted thereunder except the person to whom it is issued and at the specific place for which it was issued. 
(Ord. 197 Exh. A (SBCC § 41.0130(c)), 1994) 
5.12.040 - Investigation. 
    The collector may, upon its own decision and shall upon the verified complaint in writing of any person, investigate the conduct of any such dance or dance hall and shall have power to temporarily suspend or permanently revoke a license issued hereunder for any of the reasons specified in Section 5.04.200. 
(Ord. 197 Exh. A (SBCC § 41.0130(d)), 1994) 
5.12.050 - Hours of operation. 
    It is unlawful for any person, corporation or association of persons to operate, conduct or carry on a public dance, or a public dance hall, or for any person to dance at any public dance or in any public dance hall, between the hours of two a.m. and eight a.m. 
(Ord. 197 Exh. A (SBCC § 41.0130(e)), 1994) 
5.12.060 - Employment. 
    It is unlawful for any person, to employ anyone on a salary or on a commission or for anything of value, directly or indirectly, whose obligation, duty or business it is or shall be to dance with or act as a dancing partner at any public dance or at any public dance hall. It is further unlawful and a violation of this chapter for anyone to engage in such employment. 
(Ord. 197 Exh. A (SBCC § 41.0130(f)), 1994) 
5.12.070 - Regulations. 
    It is unlawful for any person to operate, conduct or carry on a public dance or a public dance hall in any manner which is detrimental to public health, welfare or safety or which causes a disturbance of the peace or a public nuisance. 
(Ord. 197 Exh. A (SBCC § 41.0130(g)), 1994) 
Chapter 5.16 - JUNK DEALERS, PAWNBROKERS, SECONDHAND DEALERS AND SALVAGE COLLECTORS 
Sections: 

5.16.010 - Investigation. 
    Upon receipt of a complete application with all required documentation and fees, the collector shall refer copies of the application to the building, planning, fire and police departments for investigation concerning the applicant's business and character. These investigating departments shall report their findings, together with their approval of or objection to the issuance of a license to the collector within ten business days of the referral. The collector shall, upon receipt of these reports and any recommendations either issue or deny the issuance of the license. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; Ord. 197 Exh. A (SBCC § 41.0124(a)), 1994) 
5.16.020 - Inspection. 
    Every junk dealer, pawnbroker, secondhand dealer and salvage collector shall hold and keep exposed any property acquired by them in the course of their business for inspection on their business premises during business hours. 
(Ord. 197 Exh. A (SBCC § 41.0124(b)), 1994) 
5.16.030 - Property. 
    Junk dealers shall hold all personal property received as received except automobile bodies until the expiration of three days after the submission of the daily report required by this chapter. 
(Ord. 197 Exh. A (SBCC § 41.0124(c)), 1994) 
5.16.040 - Daily reports and purchase forms. 
A.  Junk dealers, pawnbrokers and secondhand dealers licensed under this chapter shall report in writing to the police department, in a manner as approved by the police department, all personal property requiring reporting by this chapter. The daily reports shall be accompanied by a purchase form for each individual transaction. The specific information required on the purchase form is as follows: 
1.  Dealer's name, business, address and telephone number; 
2.  Date of purchase; 
3.  Seller's name, description, residence address, vehicle license number, driver's license or county business license number; 
4.  Material category descriptions; 
5.  Weight of material, amount paid and time of payment; 
6.  Description and identification number of automobile and automobile bodies. Such information may be provided by submission of a vehicle report completed by the seller of any automobile or automobile body. The vehicle report forms will be made available by the police department. 
B.  The purchase forms and daily reports shall include a general description as to the composition of scrap or junk. Products such as castings, wire, tubing, pipe, or similar items may be commonly described. Nonferrous materials shall be reported and ferrous materials including fence material, pipe, chain, machinery parts, foundry castings, cable, automobiles, and automobile bodies shall be reported. 
C.  Transactions totaling five dollars ($5.00) or less need not be reported except for automobiles or automobile bodies, which may be reported in accordance with subsection (A)(6) of this section. 
D.  Pawnbrokers and secondhand dealers shall make their reports in compliance with the provisions of Business and Professions Code, Section 21628 and Financial Code Section 21208, of the state of California. 
E.  Salvage collectors shall maintain purchase records. 
F.  The daily reports and purchase forms shall be written in the English language in a clear and legible manner. The records required by this section shall be retained by the applicant for a period of three years and shall be available for inspection upon demand by any law enforcement officer. The failure to complete, file and retain the records required pursuant to Section 5.16.040 is a violation of this chapter and is unlawful. 
(Ord. 250 Exh. A (part), 1998; Ord. 197 Exh. A (SBCC § 41.0124(d)), 1994) 
Chapter 5.20 - MASSAGE FACILITIES AND MASSAGE TECHNICIANS[2] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2009-07, § 3(Exh. A), adopted Nov. 3, 2009, amended Chapter 5.20 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Chapter 5.20, §§ 5.20.010-5.20.100, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. 197; Ord. 250; Ord. 2004-17, § 3(part), 2004; and Ord. 2004-20, § 5(part), 2004. 

5.20.010 - Exemptions. 
    This chapter shall not apply to the following classes of individuals, and no license shall be required of such persons, while engaged in the performance of the duties of their respective professions: 
A.  Physicians, surgeons, chiropractors, osteopaths, or physical therapists who are duly licensed to practice their respective professions in the state of California, and persons working at the place of, business of, or under the supervision of, a licensed physician, surgeon, chiropractor, osteopath or physical therapist; 
B.  Acupuncturists or acupressurists who are duly certified and licensed to practice their profession in the state of California; 
C.  Trainers of scholastic, amateur, semi-professional or professional athletes or teams, while providing training services for the school or team. 
(Ord. No. 2009-07, § 3(Exh. A), 11-3-09) 
5.20.020 - License application. 
A.  Any person, firm, corporation or partnership desiring to obtain a permit to operate a massage facility establishment shall file a complete application with all required documentation under penalty of perjury of the laws of the state. 
B.  Each application for a massage facility license, shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable investigative fee, as specified in Section 5.04.070. 
C.  An applicant for a license under this chapter shall submit the following information: 
1.  The full name, driver's license number and aliases, and any aliases heretofore or currently used, for each individual, partner, corporate officer, director or stockholder of applicant; 
2.  All previous residence addresses for the five years immediately preceding the application for each individual, partner, corporate officer, director or stockholder of applicant; 
3.  The height, weight, eye color, and hair color of each individual, partner, corporate officer, director or stockholder of the applicant; 
4.  The business, occupation or employment history of each individual, partner, corporate officer, director or stockholder of each applicant for five years immediately preceding the date of the application; 
5.  The street address where the licensed activities will be conducted; 
6.  Disclosure of any prior revocation or suspension of any prior massage facility business license at any location, the reason therefor, and a statement setting forth all massage business activities subsequent to such suspension or revocation. This duty of disclosure shall apply to each individual, partner, corporate officer, director or stockholder of applicant; 
7.  Disclosure of whether any individual, partner, corporate officer, director, stockholder or other massage personnel of applicant have ever been convicted of an offense involving conduct which requires registration under California Penal Code, Section 290, or of conduct which is a violation of the provisions of California Penal Code, Sections 266i, 315, 316, 318 or 647(b), or for any felony involving the sale of a controlled substance pursuant to Sections 11054 through 11058 of the California Health and Safety Code, or who have been convicted in any other state of an offense which, if committed or attempted in California, would have been punishable as one or more of the laws enumerated in this subsection; 
8.  Written proof or identification which is acceptable to the city that the applicant for a massage technician license is at least eighteen (18) years of age; 
9.  Two current photographs at least, two inches by two inches in size, for each applicant for a massage technician license; 
10.  Every person performing massage services for compensation shall obtain and maintain a valid state massage certification from the State Massage Therapy Council. 
11.  A massage practitioner or massage therapist certified by the California Massage Therapy Council (CAMTC) is not subject to undergo the criminal background checks and education requirements of this chapter. A massage facility where the owner is the only person employed by that business and certified by the CAMTC is not required to undergo criminal background checks. 
a.  A massage practitioner or massage therapist shall maintain on the premises at all times evidence of their certification for review by local municipal officials. 
b.  A massage practitioner or massage therapist shall file a copy of the certificate by the CAMTC with the city. 
c.  A massage practitioner or massage therapist shall maintain their certification while performing massage, as defined in this chapter, in the city. 
d.  The city shall revoke a license or permit issued to a massage facility if violations of California Business and Professions Code Sections 4600 thru 4620 or the local ordinance, occur on the business premises. 
e.  The city shall deny or restrict a business license if a massage facility, massage practitioner or massage therapist has provided materially false information. 
f.  An owner or operator of a massage facility certified by the CAMTC shall be responsible for the conduct of all employees or independent contractors working on the premises of the business. 
g.  An owner or operator of a massage facility certified by the CAMTC shall notify the city of any rename, management change, or exchange the business to another person occurs. 
12.  All documents, including a site plan and floor plan, demonstrating compliance with Section 5.04.050, Required Facilities, shall be submitted with any application for a license under this section. 
D.  The city shall promptly reject as incomplete any application which does not meet all the requirements of this section, and upon written request of the applicant, shall notify the applicant in writing, by first class mail, postage prepaid, to the address supplied to the city by the applicant, of the deficiencies in the application. 
E.  No application for renewal of a license shall be accepted earlier than ninety (90) days prior to expiration of the license. 
(Ord. No. 2009-07, § 3(Exh. A), 11-3-09; Ord. No. 2017-10 , § 3(Exh. A), 6-6-17) 
5.20.028 - Distance limitation requirements. 
    No massage establishment may be located within three thousand (3,000) feet of another massage establishment or within two thousand (2,000) feet of an elementary, secondary or high school. 
( Ord. No. 2017-10 , § 3(Exh. A), 6-6-17) 
5.20.030 - Investigation by city. 
A.  Upon receipt of a complete application, all supplemental required information, and payment of all required fees, the city shall refer the application to all appropriate city and county agencies including the building, planning, fire and police departments, and the county environmental health department. The departments shall review the application and, if necessary, the structure shall be inspected. The departments may request any further information which is reasonably related to the licensing requirements of this chapter. The chief of police or designee shall require the applicant to be fingerprinted and to pay whatever fingerprinting fee is in effect. The departments shall determine whether the premises and massage technicians, massage practitioner, and massage therapist comply with the applicable laws, including appropriate zoning and land use district designations. 
B.  If the city, following investigation of the applicant, determines that the applicant does not fulfill the requirements set forth in this chapter, the city shall deny said application by dated, written notice by U.S. mail, with certification attached. Following the denial or revocation of a massage facility license, no application for a massage facility establishment may be filed by such applicant, at the same or substantially same location for at least one year following the date of such denial or revocation. The applicant may appeal the denial, as set forth in Section 5.04.200. 
(Ord. No. 2009-07, § 3(Exh. A), 11-3-09) 
5.20.040 - Required facilities. 
    No license to conduct a new massage facility or any renewal license shall be issued unless an inspection by the required departments discloses that the massage facility premises and operation will comply with each of the following minimum requirements: 
A.  A readable sign shall be posted at the main entrance identifying the establishment as a massage facility; provided, however, that all such signs shall otherwise comply with the sign requirements of the Municipal Code. 
B.  Minimum lighting shall be provided in accordance with the building code. In addition, at least one unobstructed artificial light of not less than forty (40) watts shall be provided and used at all times in each enclosed room or booth while massage services are being rendered. 
C.  Minimum ventilation shall be provided in accordance with the California Building Code. 
D.  Instruments used for massage shall be disinfected prior to each use by a method approved by the San Bernardino County Department of Environmental Health Services. Where such instruments for massage are employed, adequate quantities of supplies for disinfection shall be available during all hours of operation. 
E.  Hot and cold running water shall be provided at all times. 
F.  Closed cabinets shall be utilized for the storage of clean towels and linen. After use, towels and linen shall be removed from the room or booth and stored in a clean container until laundered. 
G.  Dressing and toilet facilities shall be provided for patrons. If male and female patrons are to be treated simultaneously, then separate facilities shall be provided. 
H.  All walls, ceilings, floors, steam and vapor rooms, and all other physical facilities for the massage facility shall be kept in good repair, maintained in a clean and sanitary condition. 
I.  Clean and sanitary towels and linens shall be provided for patrons receiving massage services. No common use of towels or linens shall be permitted. 
J.  Standard or portable massage tables and chairs with durable, washable plastic or other waterproof material as covering shall be used for massage. Foam pads more than four inches thick or with a width of more than four feet may not be used. Beds, mattresses, and water beds may not be used in the administration of a massage. 
K.  The premises to be used shall not operate as a school of massage, or use the same facilities of a school of massage. 
L.  The permit shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises. 
M.  No massage facility shall place, publish or distribute any advertising matter that depicts any portion of the human body that would reasonably suggest to prospective customers or clients that any service is available other than massage services. 
N.  No massage facility shall be open for business without at least one massage technician, massage practitioner, or massage therapist on the premises in possession of a valid, current license. 
(Ord. No. 2009-07, § 3(Exh. A), 11-3-09) 
5.20.050 - License procedures. 
A.  Upon payment of all fees and successful verifications of the qualifications of the applicant, a massage practitioner, and massage therapist license shall be issued to the applicant by the city, except as provided in this chapter. A massage practitioner, massage therapist or massage facility license shall be denied if the applicant has not met the requirements of this chapter and applicable laws. A massage practitioner, massage therapist, or massage facility license shall also be denied if the police reports that the applicant, if the application is for the applicant, massage personnel, owners, operators, partners (if a partnership), or officers, directors or persons holding more than five percent of the stock, if a corporation, or any of them, of the massage business in the case of application for a massage facility license, has, within ten years immediately preceding the date of the application, been convicted of any of the offenses set forth in this chapter or has, within the same time frame, been convicted of any offense in another state which, if committed, or attempted in this state, would have been punishable as one or more of the offenses enumerated in this chapter, or is required to register under Section 290 of the Penal Code, or that a massage facility license or similar license or permit held by the applicant or any of the persons referenced in this chapter, has been revoked or suspended for cause within five years prior to the application, or that there were inaccurate statements or misrepresentations or an omission of a material fact in the application or in any document or statement submitted in support thereof. The city shall give notice of denial of a license application by first class mail, return receipt requested, to the applicant at the applicant's address listed in the application. 
B.  Any person denied a license pursuant to this chapter may appeal the denial to the city council in writing, under the provisions specified in Section 5.04.200. 
C.  All massage facility licenses issued under this chapter are nontransferable, both as to location and as to the person holding a license. All massage technician licenses issued under this chapter are nontransferable as to the person holding the license. 
D.  Any massage technician or massage establishment with a valid business license issued prior to the effective date of this chapter may continue to operate under the previous regulations indefinitely, provided that: 
1.  Their license remains continuously in effect with fees paid; 
2.  That the licensee is not convicted of a crime of moral turpitude, including the offenses listed in Section 5.20.030(C)(7). 
(Ord. No. 2009-07, § 3(Exh. A), 11-3-09; Ord. No. 2017-10 , § 3(Exh. A), 6-6-17) 
5.20.060 - Hours of operation. 
    No massage facility shall be open between the hours of ten p.m. and seven a.m. Massage facilities shall not sell food or beverages, or serve food or beverages, to patrons on the premises of the massage facility; excepting therefrom licensed vending machines. 
(Ord. No. 2009-07, § 3(Exh. A), 11-3-09) 
5.20.070 - Prohibited conduct. 
A.  All employees, including massage technicians, massage practitioners and massage therapists, shall be clean and wear clean, non-transparent outer garments. No massage technician, massage practitioner, massage therapist or massage facility owner or employee may expose his or her genitals, buttocks, or in the case of a female, her breast(s), to any natural person or patron, or in the course of administering a massage, make intentional contact with the genitals or anus of any other person. Notwithstanding other federal, state and city codes and ordinances, violation of this chapter shall not constitute a misdemeanor or an infraction, but such violation may be used as a ground for license revocation. 
B.  No person shall enter, be or remain in any part of a massage facility while in the possession of, consuming, under the influence of, or using any alcoholic beverage or drugs except pursuant to a prescription for such drugs. The owner, operator, responsible managing employee or permittee shall not permit any such person to enter or remain upon such premises. 
C.  No audio or video recording may be made of the performance of a massage. 
D.  In addition to the procedures specified in Section 5.04.210, a license issued under this chapter may be revoked upon one or more of the following grounds: 
1.  That the licensee, massage practitioner, or massage therapist, or any of its partners, corporate officers, directors, shareholder, employees, agents or representatives, violated any provision of this chapter or of the Hesperia Municipal Code; 
2.  That the licensee, massage practitioner, and massage therapist or any of its partners, corporate officers, directors, employees, agents or representatives has been convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction of any of the offenses described in this chapter or of any offense in another state which, if attempted or committed in this state, would have been punishable as one or more of the offenses described in this chapter, or is required to register under the provisions of Penal Code Section 290; 
3.  That the facilities and operations of the massage facility are not kept in compliance with the provisions of this chapter and this code at all times; 
4.  That the licensee, massage practitioner, and massage therapist has employed, allowed or permitted an unlicensed person or a person with a revoked or expired massage technician, massage practitioner, and massage therapist license to perform or assist in the performance of a massage in the licensee's massage facility; 
5.  That the license was issued in error. 
(Ord. No. 2009-07, § 3(Exh. A), 11-3-09) 
5.20.080 - Abatement. 
    Any massage facility operated, conducted or maintained contrary to the provisions of this chapter shall be and the same is declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance and the city attorney or city prosecutor may in addition to, or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal action hereunder, commence an action or actions, proceeding or proceedings for the abatement, removal and enjoinment thereof, in the manner provided by law; and shall take such other steps, and shall apply to such court or courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or remove such massage facility and restrain and enjoin any person from operating, conducting or maintaining a massage facility contrary to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2009-07, § 3(Exh. A), 11-3-09) 
5.20.090 - Inspection and enforcement. 
    Officers of the police department, the department of environmental health services, the building and safety division and the fire department shall have the right to enter any massage facility during regular business hours to make reasonable inspection to ascertain whether the provisions of this chapter are being met. 
(Ord. No. 2009-07, § 3(Exh. A), 11-3-09) 
Chapter 5.22 - BODY ART FACILITIES 

5.22.010 - Exemptions. 
    This chapter shall not apply to the following classes of individuals and or businesses: 
A.  Acupuncturists or acupressurists who are duly certified and licensed to practice their profession in the state of California; 
B.  Businesses that do piercing of an ear with a disposable, single-use, presterilized stud and clasp or solid needle that is applied using a mechanical device to force the needle or stud through the ear. Tragus piercings are not exempt. 
( Ord. No. 2012-06, § 3(Exh. A), 10-2-12 ) 
5.22.020 - License application. 
A.  Any person, firm, corporation or partnership desiring to obtain a permit to operate a body art facility shall file a complete application with all required documentation under penalty of perjury of the laws of the state. The application shall include a copy of the health permit issued by the local enforcement agency and a copy of certificate of registration for all practioners performing body art in that facility. 
B.  A health permit is valid only for the location of the facility and the time period indicated on the permit and may not be transferred to another owner or facility. 
C.  No application for renewal of a license shall be accepted earlier than ninety (90) days prior to expiration of the license. The application for renewal of a license shall include copy of a health permit, issued by the local enforcement agency, and a copy of certificate of registration for all practitioners performing body art in that facility. 
D.  The city shall promptly reject as incomplete any application which does not meet all the requirements of this chapter, and upon written request of the applicant, shall notify the applicant in writing, by first class mail, postage prepaid, to the address supplied to the city by the applicant, of the deficiencies in the application. 
E.  Any person, firm, corporation or partnership desiring to obtain a permit to operate a body art facility shall file a complete application with all required documentation under penalty of perjury of the laws of the state. 
( Ord. No. 2012-06, § 3(Exh. A), 10-2-12 ) 
5.22.030 - Investigation by city. 
A.  Upon receipt of a complete application, all supplemental required information, and payment of all required fees, the city shall refer the application to all appropriate city and county agencies including the building, planning, fire and police departments, and the county environmental health department. The departments shall review the application and, if necessary, the structure shall be inspected. The departments may request any further information which is reasonably related to the licensing requirements of this chapter. The departments shall determine whether the premises and practitioners comply with the applicable laws, including appropriate zoning and land use district designations. 
B.  If the city, following investigation of the applicant, determines that the applicant does not fulfill the requirements set forth in this chapter, the city shall deny said application by dated, written notice by U.S. mail. Following the denial or revocation of a body art facility license, no application for a body art facility may be filed by such applicant, at the same or substantially same location for at least one year following the date of such denial or revocation. 
( Ord. No. 2012-06, § 3(Exh. A), 10-2-12 ) 
5.22.040 - Required facilities. 
    No license to conduct a new body art facility or any renewal license shall be issued unless an inspection by the affected departments discloses that the facility premises and operation will comply with each of the following minimum requirements: 
A.  Have floors, walls, and ceilings that are smooth, free of open holes, and washable. 
B.  Procedure areas in a body art facility shall meet all of the following standards: 
1.  Be equipped with a light source that provides adequate light at the procedure area. 
2.  Be separated, by a wall or ceiling-to-floor partition, from nail and hair activities. 
3.  Be equipped with a sink supplied with hot and cold running water, containerized liquid soap, and single-use paper towels that are dispensed from a wall-mounted, touchless dispenser that is accessible to the practitioner. 
C.  Decontamination and sanitation areas within a body art facility shall meet all of the following requirements: 
1.  Be separated from procedure areas by a space of at least five feet or by a cleanable barrier. 
2.  Be equipped with a sink, hot and cold running water, liquid soap in a wall mounted dispenser, and single-use paper towels dispensed form a wall-mounted, touchless dispenser that is readily accessible to the practitioner. 
D.  Each procedure area and decontamination and sterilization area shall have lined waste containers. 
E.  Each procedure area and decontamination and sterilization area shall have a container for the disposal of sharps waste that meets the following requirements: 
1.  The sharps waste container shall be portable, if portability is necessary to ensure that the sharps waste container is within arm's reach of the practitioner. 
2.  The sharps waste container shall be labeled with the words "sharps waste" or with the international biohazard symbol and the word "BIOHAZARD". 
3.  All sharps produced during the process of tattooing body piercing, or the application of permanent cosmetics shall be disposed by either of the following methods: 
a.  Removal and disposal by a company, or removal and transportation through a mail-back system approved by the department pursuant to (Section 118245) subdivision (b) of the Health and Safety Code. 
b.  A solid waste, after being disinfected by a method approved by the department pursuant to paragraph (3) of subdivision (a) of the Health and Safety Code (Section 118215). 
F.  The health permit shall be posted in a conspicuous place at the body art facility. 
G.  Certificates of registration for all practitioners performing body art in that facility shall be prominently displayed either near the health permit or at the individual practitioner's procedure area if each practitioner has a designated area. 
H.  No animals shall be allowed in the procedure area or the decontamination and sterilization area. 
( Ord. No. 2012-06, § 3(Exh. A), 10-2-12 ) 
5.22.050 - Temporary body art facilities. 
    A practitioner, registered in the city may practice in a temporary demonstration booth for no more than seven days in a 90-day period. The demonstration booth shall meet all of the following requirements: 
A.  Provide a valid health permit from the San Bernardino County Environmental Health Services (EHS) Department and a business license from the city. 
B.  Be located within a building that has hand washing facilities with hot and cold running water, soap, and single-use paper towels to which practitioners have direct access. 
C.  Constructed with a partition of at least three feet in height separating the procedure area from the public. 
D.  Used exclusively for performing body art. 
E.  Equipped with adequate light available at the level where the practitioner is performing body art. 
F.  Equipped with hand washing equipment that, at a minimum, consists of containerized liquid soap, single-use paper towels, a five-gallon or larger container of potable water accessible via spigot, and a wastewater collection and holding tank of corresponding size. Potable water shall be refilled and the holding tank evacuated at least every four procedures or every four hours, whichever occurs first. 
G.  Animals shall not be allowed within the confines of the demonstration booth. 
H.  Be operating with all necessary permits to conduct business, including, but not limited to valid permits issued by the San Bernardino Environmental Health Services (EHS) Department. 
I.  The name, telephone number, and directions to an emergency room near the temporary body art event shall be posted in a conspicuous location. 
J.  Each practitioner working in a booth at a temporary body art event shall display his or her certificate of registration, or keep the certificate in a folder that is available for inspection upon request of the enforcement officer or a client. 
( Ord. No. 2012-06, § 3(Exh. A), 10-2-12 ) 
5.22.060 - License procedures. 
A.  Upon payment of all fees and successful verifications of the qualifications of the applicant, a body art facility license shall be issued to the applicant by the city, except as provided in this chapter. A body art facility license shall be denied if the applicant has not met the requirements of this chapter and applicable laws. 
B.  Any person denied a license pursuant to this chapter may appeal the denial in writing pursuant to the provisions specified in Section 5.04.200. 
C.  All body art facility licenses issued under this chapter are nontransferable, both as to location and as to the person holding a license. All licenses issued under this chapter are nontransferable as to the person holding the license. 
D.  Any body art facility with a valid business license issued prior to the effective date of this chapter may continue to operate under the previous regulations indefinitely, provided that their license remains continuously in effect with fees paid. 
( Ord. No. 2012-06, § 3(Exh. A), 10-2-12 ) 
5.22.070 - Prohibited conduct. 
    In addition to the procedures specified in Section 5.04.210, a license issued under this chapter may be revoked upon one or more of the following grounds: 
A.  That the licensee, or any of its partners, corporate officers, directors, shareholder, employees, agents or representatives, violated any provision of the Hesperia Municipal Code. 
B.  That the facilities and operations of the body art facility are not kept in compliance with the provisions of this chapter and this code at all times. 
C.  That the license was issued in error. 
D.  Body art work done in specified anatomical areas defined in Section 16.20.320(C) must be done in an enclosed area out of plain view of the other patrons in the facility. 
( Ord. No. 2012-06, § 3(Exh. A), 10-2-12 ) 
5.22.080 - Abatement. 
    Any body art facility operated, conducted or maintained contrary to the provisions of this chapter shall be and the same is declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance and the city attorney or city prosecutor may in addition to, or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal action hereunder, commence an action or actions, proceeding or proceedings for the abatement, removal and enjoinment thereof, in the manner provided by law; and shall take such other steps, and shall apply to such court or courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or remove such body art facility and restrain and enjoin any person from operating, conducting or maintaining a body art facility contrary to the provisions of this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 2012-06, § 3(Exh. A), 10-2-12 ) 
5.22.090 - Inspection and enforcement. 
    Officers of the police department, the department of environmental health services, the building and safety division and the fire department shall have the right to enter any body art facility during regular business hours to make reasonable inspection to ascertain whether the provisions of this chapter are being met. 
    A body art facility or practitioner whose certificate of registration or health permit has been suspended or revoked shall cease doing business until the certificate or permit has been reinstated or a new one has been issued. Suspension of the registration of one practitioner in a body art facility does not affect the status of other practitioners in the facility unless the violation or violations are for conditions or equipment that affects the ability of all the practitioners in the facility to comply with the provisions of this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 2012-06, § 3(Exh. A), 10-2-12 ) 
Chapter 5.24 - PEDDLING, SOLICITING AND HAWKING 
Sections: 

5.24.010 - Application requirements. 
    In addition to the application requirements specified in Section 5.04.050, the following information shall be required: 
A.  The supplier of the goods to be sold; 
B.  The place and date of any court judgment rendered against the applicant as a sex offender or as a defendant guilty of a criminal battery, fraud, burglary or theft; 
C.  A copy of the state sales tax permit (California Revenue and Taxation Code §6066) for the applicant's activities attached to the application; 
D.  A description of every type of merchandise or service that the applicant proposes to peddle or solicit; 
E.  A designation of the location or locations at which place or places the applicant proposes to peddle or solicit and the dates and time of the same; 
F.  A copy of the permit for any food products which are regulated. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; Ord. 197 Exh. A (SBCC § 41.0126(a)), 1994) 
5.24.020 - License limitations. 
    Upon filing a complete application and all required documentation and payment of the required fee, the city shall transmit one copy to the police department. The chief of police or designee shall, within thirty (30) business days of the referral report to the collector, in writing, recommend approval or denial of the license and state the reasons therefore. The license shall not be issued unless all of the following conditions have been met: 
A.  The applicant has submitted a correct and complete application form; 
B.  The applicant has paid all required fees; 
C.  The supplier of the personal property to be sold has been sufficiently identified as required by this chapter and there is no reasonable doubt as to the title or ownership of the personal property; 
D.  The applicant has not had a judgment rendered against him as a violator of California law as a sex offender, as a person who has committed a criminal battery, burglary or theft, or as a person who has committed a fraud; 
E.  The time and place of the proposed licensed activities is in accordance with the regulations set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; Ord. 197 Exh. A (SBCC § 41.0126(b)), 1994) 
5.24.030 - Hours of operation. 
    A license issued under this chapter shall authorize the licensee to peddle or solicit during the dates specified on the license and only during daylight hours. 
(Ord. 197 Exh. A (SBCC § 41.0126(c)), 1994) 
5.24.040 - Hawking prohibited. 
    Hawking, as defined in this title, is prohibited within the city limits of the city. 
(Ord. 197 Exh. A (SBCC § 41.0126(d)), 1994) 
5.24.050 - Exceptions. 
    The following persons must apply for and be given a license pursuant to this chapter and shall be subject to the exemption specified below: 
A.  Veterans Exemption. Any person who was honorably discharged or honorably relieved from the armed services of the United States shall not be required to pay a license fee under this chapter unless the merchandise includes spirituous, malt, vinous, or other intoxicating liquor. 
B.  Religious, Scientific or Charitable Organizations. Organizations qualifying under this chapter shall not be required to pay a license fee. 
C.  Senior Citizens, Youth, Physically Disabled and Blind Persons. Any person who is either: (1) at least fifty-five (55) years of age, or is (2) under eighteen (18) years of age, or is (3) physically disabled, or is (4) certified by a physician to be blind, shall not be required to pay a license fee. 
(Ord. 197 Exh. A (SBCC § 41.0126(e)), 1994) 
5.24.060 - Mobile food vending vehicle operations. 
    Special requirements for mobile food vending vehicle operations shall apply as follows: 
A.  Equipment Requirements for Mobile Food Vending Operations. In addition to other equipment required by law, every mobile food vending vehicle shall be equipped with: 
1.  Signal lamps mounted at the same level and as high and as widely space laterally as practicable. These lamps shall be five to seven inches in diameter and shall display two alternately flashing amber lights visible at five hundred (500) feet to the front and rear in normal sunlight upon a straight level street. The light output of each indicator shall not be less than five candle power nor more than fifteen (15) candle power at any time; 
2.  A convex mirror mounted on the front so the driver in his normal seating position can see the area in front of the truck obscured by the hood; 
3.  An audible warning device to indicate vehicle backing automatically activated and audible at a distance of one hundred (100) feet to the direct rear of the vehicle. 
B.  Use of Special Lights on Mobile Food Vending Vehicles. 
1.  The driver of a mobile food vending vehicle stopped on the street for the purpose of vending shall actuate the special amber flashing lights required by subsection (A)(1) of this section; 
2.  These lights shall not be used when the truck is in motion nor at any time the truck is stopped for a purpose other than vending. 
C.  Inspection Required. Every mobile food vending vehicle shall be inspected by the chief of police or designee once each year prior to its use in this city for the purpose of retail sales of frozen dairy products. The department shall inspect each mobile food vending vehicle to determine whether it complies with this chapter and other state and local laws. Notice from the captain or designee shall be made to the business license officer prior to issuance of a city business license. 
D.  Vending Restrictions. 
1.  A person shall not vend within five hundred (500) feet of any property used as a grade school, junior high school or middle school, either public or private, from one hour before the regular school day to one hour after the regular school day; provided, this subsection shall not apply on days when school is not attended by children or on school property when vending has been approved in writing by the principal. 
2.  A personal shall vend only when the vehicle is lawfully parked or stopped. 
3.  A person shall vend only from the side of the vehicle away from moving traffic and as near as possible to the curb or edge of the right-of-way. 
4.  A person shall not vend to a person standing in the roadway. 
5.  A person shall not stop on the left side of a one-way street to vend. 
6.  A person shall not vend on a street unless there is a clear view of the mobile food vending vehicle for a distance of at least two hundred (200) feet in each direction. 
7.  A person shall not vend except during the period between thirty (30) minutes before sunrise and thirty (30) minutes after sunset. 
8.  A person shall not vend within five hundred (500) feet of any property used as a public or private park or playground. 
E.  Backing Restricted. The vendor shall not back up the vehicle on a public street to make or attempt a sale. 
F.  Unauthorized Riders Prohibited. 
1.  The driver shall not permit any unauthorized person to ride in or on the vehicle. 
2.  A person shall not ride in or on a mobile food vending machine unless employed by its owner or unless authorized in writing to do so by the owner or police department. 
G.  Exemption Authorized. 
1.  The planning director, with the concurrence of the chief of police or designee, may exempt from the requirements of this chapter any mobile food vendor which is not used to vend to persons under twelve (12) years of age. 
2.  The special equipment, inspection, and vending restrictions do not apply to vendors which do not vend to persons under twelve (12) years of age. 
(Amended during 1997 codification; Ord. 197 Exh. A (SBCC § 41.0126(f)), 1994) 
Chapter 5.26 - SIDEWALK VENDING 
Sections: 

5.26.030 - Sidewalk vending. 
    Sidewalk vending includes selling or distributing food or merchandise from a pushcart, stand, display, pedal-driven cart, wagon, showcase, rack, or other non-motorized conveyance, or from one's person, upon a public sidewalk or other public pedestrian path or within a public park. A sidewalk vendor can be roaming or stationary. The following sidewalk vendors are not subject to the standards in this subsection: 
A.  A sidewalk vending pushcart owned or operated by any public agency; 
B.  Persons delivering goods, wares, merchandise, fruits, vegetables, or foodstuffs upon order of, or by agreement with, a customer from a store or other fixed place of business or distribution; 
C.  Vendors participating in farmers markets or other special events as allowed by the city; 
D.  An event at a school facility or an assembly use facility, if the vendor is operating in partnership with the organization conducting the event and is located on the site of the event (i.e., not in the public right-of-way); 
E.  Vendors that only sell, distribute, display, solicit, or offer sale of items that are inherently communicative and have nominal utility apart from its communication (e.g., newspapers, leaflets, pamphlets, buttons, etc.). 
(Ord. No. 2018-09 , § 2(Exh. A), 2-5-19) 
5.26.040 - Vending permit required. 
    No sidewalk vendor shall operate without a sidewalk vending permit and a business license. 
(Ord. No. 2018-09 , § 2(Exh. A), 2-5-19) 
5.26.050 - Application. 
    The application for a sidewalk vending permit shall be signed by the applicant and shall include at least all of the following information: 
A.  The name and current mailing address of the applicant; 
B.  A description of the type of food, beverage, or merchandise to be sold, as well as hours of operation, a description of the cart, and any additional information that will explain the proposed use; 
C.  A description and photograph (including colors and any signs) of any stand to be used in the operation of the business; 
D.  A certification by the sidewalk vendor that to his or her knowledge and belief, the information contained on the application is true; 
E.  A copy of the vendors unexpired sellers permit. 
F.  If the sidewalk vendor is an agent of an individual, company, partnership, or corporation, the name and business address of the principal; 
G.  If operating in state right-of-way, the vendor shall provide evidence of the state's authorization; 
H.  Proof of insurance policy, issued by an insurance company licensed to do business in the state, protecting the permittee and the city from all claims for damages to property and bodily injury, including death, which may arise from operations under or in connection with the permit. Such insurance shall name as additional insured the city and shall provide that the policy shall not terminate or be canceled prior to the expiration date without thirty (30) days advance written notice to the city. 
(Ord. No. 2018-09 , § 2(Exh. A), 2-5-19) 
5.26.060 - Vending locations prohibited. 
    Stationary sidewalk vending is prohibited in all residential zones of the City of Hesperia. 
(Ord. No. 2018-09 , § 2(Exh. A), 2-5-19) 
5.26.070 - License issuance. 
    Not later than 60 days after the filing of a completed application for a vendor's permit, the applicant shall be notified of the decision on the issuance or denial of the permit. 
A.  Fees shall be determined by council resolution and shall be paid prior to issuance of a permit. 
B.  Locations for vending shall be approved by the director. 
1.  In addition to any locational restrictions found in Section 5.26.060 vending locations may be further limited by the Director only if the limitation is directly related to objective health, safety or welfare concerns, including but not limited to: 
a.  The ability of the site to safely accommodate the use; 
b.  Pedestrian safety. 
2.  Vending locations may change only upon written request by an applicant and approval by the director. 
(Ord. No. 2018-09 , § 2(Exh. A), 2-5-19) 
5.26.080 - Term and renewal. 
    All permits are valid for one year unless revoked or suspended prior to expiration. An application to renew a permit shall be made not later than 90 days before the expiration of the current permit. A valid business license shall be applied for or renewed concurrently with the vendors permit each year. 
(Ord. No. 2018-09 , § 2(Exh. A), 2-5-19) 
5.26.090 - Vending cart requirements. 
    No vending cart shall exceed four feet in width, eight feet in height, or eight feet in length. 
(Ord. No. 2018-09 , § 2(Exh. A), 2-5-19) 
5.26.100 - Safety requirements. 
    All sidewalk vendors that prepare or sell food shall comply with the following requirements: 
A.  All equipment installed in any part of the cart shall be secured in order to prevent movement during transit and to prevent detachment in the event of a collision or overturn. 
B.  All utensils shall be securely stored in order to prevent their being thrown from the cart or vehicle in the event of a sudden stop, collision or overturn. A safety knife holder shall be provided to avoid loose storage of knives. 
C.  Compressors, auxiliary engines, generators, batteries, battery chargers, gas-fueled water heaters, and similar equipment shall be installed so as to be hidden from view to the extent possible and be easily accessible. 
D.  All vendors must possess a valid permit issued by the San Bernardino County Health Department, if the sidewalk vendor intends to sell food or any other item requiring a county health department permit. 
(Ord. No. 2018-09 , § 2(Exh. A), 2-5-19) 
5.26.110 - Display of permit. 
    All permits shall be displayed in a visible and conspicuous location at all times during the operation of the vending business. 
(Ord. No. 2018-09 , § 2(Exh. A), 2-5-19) 
5.26.120 - Stationary vending operational standards. 
    It shall be prohibited for any sidewalk vendor to operate under any of the following conditions: 
A.  Vend between 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. unless in conjunction with a special event; 
B.  Leave any stand unattended; 
C.  Store, park, or leave any stand overnight on any public street, sidewalk, or park; 
D.  Sell food or beverages for immediate consumption unless there is a litter receptacle available for patrons' use; 
E.  Leave any location without first disposing all trash or refuse remaining from sales conducted. Trash and refuse generated by the vending cart operations shall not be disposed of in public trash receptacles; 
F.  Discharge solids or liquids to the street or a storm drain; 
G.  Allow any items relating to the operation of the vending business to be placed anywhere other than in, on, or under the stand; 
H.  Set up, maintain, or permit the use of any additional table, crate, carton, rack, or any other device to increase the selling or display capacity of his/her stand where such terms have not been described by his or her application; 
I.  Solicit or conduct business with persons in motor vehicles; 
J.  Sell anything other than that which he or she is permitted to vend; 
K.  Sound or permit the sounding of any device that produces a loud and raucous noise or any noise in violation of the city's noise ordinance, or use or operate any loud speaker, public address system, radio, sound amplifier, or similar device to attract the attention of the public; 
L.  Vend without the insurance coverage previously specified; 
M.  Operate within fifty (50) feet of a fire hydrant or twenty-five (25) feet of a transit stop; 
N.  Operate within fifty (50) feet of the outer edge of a driveway or vehicular entrance to public or private property in commercial, business park, mixed use, or industrial zones; 
O.  Vend from the exposed street or alley and/or traffic side of the vending cart; 
P.  Operate in a manner that does not maintain four (4) feet of clear space on a public sidewalk; 
Q.  Operate a stationary vending cart in exclusively residential zones; 
R.  Operate a sidewalk vending cart within five hundred (500) feet of a certified farmers' market or swap meet during the operating hours of that certified farmers' market or swap meet; 
S.  Operate a sidewalk vending cart within five hundred (500) feet of any public sidewalk, street, right-of-way, or other public property approved for commercial filming or a temporary event or festival; 
T.  Operate in violation of any other generally applicable law; 
U.  Display off-site signs. No signs are allowed, except those approved in the application which identify the name of the product or the name of the vendor and the posting of prices on the cart. Signs with intermittent, flashing, moving, or blinking light, or varying intensity of light or color, are not permitted. 
V.  Evidence of compliance with Health & Safety Code § 114315(a). Such evidence may include, but is not limited to, written permission from a private business owner for use of the business's toilet and hand washing facility, a printed or electronic map showing the location of a compliant public toilet and hand washing facility, or similar documented evidence of compliance. 
(Ord. No. 2018-09 , § 2(Exh. A), 2-5-19) 
5.26.130 - Roaming vendors. 
    This section regulates roaming vending other than in public sidewalks or parks. Roaming vending can promote the public interest by contributing to an active and attractive pedestrian environment. However, reasonable regulation of roaming vending is necessary to protect the public health, safety, and welfare. The purpose of this subsection is to set forth the conditions and requirements under which roaming vendors may be permitted to operate to protect the public health, safety, and welfare of the residents of and visitors to Hesperia. 
(Ord. No. 2018-09 , § 2(Exh. A), 2-5-19) 
5.26.140 - Applicability. 
    Roaming vending activity may occur within a public or private open space not including a public sidewalk or park (e.g. parking lot, plaza, etc.), or from a vehicle legally parked on a street, in all commercial, mixed-use, business park and industrial zones in compliance with the standards in this subsection. Roaming vending activity may also occur from a vehicle legally parked on the street in all residential zones, in compliance with the standards in this subsection. The following roaming vendors are not subject to the standards in this subsection: 
A.  A roaming vending vehicle or pushcart owned or operated by any public agency; 
B.  Persons delivering goods, wares, merchandise, fruits, vegetables, or foodstuffs upon order of, or by agreement with, a customer from a store or other fixed place of business or distribution; 
C.  Vendors participating in farmers markets or other special events as allowed by the city; 
D.  An event at a school facility or an assembly use facility, if the vendor is operating in partnership with the organization conducting the event and is located on the site of the event (i.e., not in the public right-of-way); 
E.  Vendors that only sell, display, distribute, solicit, or offer sale of items that are inherently communicative and have nominal utility apart from its communication (e.g., newspapers, leaflets, pamphlets, buttons, etc.). 
(Ord. No. 2018-09 , § 2(Exh. A), 2-5-19) 
5.26.150 - Roaming vendor application additional requirements. 
    The application for a roaming vendor's permit shall be signed by the applicant and shall include, in addition to the requirements of Section 5.26.050, the following: 
A.  The state vehicle license plate number and the vehicle identification number of the roaming vendor vehicle. 
B.  If operating on private property or on a city-owned parking lot, plaza, or other city-owned area (other than a public sidewalk or park), the roaming vendor shall provide evidence of the property owners written authorization. 
C.  If operating in state right-of-way, the roaming vendor shall provide evidence of the state's authorization. 
D.  For each person with a ten percent or greater financial interest in the business that operates the roaming vendor vehicle, a list, signed under penalty of perjury, of each conviction of such person and whether such conviction was by verdict, plea of guilty, or plea of no contest. The list shall for, each conviction, set forth the date of arrest, the offense charged, and the offense of which the person was convicted. A person who acquires a ten percent or greater financial interest in the business that operates the roaming vendor vehicle during the term of the permit issued pursuant to this code shall immediately so notify the director and comply with this subsection. 
E.  Valid permit issued by the San Bernardino County Environmental Health Department, if the sidewalk vendor intends to sell food or any other item requiring a county health department permit. 
F.  Evidence of compliance with Health & Safety Code § 114315(a). Such evidence may include, but is not limited to, written permission from a private business owner for use of the business's toilet and hand washing facility, a printed or electronic map showing the location of a compliant public toilet and hand washing facility, or similar documented evidence of compliance. 
(Ord. No. 2018-09 , § 2(Exh. A), 2-5-19) 
5.26.160 - Roaming vending locations. 
    Roaming vending may take place within the commercial, mixed-use, business park, industrial, and/or residential zones, with individual locations approved by the director. 
(a)  Vending locations shall be designated based on the ability of the site to safely accommodate the use. 
(b)  Vending locations may change only upon written request by an applicant and approval by the director. 
(c)  All locations of vending stands shall be considered in relation to right-of-way configurations and pedestrian safety. 
(Ord. No. 2018-09 , § 2(Exh. A), 2-5-19) 
5.26.170 - Roaming vending operational standards. 
    It shall be prohibited for any roaming vendor to operate under any of the following conditions: 
A.  Vend between 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. unless in conjunction with a special event; 
B.  Leave any stand or motor vehicle unattended; 
C.  Store, park, or leave any stand overnight on any public street or sidewalk, or park any motor vehicle other than in a lawful parking place; 
D.  Sell food or beverages for immediate consumption unless there is a litter receptacle available for patrons' use; 
E.  Leave any location without first disposing all trash or refuse remaining from sales conducted. Trash and refuse generated by the vending cart operations shall not be disposed of in public trash receptacles; 
F.  Discharge solids or liquids to the street or a storm drain; 
G.  Allow any items relating to the operation of the vending business to be placed anywhere other than in, on, or under the stand or vehicle; 
H.  Set up, maintain, or permit the use of any additional table, crate, carton, rack, or any other device to increase the selling or display capacity of his/her stand where such terms have not been described by his or her application; 
I.  Solicit or conduct business with persons in motor vehicles; 
J.  Sell anything other than that which he or she is permitted to vend; 
K.  Sound or permit the sounding of any device that produces a loud and raucous noise, or any noise in violation of the city's noise ordinance or use or operate any loud speaker, public address system, radio, sound amplifier, or similar device to attract the attention of the public; 
L.  Vend without the insurance coverage previously specified; 
M.  Operate within fifty (50) feet of a fire hydrant or twenty-five (25) feet of a transit stop; 
N.  Operate within twenty-five (25) feet of the outer edge of a driveway or vehicular entrance to public or private property in residential zones; 
O.  Operate within fifty (50) feet of the outer edge of a driveway or vehicular entrance to public or private property in commercial, business park, mixed use, or industrial zones; 
P.  Vend from the exposed street or alley and/or traffic side of the vending cart or vehicle; 
Q.  Vend while parked illegally; 
R.  Vend from any street parking space other than a space parallel to the curb; 
S.  Operate in a manner that does not maintain four (4) feet of clear space on a public sidewalk; 
T.  Operate in any manner or location that blocks any citizen or service entry or exit from any business or residence; 
U.  Operate from any motor vehicle not licensed by the department of motor vehicles. 
V.  Display off-site signs. No signs are allowed, except those approved in the application which identify the name of the product or the name of the vendor and the posting of prices on the cart. Signs with intermittent, flashing, moving, blinking light, or varying intensity of light or color, are not permitted. 
(Ord. No. 2018-09 , § 2(Exh. A), 2-5-19) 
5.26.180 - Additional operational standards in public parks. 
    In addition to the operational standards in Section 5.26.130 and Section 5.26.180 the following shall also be prohibited for any sidewalk vendor operating in a public park: 
A.  Operate outside the hours of operation of the park; 
B.  Operate more than six (6) feet from any walking or bicycling pathway in the park; 
C.  Operate within fifty (50) feet of any other sidewalk vendor in the park; 
D.  Operate on, or within twenty-five (25) feet of, any sports field or playground equipment area. 
E.  Utilize any bench, table, barbeque pit, covered gathering area, or other publicly-owned structure or amenity in the park in any way as part of the sidewalk vending operation. 
F.  Operate within twenty-five (25) feet of any bench, table, barbeque pit, covered gathering area, or other publicly-owned structure or amenity in the park. 
(Ord. No. 2018-09 , § 2(Exh. A), 2-5-19) 
5.26.190 - Denial, suspension, and revocation. 
    Any permit may be denied, suspended, or revoked for any of the following causes: 
A.  Fraud or misrepresentation contained in the application for the permit. 
B.  Fraud or misrepresentation made in the course of carrying on the business of vending. 
C.  Conduct of the permitted business in such manner as to create a public nuisance, or constitute a danger to the public health, safety, or welfare. 
D.  Conduct in violation of the provisions of this chapter. 
E.  Denial, void, or revocation of the business license shall result in revocation of the vendor permit. 
(Ord. No. 2018-09 , § 2(Exh. A), 2-5-19) 
5.26.200 - Violation of sidewalk vending requirements. 
    A violation of these sidewalk vending requirements, other than failure to possess a valid sidewalk vending permit, is punishable by the following: 
A.  An administrative fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for a first violation. 
B.  An administrative fine of two hundred dollars ($200.00) for a second violation within one year of the first violation. 
C.  An administrative fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each additional violation within one year of the first violation. 
D.  Rescission of a sidewalk vending permit for the term of that permit upon the fourth violation or subsequent violations. 
(Ord. No. 2018-09 , § 2(Exh. A), 2-5-19) 
5.26.210 - Vending without a permit. 
    Vending without a sidewalk vending permit issued by the City of Hesperia is punishable by the following: 
A.  An administrative fine of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for a first violation. 
B.  An administrative fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00) for a second violation within one year of the first violation. 
C.  An administrative fine of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each additional violation within one year of the first violation. 
D.  Upon proof of a valid permit issued by the City of Hesperia, any administrative fines imposed under this subsection for vending without possessing a copy of the permit shall be reduced to the administrative fines set forth in Section 5.26.200. 
E.  All fines imposed pursuant to Sections 5.26.200 and 5.26.210 shall be subject to an ability-to-pay determination as described in California Government Code section 51039(f). Concurrently with issuing a citation for such fines to a person, the city shall provide the person with notice of his or her right to request an ability-to-pay determination and shall make available instructions or other materials for requesting an ability-to-pay determination. 
(Ord. No. 2018-09 , § 2(Exh. A), 2-5-19) 
Chapter 5.28 - POOL AND BILLIARD HALLS 
Sections: 

5.28.010 - Public welfare. 
    The city council may refuse to grant a license for a pool and billiard hall if, in the opinion of a majority of the council, the establishment and maintaining of a billiard hall or pool room would be contrary to the public welfare of the neighborhood. 
(Ord. 197 Exh. A (SBCC § 41.0127(a)), 1994) 
5.28.020 - Prohibited activities. 
    The following activities shall be prohibited within pool and billiard halls and rooms: 
A.  Gambling or possession of any gambling device; 
B.  Operating a pool or billiard hall between the hours of twelve midnight and six in the morning; 
C.  To allow any person under the age of eighteen (18) to be present or remain in the billiard hall or pool room; 
D.  Not to allow at least one door or window, of at least twenty (20) square feet, through which the public may at all times see the entire interior of any such pool hall, room or place during day time, and where any light is therein at night time, and no obstruction of any kind whatever shall be permitted. 
(Ord. 197 Exh. A (SBCC § 41.0127(b)), 1994) 
5.28.030 - Exemptions. 
    This chapter shall not apply to any bona fide lodge, club, society, veterans' organization or similar group having one or more billiard tables or pool tables on their private premises solely for the amusement and entertainment of their members and guests, and where no fee is charged for the use of such billiard tables or pool tables and the use of such tables is not open to the public. 
(Ord. 197 Exh. A (SBCC § 41.0127(c)), 1994) 
Chapter 5.32 - PRIVATE PATROL SERVICES AND PRIVATE PATROLMEN 
Sections: 

5.32.010 - Registration. 
    It is unlawful for any private patrol service to employ or have associated with it in the conduct of its business any private person who is not currently registered pursuant to Section 7581(e) of the California Business and Professions Code. Current registration shall be presented to any law enforcement or code enforcement officer upon request. 
(Ord. 250 Exh. A (part), 1998; Ord. 197 Exh. A (SBCC § 41.0125(a)), 1994) 
5.32.020 - Proof of registration. 
    Each applicant shall prove to the satisfaction of the collector that he or she possesses a valid license under the Private Investigator Act of the state of California. A current copy of the state license shall be filed with the application. 
(Ord. 250 Exh. A (part), 1998; Ord. 197 Exh. A (SBCC § 41.0125(b)) 1994) 
Chapter 5.36 - TAXICABS 
Sections: 

5.36.020 - License required. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to engage in the business of operating or causing to be operated any taxicab service within the incorporated area of the city, without having a license to do so under the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  It is unlawful for any person to drive a taxicab in the incorporated area of the city without having a taxicab driver's license to do so under the provisions of this chapter. A copy of the city license shall be prominently displayed in each vehicle at all times. 
(Ord. 197 Exh. A (SBCC § 41.0132(b)), 1994) 
5.36.030 - Application for taxicab service license. 
    Any person desiring to obtain a license to operate a taxicab service under this chapter shall submit a written application pursuant to Section 5.04.050 to the collector. In addition to the information required by Section 5.04.050, the following information shall be provided: 
A.  The number of vehicles to be operated under the permit; 
B.  The make, type, year, manufacturer, vehicle license number, and passenger seating of the vehicles to be used by the applicant; 
C.  The proposed color scheme, insignia or other distinguishable characteristics of the taxicab to be used, including the type of illuminated sign to be mounted on the top of the vehicle and legend thereon; 
D.  Evidence of public liability insurance of not less than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for each person killed or injured and not less than three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) for injury or death of any two or more persons in any one accident, and for damages to property of at least fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) from any one accident; 
E.  Legal and registered ownership of the vehicles to be used by the applicant. It shall be the licensee's responsibility to notify the collector of any changes in vehicles registered to their license; 
F.  Prior experience of the applicant and each driver in the taxicab business, including any prior denial, revocation or suspension by any public agency of any taxicab service or taxicab driving permit, license or certificate for a period of five years prior to application; 
G.  All felony convictions or those involving a crime of moral turpitude of the applicant and of all persons having an ownership interest in the proposed taxicab service; 
H.  Written evidence satisfactory to the city that each driver employed by the applicant has complied, and currently complies, with the provisions of California Government Code Section 53075.5(b)(3), or any successor provision thereto, pertaining to pre-employment and periodic testing of drivers for controlled substances and alcohol, and with provisions therein pertaining to payment for drug and alcohol testing programs and related reporting requirements. 
(Ord. 250 Exh. A (part), 1998; Ord. 197 Exh. A (SBCC § 41.0132(c)), 1994) 
5.36.040 - Grounds for denial or revocation of taxicab service license. 
    In addition to the provisions of Section 5.04.200, taxicab service license shall be denied or revoked by the collector on the following grounds: 
A.  Failure to have or maintain insurance as required by this chapter at all times; 
B.  Failure to maintain vehicles in good and safe order and in compliance with all laws; 
C.  The application is found to contain inaccurate, false, misleading or fraudulent statements or omissions of material facts, or the application was not accompanied by all required supporting documentation; 
D.  Failure to pay any fees as required under this title; 
E.  A driver's conviction of more than two violations of any state laws pertaining to the operation of a motor vehicle in any calendar year; 
F.  Employing of a driver who does not have a valid taxicab driver's license under the requirements of this chapter; 
G.  Violation of any provisions of this chapter or of the Hesperia Municipal Code. 
(Ord. 197 Exh. A (SBCC § 41.0132(d)), 1994) 
5.36.050 - Application for a taxicab driver's license. 
A.  Any person desiring to obtain a taxicab driver's license shall submit a written application and all supporting documentation to the collector. In addition to the information required by Section 5.04.050, the following information shall be required: 
1.  Pertinent personal data and proof of possession of a valid class 3 driver's license issued by the state of California; 
2.  Physical and mental condition, including any condition that might hinder or impair his or her ability to safely drive a taxicab; 
3.  Motor vehicle record for three years prior to application; 
4.  Any criminal convictions of the applicant during the previous three years; 
5.  Experience in driving motor vehicles, taxis and other vehicles for hire during the previous five years; 
6.  The name and address of the taxicab service by whom the applicant will be employed; 
7.  Written evidence satisfactory to the city that, within the previous year, the applicant tested negative for controlled substances and/or alcohol, as specified and required in California Government Code Section 53075.5(b)(3), or any successor provision thereto. 
B.  Each applicant shall be fingerprinted and photographed by the police department and a criminal records check shall be conducted on the applicant. The applicant will be required to pay the sheriff's established fees for such services in addition to the taxicab driver's license fee. A driver obtaining a permit renewal need not be fingerprinted and photographed if the chief of police determines that such is not necessary for proper administration of this chapter. 
(Ord. 250 Exh. A (part), 1998; Ord. 197 Exh. A (SBCC § 41.0132(e)), 1994) 
5.36.060 - Grounds for denial or revocation of taxicab driver's license. 
    In addition to the provisions of Section 5.04.200; a taxicab driver's license shall be denied or revoked by the collector on the following grounds: 
A.  The person does not possess a valid class 3 driver's license issued by the state of California; 
B.  The person is less than eighteen (18) years of age; 
C.  The person is required to register pursuant to Section 290 of the California Penal Code; 
D.  The person has been convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude, soliciting for prostitution, narcotics or dangerous drugs, unless a period of not less than three years has elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement for such offense, whichever is later; 
E.  The person has been convicted for driving a motor vehicle recklessly or under the influence of a controlled substance within the preceding three years preceding the date of his or her application for a license; 
F.  Conviction of more than two violations of any state law pertaining to the operation of a motor vehicle in any calendar year; 
G.  Driving any taxicab the driver knew or should have known was not in good order and repair; 
H.  The application is found to contain inaccurate, false, misleading or fraudulent statements or omissions of material facts or the application was not accompanied by all required supporting documentation; 
I.  The person has committed a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or of the Hesperia Municipal Code. 
(Ord. 197 Exh. A (SBCC § 41.0132(f)), 1994) 
5.36.070 - Exemptions. 
    This chapter shall not apply to public transportation service being performed pursuant to a contract or franchise with the city or any other public entity in this state. 
(Ord. 197 Exh. A (SBCC § 41.0132(g)), 1994) 
Chapter 5.40 - THEATERS 
Sections: 

5.40.010 - Application requirements. 
    In addition to the application requirements specified in Section 5.04.050 the following shall be required: 
A.  A statement that the applicant, licensee, his agent, employee or any person connected with the licensee as partner, director, officer, stockholder, general manager, or other associate has not: 
1.  Knowingly made any false, misleading or fraudulent statement of a fact in an application for a license or in any statements made to city departments, the local fire authority, or the police department investigating the application; or 
2.  Violated any provision of this chapter or any statute relating to his permitted activity; or 
3.  Been convicted of a felony or any crime involving moral turpitude; or 
4.  Committed any unlawful, fraudulent or dangerous act while conducting the permitted business; or 
5.  Violated any rule or regulation adopted by the city council relating to the licensee's business; or 
6.  Conducted the licensed business in a manner contrary to the peace, health, safety or general welfare of the public; or 
7.  Failed to comply with zoning, building and safety regulations of the city, the San Bernardino County Environmental Health Services Department, or the Hesperia Fire District prior to the commencement of business operations. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; Ord. 197 Exh. A (SBCC § 41.0128(a)), 1994) 
(Ord. No. 2012-09, § 3(Exh. A), 6-19-12) 
5.40.020 - Viewing area. 
A.  It is unlawful to maintain, operate or manage, or permit to be maintained, operated or managed any theater in which the viewing areas are not visible from a continuous main aisle or are obscured by a curtain, door, wall or other enclosure. For purposes of this section, "viewing area" means the area where a patron or customer is positioned while watching the performance, picture, show or film, and the internal configuration of each viewing area shall be such that the activities of the patron or customer viewing the performance, picture, show or film are visible from the main aisle. For purposes of this section, "obscured" means covered at any point from the surface upon which a patron or customer's feet are placed to a point forty-eight (48) inches above that surface. Violation of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor, and shall be punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), by imprisonment for not more than six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
B.  Any theater lawfully in existence prior to the adoption of or any amendment to this chapter shall conform to the provisions of this chapter within ninety (90) days of the effective date of this chapter. 
(Ord. 197 Exh. A (SBCC § 41.0128(b)), 1994) 
(Ord. No. 2012-09, § 3(Exh. A), 6-19-12) 
5.40.030 - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2012-09, § 3(Exh. A), adopted June 19, 2012, repealed § 5.40.030, which pertained to alcoholic beverages prohibited. See also the Code Comparative Table and Disposition List. 
5.40.040 - Exemptions. 
    Any provision of this chapter may be waived by action of the city council in writing as to any civic, educational, charitable or other noncommercial presentation or event. 
(Ord. 197 Exh. A (SBCC § 41.0128(d)), 1994) 
(Ord. No. 2012-09, § 3(Exh. A), 6-19-12) 
Chapter 5.44 - HOME OCCUPATIONS 
Sections: 

5.44.010 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of the home occupation provisions is to permit the conduct of a part-time business for supplemental income purposes in the residential districts. Home occupations are limited to those uses which may be conducted within a residential dwelling, without in any way changing the appearance or condition of the residence, or the surrounding neighborhood. 
(Ord. 218 § 6(a), 1995) 
5.44.020 - Application for a home occupation. 
    Any person desiring to obtain a license to operate a business as a home occupation shall submit a written application pursuant to Section 5.04.050 to the collector. In addition to the information required by Section 5.04.050, a surrounding property owners' list consisting of the names and addresses of all contiguous property owners must be neatly listed and typed on gummed labels following the city format. "Contiguous property" is defined as those properties that share a common boundary with the subject property, including across streets. The city shall mail to every person on the submitted list a copy of the application for a home occupation and the conditions of approval of the home occupation. The mailing shall include a statement that an objection may be filed with the city if the conditions of operation are not met. 
(Ord. 218 § 6(b), 1995) 
5.44.030 - Mandatory conditions for operation. 
    Home occupations may be permitted on property used for residential purposes, based upon the following conditions: 
A.  The use of the dwelling for such home occupation shall be clearly incidental and subordinate to its use for residential purposes by its inhabitants. 
B.  No persons, other than members of the family who reside on the premises, shall be engaged in such activity on the site, with the exception of an employee at a cottage food establishment. 
C.  There shall be no change in the outward appearance of the building or premises, or other visible evidence of the activity. 
D.  There shall be no sales of products on the premises, except produce (fruit or vegetables) grown on the subject property, and the sales of products produced by a permitted cottage food establishment. 
E.  The use shall not allow customers or clientele to visit dwellings. However, incidental uses such as music lessons, the sale of fruits and vegetables, and the sale of food produced by a cottage food establishment, may be permitted if the intensity of such use is approved by the planning director. 
F.  A cottage food establishment shall provide a copy of their current San Bernardino County Environmental Health permit. 
G.  No equipment or processes shall be used on the subject property which creates noise, smoke, glare, fumes, odor, vibration, electrical, radio or television interference disruptive to surrounding properties. 
H.  All required accessory uses for the primary residential use shall be maintained. Normal use of the garage may be permitted if such use does not obstruct required parking. 
I.  No more than fifteen (15) percent of the total square footage of the dwelling, or one room of the dwelling, whichever is less, shall be used for the home occupation. 
J.  The use shall not involve storage of materials outside any structures. 
K.  Use of the United States Postal Service in conjunction with the home occupation shall be limited to use of a post office box only. 
L.  No signs shall be displayed in conjunction with the home occupation, and there shall be no advertising using the home address, either on or off site. 
M.  The use shall not involve the use of commercial vehicles for delivery of materials to or from the premises, other than a vehicle not to exceed a capacity of one ton, owned by the operator of such home occupation. 
N.  If an applicant is not the owner of the property where a home occupation is to be conducted, then a signed statement from the owner approving such use of the dwelling must be submitted with the application. 
(Ord. 218 § 6(c), 1995) 
(Ord. No. 2012-15, § 3(Exh. A), 1-15-13) 
5.44.040 - Revocation of home occupation permit. 
    Any violation of, or failure to comply with, the mandatory conditions of the home occupation permit as specified herein may result in the revocation of the permit pursuant to Section 5.04.200. 
(Ord. 218 § 6(d), 1995) 
Chapter 5.48 - SEXUALLY-ORIENTED BUSINESSES 
Sections: 

5.48.010 - Purpose and intent. 
    It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate sexually-oriented businesses in order to promote the health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the city. The provisions of this chapter have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials, including sexually-oriented materials. Similarly, it is not the intent nor effect of this chapter to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually-oriented materials protected by the First Amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually-oriented entertainment to their intended market. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; Ord. 129 § 2, 1991) 
5.48.030 - Classification of sexually-oriented businesses. 
    Sexually-oriented businesses are classified as follows: 
A.  Adult arcades; 
B.  Adult bookstores or adult video stores; 
C.  Adult cabarets; 
D.  Adult motels; 
E.  Adult motion picture theaters; 
F.  Adult theaters; 
G.  Escort agencies; 
H.  Nude model studios; and 
I.  Sexual encounter centers. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; Ord. 129 § 4, 1991) 
5.48.040 - Sexually-oriented business license required. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to operate a sexually-oriented business or to enlarge such a business by a twenty-five (25) percent or greater floor area increase without a valid sexually-oriented business license, issued by the city manager for the particular type of business. 
B.  An application for a sexually-oriented business license must be made on a form provided by the city manager and shall not be deemed complete unless all of the following information is provided. The application must be accompanied by a sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the premises, including a statement of total floor space occupied by the business. The sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared but must be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches. Applicants who must comply with Section 5.48.160 shall submit a diagram meeting the requirements of Section 5.48.160. 
C.  The applicant must be qualified according to the provisions of this chapter and the premises must be inspected and found to be in compliance with all applicable laws and regulations by the health department, fire department, and building official. Such inspection shall be conducted by city within two weeks of receipt by the city manager of a complete application. The applicant shall be advised as to whether or not the premises is in compliance with all applicable laws and regulations within fourteen (14) days of such inspection. If found to not be in compliance, the applicant shall be served with a notice of noncompliance stating what specific action must be taken to achieve compliance. The applicant shall have six months thereafter to achieve compliance pursuant to Section 5.48.050(D). No license shall be issued until compliance has been obtained. 
D.  If a person who wishes to operate a sexually-oriented business is an individual, he or she must sign the application for a license as applicant. If a person who wishes to operate a sexually-oriented business is other than an individual, each individual who has a ten percent or greater interest in the business must sign the application for a license as applicant. Each applicant must be qualified under Section 5.48.050 and each applicant shall be considered a licensee if a license is granted. 
E.  The fact that a person possesses any other form of required license does not exempt such person from the requirement of obtaining a sexually-oriented business license. A person who operates a sexually-oriented business and possesses any other license related to such business shall comply with the requirements and provisions of this chapter, any and all other ordinances of the city, and all other applicable requirements and provisions of the San Bernardino County Code. 
F.  The applicant shall state the date, location and nature of all criminal convictions occurring within the previous five years, including the terms of any probation. 
G.  The application shall be signed by the applicant and shall contain a declaration made under penalty of perjury that the information provided is true and correct. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; Ord. 129 § 5, 1991) 
5.48.050 - Issuance of license. 
A.  Except as provided in Section 5.48.050(D), the city manager shall issue a license to an applicant within thirty (30) days after receipt of a complete application unless he or she finds one or more of the following to be true: 
1.  An applicant is under eighteen (18) years of age; 
2.  An applicant has failed to pay to city any taxes, fees, fines or penalties previously assessed or imposed in relation to a sexually-oriented business and any appeal period or period to initiate any civil action with respect thereto has expired; 
3.  An applicant has failed to provide information required by this chapter or has falsely answered a question or request for information on the application form; 
4.  An applicant has been convicted of a violation of a provision of this chapter within two years immediately preceding the application. The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect; 
5.  The license fee required by this chapter has not been paid; 
6.  The proposed establishment is in violation of or is not in compliance with Sections 5.48.130 or 5.48.160; 
7.  An applicant has, within the preceding five years, been convicted of, or is under indictment or is currently waiting trial for a crime involving or constituting any of the following: 
a.  Prostitution or solicitation of prostitution, 
b.  Pandering or pimping, 
c.  Obscenity as defined under California law, 
d.  Sale, distribution or display of harmful material to minors, 
e.  Sexual assault, 
f.  Running a house of prostitution; 
B.  The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the disqualification of the applicant. 
C.  The license, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the person or persons to whom it is granted, the expiration date and the address of the sexually-oriented business. The license shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the sexually-oriented business so that it may be easily read at any time. 
D.  If the application is otherwise approved, an applicant shall have six months following service of a notice of noncompliance referred to in Section 5.48.040(C) to bring the premises into compliance, whereupon the license shall be promptly issued. If the premises are not brought into compliance within said period, the license application shall be deemed to be denied. 
E.  If granted a license, the licensee shall report, in writing, any material change in information provided in the application to the city manager within five days of such change. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; Ord. 129 § 6, 1991) 
( Ord. No. 2014-15, § 2, 8-19-14 ) 
5.48.060 - Fees. 
A.  The license fee for a sexually-oriented business license shall be as established by resolution of the city council. 
B.  If an applicant is required to also obtain any other form of business license in order to operate a sexually-oriented business for which location this application applies, then payment of the fee required herein shall exempt applicant from payment of any further fee otherwise required by the city as payment for such business license, in any given year. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; Ord. 129 § 7, 1991) 
5.48.070 - Inspection. 
A.  An applicant or licensee shall permit representatives of the sheriff's department, health department, fire department, and building inspection division to inspect the premises of a sexually-oriented business for the purpose of insuring compliance with all applicable laws, during normal business hours. 
B.  A person who operates a sexually-oriented business, or his agent or employee, commits an offense if he or she refuses to permit a lawful inspection of the premises by a representative of the sheriff's department at any time it is open for business. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; Ord. 129 § 8, 1991) 
5.48.080 - Expiration of license. 
A.  Each license shall expire one year from the date of issuance and may be renewed only through successful completion of the application process provided in Section 5.48.040. Application for renewal should be made at least thirty (30) days before the expiration date, and when made less than thirty (30) days before the expiration date, the expiration of the license will not be affected. 
B.  In the event the city manager denies a new license or renewal of a license, the applicant shall not be issued a license for one year from the date of denial; unless, subsequent to denial, the city manager finds that the basis for denial of the license or renewal has been corrected or abated, in which event the applicant will be granted a license if at least ninety (90) days have elapsed since the date denial became final. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; Ord. 129 § 9, 1991) 
5.48.090 - Suspension of license. 
A.  The city manager may suspend a license, which suspension shall not become effective until expiration of the appeal period provided herein, or until any appeal has been denied, whichever is later, for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days if he or she determines that a licensee or an employee of a licensee has: 
1.  Violated or is not in compliance with any applicable section of this chapter; 
2.  Refused to allow an inspection of the sexually-oriented business premises as authorized by this chapter; 
3.  Served alcohol on the sexually-oriented business premises without having all legally required licenses or permits; 
4.  Failed to comply with, or has knowingly permitted violation of, any provision of city's building, fire, electrical, plumbing or housing code after receipt of notice from city of such violation. 
B.  Notwithstanding any other provision herein, a sexually-oriented business license may be suspended in the event the city manager determines that there is an immediate and serious threat or risk of harm to the public health, safety or welfare. If so suspended, a public hearing following suspension shall be conducted within three business days thereafter to determine whether or not such public threat or risk of harm has been eliminated. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; Ord. 129 § 10, 1991) 
5.48.100 - Revocation of license. 
A.  The city manager may revoke a license if a cause of suspension in Section 5.48.090 occurs and the license has previously been suspended within the preceding twelve (12) months. 
B.  The city manager may revoke a license if he or she determines that: 
1.  A licensee gave false or misleading information in the material submitted to the city manager during the application process; 
2.  A licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed possession, use or sale of controlled substances on the premises; 
3.  A licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed prostitution on the premises; 
4.  A licensee or an employee knowingly operated the sexually oriented business during a period of time when the licensee's license was suspended; 
5.  A licensee has been convicted of an offense listed in Section 5.48.050(A)(7) for which the time period required in Section 5.48.050(A)(7) has not elapsed; 
6.  On two or more occasions within a twelve (12) month period, a licensee or employee committed an offense on the licensed premises, listed in Section 5.48.050(A)(7), for which a conviction has been obtained; 
7.  A licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed any act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation, or offense listed in Section 5.48.050(A)(7) on the licensed premises. 
C.  The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the revocation of the license. 
D.  Subsection (B)(7) does not apply to adult motels as a ground for revoking the license. 
E.  When the city manager revokes a license, the revocation shall continue for one year and the licensee shall not be issued a sexually-oriented business license for one year from the date revocation became effective; unless, subsequent to revocation, the city manager finds that the basis for the revocation has been corrected or abated, in which event the applicant may be granted a license if at least ninety (90) days have elapsed since the date the revocation became effective. If the license was revoked under subsection (B)(5), an applicant may not be granted another license until the appropriate number of years required under Section 5.48.050(A)(7) has elapsed. 
F.  Any revocation shall not become effective until expiration of the appeal period provided herein, or until any appeal has been denied, whichever is later. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; Ord. 129 § 11, 1991) 
5.48.110 - Appeal. 
    If the city manager denies the issuance or renewal of a license, or suspends or revokes a license, he or she shall send to the applicant, or licensee, by certified mail, return receipt requested and addressed to the subject business, written notice of the action and the right to an appeal. The aggrieved party shall have ten days after service by mail of the city manager's denial to file with the city clerk a written appeal to the city council. The city clerk shall schedule a public hearing on the appeal, to be conducted not less than two weeks, nor later than thirty (30) days thereafter, at a regularly scheduled meeting of the city council. 
    The filing of an appeal stays such suspension or revocation until the city council makes a final decision. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; Ord. 129 § 12, 1991) 
5.48.120 - Transfer of license prohibited. 
    A licensee shall not purport to transfer his or her license to another, nor shall a licensee operate a sexually oriented business under the authority of a license at any place other than the address designated in the application and license. Any license purportedly transferred shall be deemed by law to be voluntarily surrendered and of no force or effect. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; Ord. 129 § 13, 1991) 
5.48.130 - Additional regulations applicable to nude modeling studios and escort agencies. 
A.  Escort agencies and nude model studios shall not employ, nor otherwise allow nude modeling by, any person under the age of eighteen (18) years. 
B.  It is unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen (18) years to act as an escort or appear in a state of nudity on the premises of an escort agency or a nude model studio. 
C.  Except as otherwise provided by law, it is unlawful for any escort agency or nude model studio to place or permit a bed, sofa or mattress in any room on the premises, except that a sofa may be placed in a reception room open to the public. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; Ord. 129 § 14, 1991) 
5.48.140 - Additional regulations applicable to adult theaters and adult motion picture theaters. 
A.  All other provisions of city's ordinances and this code remain applicable to adult theaters and adult motion picture theaters. 
B.  It is unlawful for any licensee or employee to knowingly allow a person under the age of eighteen (18) years to appear in a state of nudity on the premises of an adult theater or adult motion picture theater. 
C.  It is unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen (18) years to appear in a state of nudity in or on the premises of an adult theater or adult motion picture theater. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; Ord. 129 § 15, 1991) 
5.48.150 - Additional regulations applicable to adult motels. 
A.  Evidence that a sleeping room in a hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment has been rented and vacated two or more times in a period of time that is less than ten consecutive hours creates a rebuttable presumption that the establishment is an adult motel as that term is defined in this chapter. 
B.  It is unlawful for any person in control of a sleeping room in a hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment that does not have a sexually-oriented business license, to rent or sub-rent a sleeping room to a person and, within ten hours from the time the room is rented, to again rent or sub-rent the same sleeping room. 
C.  For purposes of subsection (B) of this section, the terms "rent" or "sub-rent" mean the act of permitting a room to be occupied for any form of consideration. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; Ord. 129 § 16, 1991) 
5.48.160 - Additional regulations applicable to exhibition of sexually explicit films or videos. 
A.  A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually-oriented business, other than an adult motel, which exhibits on the premises in a viewing room of less than one hundred fifty (150) square feet of floor space, a film, video cassette, or other video reproduction which depicts specified sexual activities of specified anatomical areas, shall comply with the following requirements: 
1.  Upon application for a sexually-oriented business license, the application shall be accompanied by a diagram of the premises showing a plan thereof specifying the location of one or more manager's stations and the location of all overhead lighting fixtures and designating any portion of the premises in which patrons will not be permitted. The diagram shall also designate the place at which the permit will be conspicuously posted, if granted. A professionally prepared diagram in the nature of an engineer's or architect's blueprint shall not be required; however, each diagram should be oriented to the north or to some designated street or object and should be drawn to a designated scale or with marked dimensions sufficient to show the various internal dimensions of all areas of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches. The city manager may waive the foregoing diagram requirement for renewal applications if the applicant adopts a diagram that was previously submitted and certifies that the configuration of the premises has not been altered since it was prepared. 
2.  The application shall contain a declaration made under penalty of perjury by applicant that the information provided is true and correct. 
3.  No alteration in the configuration or location of a manager's station may be made without the prior approval of the city manager or his designee. 
4.  It is the duty of the owners and operators of the premises to ensure that at least one employee is on duty and situated in each manager's station at all times that any patron is present inside the premises. 
5.  The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that at any given time there is an unobstructed view from a manager's station to every area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose, excluding restrooms. Restrooms may not contain video reproduction equipment. If the premises has two or more manager's stations designated, then the interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view of each area of the premises, excluding restrooms, to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose, from at least one of the manager's stations. The view required in this subsection must be by direct line of sight from the manager's station. 
6.  It shall be the duty of the owners and operators, and it shall also be the duty of any agents and employees present on the premises, to ensure that the view area specified in subsection (A)(5) of this section remains unobstructed by any doors, walls, merchandise, display racks or other materials at all times that any patron is present on the premises and to ensure that no patron is permitted access to any area of the premises which has been designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted in the diagram filed pursuant to subsection (A)(1) of this section. 
7.  The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted access, at an illumination of not less than one footcandle as measured at the floor level. 
8.  It shall be the duty of the owners, operators and their agents and employees present on the premises to ensure that the illumination described in subsection (A)(7) of this section, is maintained at all times that any patron is present in the premises. 
9.  The provisions of subsections (A)(3) through (A)(8) of this section shall be conspicuously posted on the premises for viewing by employees. 
B.  It is unlawful for any person having a duty under this section to knowingly fail to fulfill each such duty. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; Ord. 129 § 17, 1991) 
Chapter 5.50 - DISPENSING AND DELIVERY OF MEDICAL CANNABIS 

5.50.010 - Purpose and intent. 
A.  The declared purpose of this chapter is to establish a comprehensive set of regulations with an attendant regulatory permit governing the operation of medical cannabis dispensaries located in the city limited to the sole activity of dispensing medical cannabis through deliveries, as provided for herein. 
B.  This chapter is not intended to interfere with a patient's right to obtain medical cannabis, as provided for in California Health and Safety Code Section 11362.5. This article is not intended to conflict with federal law as contained in the Controlled Substances Act, 21 U.S.C. §§ 800 et seq., nor to otherwise permit any activity that is prohibited under that Act or any other local, state or federal law, statute, rule or regulation. 
( Ord. No. 2017-16 , § 3(Exh. C), 9-19-17) 
5.50.020 - Definitions. 
    Unless otherwise provided herein, the definitions of all terms used within this chapter shall be as defined below and by Section 16.16.445, or as defined by Section 1.04.050 (with these definitions and Section 16.16.445 taking precedence over Section 1.04.050 in the event of conflict). Any ambiguity in the definitions used herein shall be resolved in favor of the City's understanding of the term. 
    "Delivery dispensary" means a dispensary, with a permanent fixed location within the city, limited to retail sales of medical cannabis, or medical cannabis products, occurring exclusively through delivery. All retail sales are prohibited at the physical location of the delivery dispensary. 
    "Employee" means any person (whether paid or unpaid) who provides regular labor or regular services for a delivery dispensary, including but not limited to at the location of a delivery dispensary. 
    "Live scan" means a system for inkless electronic fingerprinting and the automated background check developed by the California Department of Justice (DOJ) which involves digitizing fingerprints and electronically transmitting the fingerprint image data along with personal descriptor information to computers at the DOJ for completion of a criminal record check; or such other comparable inkless electronic fingerprinting and automated background check process as determined by the city council. 
    "Location" means a single address within the city, controlled, leased, or owned by the applicant, or a single suite controlled, leased or owned by the applicant at a single address within the city, or a combination of suites, at a single address within the city, adjacent to one another, controlled, leased or owned by the applicant, from which access is provided between the suites, without the need to exit the building. 
    "Manager" means an employee responsible for management and/or supervision of a delivery dispensary. 
( Ord. No. 2017-16 , § 3(Exh. C), 9-19-17; Ord. of 2018-01 , § 3(Exh. A), 3-20-18) 
5.50.030 - Operation prohibited without delivery dispensary permit. 
    It shall be unlawful to own, establish, operate, use, or permit the establishment or operation of a delivery dispensary, or to participate with a delivery dispensary as an employee, contractor, agent, volunteer, or in any manner or capacity other than as provided in this chapter and pursuant to a valid permit issued under this chapter. The general prohibition contained in this section shall include renting, leasing, or otherwise permitting a delivery dispensary to occupy or use a location, vehicle, or other mode of transportation. 
( Ord. No. 2017-16 , § 3(Exh. C), 9-19-17) 
5.50.040 - Delivery dispensary permit. 
A.  Prior to initiating operations as a delivery dispensary and as a continuing requisite to conducting operations, the owner of a delivery dispensary shall obtain a permit from the director under the terms and conditions set forth in this chapter. 
B.  Delivery dispensary permits shall be issued to a single location. Each delivery dispensary must apply for and receive approval for an individual location. 
C.  Delivery dispensary permits issued pursuant to this chapter shall automatically expire one year from the date of issuance. 
D.  Renewal of delivery dispensary permits shall follow the same procedures as provided for herein for the issuance of a new delivery dispensary permit, such procedures subject to written modification by the director. 
E.  Conditions necessary for the continuing validity of any and all permits issued for the operation of a delivery dispensary include: 
1.  Strict adherence to each and every requirement of this chapter. 
2.  Allowing the director, or designee, and the police department to conduct reasonable inspections of the location of the delivery dispensary at the discretion of the city, including but not limited to inspection of security, inventory, and written records and files pertaining to the delivery dispensary, for the purposes of ensuring compliance with local and state law. 
3.  Maintaining with the city current and valid contact information of the owner(s) and manager(s) of the delivery dispensary. 
4.  Maintaining with the city current and valid contact information of a legal representative of the delivery dispensary. 
5.  Maintaining a valid State License of the type: M-Type 9 Non-Storefront Retailer. 
6.  Maintaining a valid city business license. 
7.  A certificate of occupancy. 
( Ord. No. 2017-16 , § 3(Exh. C), 9-19-17; Ord. of 2018-01 , § 3(Exh. A), 3-20-18) 
5.50.050 - Application for delivery dispensary permit. 
    Each person, firm, partnership, or corporation desiring a delivery dispensary permit shall file an application with the director upon a form provided by the city, and shall pay a filing fee as established by resolution adopted by the city council from time to time. An application shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
A.  A completed business license application; and 
B.  Copies of the driver's license or valid identification cards for each person listed on the license application; and 
C.  All fees required; and 
D.  Certification from appropriate city departments that facility inspections by city staff confirm complete compliance with all the requirements of this Chapter, including but not limited to the general operating standards and restrictions contained in Section 5.50.100; and 
E.  Completed live scan forms (provided by the city for all business owners and applicants) that are both dated within seven days of application submittal and will allow processing by city (or as otherwise authorized by law) of live scan; and 
F.  Address of the location where the delivery dispensary will be located; and 
G.  A Commercial Cannabis Delivery Site Plan, in the form prescribed by the city, showing the proposed location of the dispensary, location of security cameras, locations of all of entrances and exits, designs of proposed signage, and interior floor plan, including, but not limited to, storage areas, locked rooms designed to store cannabis, or cannabis product, employee areas, and loading and unloading zones; and 
H.  A Security and Lighting Plan, in accordance with Section 5.50.100 (C), in the form prescribed by the city, detailing the security measures to be in place at the facility, including, but not limited to, all required security and alarm contracts, security camera placement, window and door locking mechanisms, secure inventory system, and any other measures in place to ensure the security of the facility and cannabis or cannabis product; 
I.  A photometric plan of the entire site, inclusive of all existing and proposed outdoor lighting, which shall be professionally prepared and subject to a sample, provided by applicant, taken at night, showing the site is properly lit and the security cameras ability to capture images with the provided lighting; and 
J.  A Ventilation Plan, in accordance with Section 5.50.100 (D), in the form prescribed by the city, detailing the proposed ventilation system designed to mitigate the odor from the facility to the outdoors, and to any tenants within the same building; and 
K.  Evidence satisfactory to the director of compliance with all state law requirements governing medical cannabis dispensaries; and 
L.  Evidence satisfactory to the director of compliance with all insurance requirements of this chapter; and 
M.  The name, address and current phone number of any person who is managing or responsible for the delivery dispensary's activities; and 
N.  The name, address and current phone number of the owner and lessor of the real property upon which the delivery dispensary is to be conducted. In the event the applicant is not the legal owner of the property, the application must be accompanied with a notarized acknowledgement from the owner of the property that a delivery dispensary will be operated on his/her property. 
O.  Authorization for the director to seek verification of the information contained within the application. 
P.  A statement in writing by the applicant that he or she certifies under penalty of perjury that all the information contained in the application is true and correct. 
Q.  Any such additional and further information as is deemed necessary by the director to administer this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 2017-16 , § 3(Exh. C), 9-19-17; Ord. of 2018-01 , § 3(Exh. A), 3-20-18) 
5.50.060 - Review of delivery dispensary permit applications. 
A.  Upon receipt of a completed application and payment of the application and required fees, the director shall investigate the information contained in the application to determine whether the applicant shall be issued the requested permit. 
B.  If the director determines that the applicant has completed the application improperly, the director shall notify the applicant of such fact within sixty (60) days of receipt of the application. The incomplete application upon return as incomplete shall be deemed abandoned. The applicant may then resubmit a new application for a new review pursuant to the requirements of this section. 
C.  Within ninety (90) days of receipt of the completed application, the director shall complete the investigation, approve or deny the application in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, and so notify the applicant by United States mail, first class postage prepaid, addressed to the applicant at the address stated in the application. 
D.  Upon completing the review process, the permit shall be deemed a qualified application, unless the director finds: 
1.  The applicant has made one or more false or misleading statements or omissions, either on the written application or during the application process; or 
2.  A proposed location for the delivery dispensary is not allowed by state or local law, statute, ordinance, or regulation (including this code); or 
3.  The applicant is not a primary caregiver, qualified patient, or otherwise qualified to operate a medical cannabis dispensary under the Medicinal and Adult-Use Cannabis Regulation and Safety Act (MAUCRSA); or 
4.  The applicant has not satisfied each and every requirement of this chapter and Code; or 
E.  The applicant does not comply with applicable state law, including, but not limited to, applicable requirements and minimum standards of the Medicinal and Adult-Use Cannabis Regulation and Safety Act (MAUCRSA). If an application is granted a permit will not be issued until and unless full compliance by the successful applicant with the requirements of Section 5.50.90 ("Obligations of Delivery Dispensary"). 
F.  If the Director neither grants nor denies a complete application within ninety (90) days after it is received (except as provided in Section 5.50.060(B)) the application shall be forwarded to the city council at its next regularly scheduled meeting for consideration in strict conformance with the requirements of this chapter. 
G.  Based on the information set forth in the application and the director's review, the director may impose reasonable terms and conditions on the use of the permit in addition to those specified in this chapter to ensure the safe operation of the delivery dispensary, and to ensure the health, safety and welfare of the citizens and visitors of the City of Hesperia. 
( Ord. No. 2017-16 , § 3(Exh. C), 9-19-17) 
5.50.070 - Denial or revocation of delivery dispensary permit. 
A.  Denial or revocation. The director may deny or revoke a delivery dispensary permit if any of the following is found: 
1.  No person may apply for, or be granted, a permit to operate a delivery dispensary within the city who has been determined (whether by operation of the Hesperia Municipal Code, or other controlling law) to be in violation, within fifteen (15) years prior to the operative date of this chapter, either administratively, criminally or otherwise, of a prohibition on operating a cannabis dispensary of any type within the city, and has not paid such fines and fees as a result of such violations. 
2.  Additionally, no person shall employ a person at a delivery dispensary within the city who has been determined (whether by operation of the Hesperia Municipal Code, or other controlling law), to be in violation within fifteen (15) years prior to the operative date of this chapter, either administratively, criminally, or otherwise, of a prohibition on operating a cannabis dispensary of any type within the city, and has not paid such fines and fees as a result of such violations. 
3.  The results of the live scan reveal a criminal conviction described in Business and Professions Code Section 26057 (4)(A-E), and as may be amended from time to time. Except as provided in subparagraphs (D) and (E) of paragraph (4) of Business and Professions Code Section 26057, a prior conviction, where the sentence, including any term of probation, incarceration, or supervised release, is completed, for possession of, possession for sale, sale, manufacture, transportation, or cultivation of a controlled substance, shall not be the sole ground for denial of a license. 
4.  Conviction for any controlled substance felony, as that term is used in Business and Professions Code Section 26057, subsequent to licensure shall be grounds for revocation of a license or denial of the renewal of a license. 
5.  Failure to obtain and maintain a valid seller's permit required pursuant to Part 1 (commencing with Section 6001) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code. 
6.  Failure to comply with any state or local law pertaining to commercial cannabis activity. 
B.  Cure Period. Prior to revocation of a delivery dispensary permit, the permittee shall be provided with a written notice which details the violation(s). The permittee shall have seven days to cure the violation to the satisfaction of the director. The seven day cure period may be extended by the director or the city council for reasonable cause. 
( Ord. No. 2017-16 , § 3(Exh. C), 9-19-17; Ord. of 2018-01 , § 3(Exh. A), 3-20-18) 
5.50.075 - Appeals. 
    Appeals. Any decision regarding an application for, a renewal of, or the revocation of, a delivery dispensary permit may be appealed to the city manager by an applicant or (former) permit holder as follows: 
1.  Appellant must file a written appeal with the Hesperia City Clerk within ten calendar days of the decision. The written appeal shall specify the person making the appeal, identify the decision appealed from, state the reasons for the appeal, and include any evidence in support of the appeal. 
2.  Notice of the time and place of an appeal hearing shall be provided to the appellant within thirty (30) days of receipt of the written appeal by the Hesperia City Clerk. 
3.  The appeal hearing shall be held within sixty (60) days of the filing of the written appeal with the Hesperia City Clerk, unless the 60-day time limit is waived by the appellant, or unless the city manager continues the appeal hearing date for good cause and upon written notification to the appellant. 
4.  The city manager shall review the facts of the matter, written documents submitted for review, the basis for making the decision which is under appeal, and then determine whether the director's decision should be reversed or affirmed. The determination made shall be in writing, shall set forth the reasons for the determination, and shall be final. 
5.  The provisions of Sections 1094.5 and 1094.6 of the Code of Civil Procedure set forth the procedure for judicial review of any final determination. 
(Ord. of 2018-01 , § 3(Exh. A), 3-20-18) 
5.50.080 - Penalty for violation. 
A.  Any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense for each and every day during which such violation is committed or continued, and shall be subject to all remedies and enforcement measures authorized by the Hesperia Municipal Code for violation of the law. 
B.  To the fullest extent allowed under state law, any person, whether as principal, employee, agent, partner, director, officer, stockholder, or trustee or otherwise, violating or causing the violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and any conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment for not more than six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
( Ord. No. 2017-16 , § 3(Exh. C), 9-19-17) 
5.50.090 - Obligations of delivery dispensary. 
A.  Before receiving possession of an approved delivery dispensary permit, as provided for in this chapter, the delivery dispensary permit holder shall to the satisfaction of the director: 
1.  Provide written authorization to the director as well as the police department, to conduct reasonable inspections of the location of the delivery dispensary at the discretion of the city, including but not limited to inspection of security, inventory, and records and files pertaining to the delivery dispensary, for the purposes of ensuring compliance with local and state law. 
2.  Execute an agreement indemnifying the city, its elected officials, employees, agents, officers, and representatives, and each and all of them individually, from all liability in connection with all claims, damages, attorney's fees, costs and allegations arising from or in any way related to the operation of the delivery dispensary. 
3.  Execute an agreement to: 
a.  Defend, at the delivery dispensary permit holder's sole expense, any action against the city, its elected officials, employees, agents, officers, and representatives, and each and all of them individually, which arises from the operation of the delivery dispensary. 
b.  To reimburse the city for any court costs and attorney fees that the city may be required to pay as a result of such action. The city may, at its sole discretion, participate at its own expense in the defense of any such action. 
B.  Upon and after receiving possession of a delivery dispensary permit as provided for in this chapter, the delivery dispensary permit holder shall: 
1.  Maintain continuing compliance with all of the insurance requirements of Section 5.50.100(F) of this chapter. 
2.  Immediately update the director in writing with correct and current contact information, when there is any change in the address or phone number, previously provided to the city in compliance with this chapter, for any owner(s), manager(s) or legal representative(s) of the delivery dispensary. 
3.  Comply with all conditions of approval prescribed by the director for operation of the delivery business. 
C.  Failure to perform the aforementioned actions of this Section 5.54.090 shall render the operation of a delivery dispensary unlawful. 
( Ord. No. 2017-16 , § 3(Exh. C), 9-19-17; Ord. of 2018-01 , § 3(Exh. A), 3-20-18) 
5.50.100 - General operating standards and restrictions. 
A.  Hours of operation shall be limited to 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. 
B.  Regulations. 
1.  No delivery dispensary shall offer retail services or dispense in any manner to customers on site of any product, including but not limited to cannabis and cannabis accessories. All products shall be delivered to patients, or qualified caregivers, at a fixed residential address other than the dispensary. 
2.  There shall be no sale or delivery of industrial hemp products. 
3.  There shall be no sale or delivery to any person not in possession of a valid identification card denoting the person as a qualified patient or a caregiver as defined by law. 
4.  Delivery shall only be made to residential homes, and no delivery or exchange of goods for money shall occur on city streets, sidewalks or public ways. 
5.  Consumption of alcohol and cannabis products is prohibited in the establishment as well as in any vehicles used for delivery. 
6.  All vehicles associated with the business shall carry in the vehicle a copy of the valid, unexpired business license. 
C.  Security. 
1.  All cannabis and related products shall be stored in a secured and locked room. As no retail sales are permitted, no display of cannabis or related products is permitted. 
2.  No person may be an employee of a delivery dispensary who has been convicted of a crime involving the illegal distribution of narcotics within the last seven years, dated from time of conviction, or if the conviction required incarceration, the time of release, whichever is later. 
3.  The facility and parking area shall be equipped with security lighting at each entrance, and no less than five other points on the building or property as approved by the city, and at all gated entrances. Entrance lighting and parking area lighting shall not require motion to activate and shall provide adequate lighting without the aid of motion-detecting lights. Security lighting shall illuminate the entire entrance, and the adjacent parking area upon motion detection. Each light shall provide at least 0.1 foot candle intensity. This lighting shall be in addition to any other lighting requirements of this code. 
4.  The facility shall be alarmed with a centrally-monitored fire and burglar alarm system, and monitored by an alarm company properly licensed by the State of California Department of Consumer Affairs Bureau of Security and Investigative Services in accordance with California Business & Professions Code section 7590 et seq. and whose agents are properly licensed and registered under applicable law. 
5.  Security cameras shall be installed on the property, maintained in good condition, and shall provide a clear, unobstructed view of the parking area, all entrances, loading areas, bays, windows and any other areas as determined by the director. The cameras shall be in use twenty-four (24) hours per day, seven days per week. All recordings shall be digitally recorded and kept for no less than ninety (90) days and shall be made available to the police department upon request. All recordings shall be time and date stamped. All security cameras shall be properly maintained and kept in working order. 
6.  Cannabis or cannabis product shall not be stored, kept, or otherwise accessed from outside the building. Loading and unloading of cannabis or cannabis products is allowed during business operating hours only and must be completed at the rear of the building. Loading and unloading may be allowed at the front of the building, at the discretion of the director, providing that all of the below is true: 
i.  That there is a roll-up door or doors, which are attached to and part of the cannabis business location; and 
ii.  That the interior of the building accessible by the roll-up door(s) is large enough to accommodate a vehicle, completely inside the facility; and 
iii.  That the roll-up door(s) can be closed completely, concealing the vehicle during the loading and unloading of cannabis product; and 
iv.  That the roll-up door(s) remain closed and locked when not in use; and 
v.  All loading and unloading of cannabis occurs inside of the building with the roll-up door closed. 
7.  All exterior doors shall remain locked and be accessible for operation by employees only, and all windows shall be secured against entry from the outside. Exterior doors shall be properly equipped with panic hardware as required by all applicable state codes. 
8.  All cannabis present or kept at the premises shall be securely stored against both unauthorized access as well as theft. 
9.  Cannabis and cannabis products prepared for delivery shall be stored in secure containers within the trunk of the delivery vehicle during delivery. 
D.  Odor Control. A delivery dispensary shall have an air treatment system that ensures off-site odors shall not result from its operations. This requirement at a minimum means that the delivery dispensary shall be designed to provide sufficient odor absorbing ventilation and exhaust systems so that any odor generated inside the location of the delivery dispensary is not detected outside the building, on adjacent properties or public rights-of-way, or within any other unit located within the same building as the delivery dispensary, if the use only occupies a portion of a building. 
E.  Records. 
1.  Delivery dispensaries shall maintain records reflecting: 
a.  The full name, address, and telephone number(s) of the owner and lessee of the property. 
b.  The full name, address, and telephone number(s) of all employees. 
c.  The delivery of medical cannabis, including but not limited to the identity of the recipient using the unique identifier supplied to them by the state, the amount delivered, the date of the delivery, the address of the delivery, the name of the employee making the delivery, and a written receipt confirming the delivery by signature of the receiving person(s). 
d.  A written accounting of all expenditures, costs, revenues and profits of the delivery dispensary. 
e.  A copy of the delivery dispensary's required insurance policy and all other insurance policies related to the operation of the delivery dispensary. 
f.  An inventory record documenting the dates and amounts of medical cannabis received at the medical cannabis dispensary, the daily amounts of medical cannabis stored at the location of the medical cannabis dispensary, and the daily amounts distributed. 
g.  Proof of a valid and current permit issued by the city in accordance with this chapter. Every medical cannabis dispensary shall display at all times during business hours the permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter in a conspicuous place. 
2.  Records shall be maintained on-site, either in paper or electronic form, and secured and verified by the director as needed (consistent with requirements pertaining to patient confidentiality pursuant to applicable State and Federal law). 
3.  All records required to be maintained by the delivery dispensary must be maintained for no less than three years and are subject to immediate inspection upon written request by the director. 
F.  Insurance. 
1.  A delivery dispensary shall procure and maintain, at its sole cost and expense, in a form and content satisfactory to the director, the following policies of insurance in the amounts and of the types that are acceptable to the director, with minimal coverage provided of: 
2.  Throughout the life of the license, the licensee shall pay for and maintain in full force and effect all policies of insurance required hereunder with an insurance company(ies) either (i) admitted by the California Insurance Commissioner to do business in the State of California and rated not less than "A-VIII" in Best's Insurance Rating Guide, or (ii) authorized by city manager or his/her designee and in his/her sole discretion. The following policies of insurance are required: 
3.  Commercial general liability insurance which shall be at least as broad as the most current version of Insurance Services Office (ISO) Commercial General Liability Coverage Form CG 00 01 and include insurance for "bodily injury," "property damage" and "personal and advertising injury" with coverage for premises and operations (including the use of owned and non-owned equipment), products and completed operations, and contractual liability (including, without limitation, indemnity obligations under the Contract) with limits of not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per occurrence for bodily injury and property damage, one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per occurrence for personal and advertising injury, two million dollars ($2,000,000.00) aggregate for products and completed operations and two million dollars ($2,000,000.00) general aggregate. 
4.  Commercial automobile liability insurance which shall be at least as broad as the most current version of Insurance Services Office (ISO) form CA 00 01 and shall include coverage for "any auto" with limits of liability of not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per accident for bodily and property damage. 
5.  Workers' compensation insurance as required under the California Labor Code. 
6.  Employers' liability insurance with minimum limits of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) each accident, one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) disease each employee and one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) disease policy limit. 
7.  Licensee shall be responsible for payment of any deductibles or self-insured retentions contained in any insurance policies required hereunder. 
8.  All policies of insurance required hereunder shall be endorsed to provide that the coverage shall not be cancelled, non-renewed, reduced in coverage or in limits except after thirty (30) calendar day written notice by certified mail, return receipt requested, has been given to the city. Upon issuance by the insurer, broker or agent of a notice of cancellation, non-renewal or reduction in coverage or limits, licensee shall furnish city with a new certificate and applicable endorsements for such policy(ies). In the event any policy(ies) is due to expire during the license, licensee shall provide a new certificate and all applicable endorsements evidencing renewal of such policy(ies) not less than fifteen (15) calendar days prior to the expiration date of the expiring policy(ies). 
9.  The general liability (including ongoing operations, and products, and completed operations) and automobile liability insurance policies shall be endorsed to name the city and its officers, officials, employees, agents and volunteers as an additional insured. Such policy(ies) of insurance shall be endorsed so permittee's insurance shall be primary and no contribution shall be required of city, its officers, officials, employees, agents and volunteers. Any workers' compensation insurance policy shall contain a waiver of subrogation as to city, its officers, officials, employees and agents. The coverage shall contain no special limitations on the scope of protection afforded to city and its officers, officials, employees, agents and volunteers. Should licensee maintain insurance with broader coverage and/or limits of liability greater than those shown above, the city requires and shall be entitled to the broader coverage and/or the higher limits of liability maintained by the licensee. Licensee shall furnish city with the certificate(s) and applicable endorsements for all required insurance fourteen (14) days prior to the issuance of the permit. 
10.  If the general liability insurance policy is written on a claims-made form: 
(1)  The retroactive date must be shown, and must be before the effective date of the agreement or the commencement of work by consultant. 
(2)  Insurance must be maintained and evidence of insurance must be provided for at least three years after any expiration or termination of the agreement or, in the alternative, the policy shall be endorsed to provide not less than a 3-year discovery period. 
(3)  If coverage is canceled or non-renewed, and not replaced with another claims-made policy form with a retroactive date prior to the effective date of the agreement or the commencement of work by consultant, consultant must purchase extended reporting coverage for a minimum of three years following the expiration or termination of the agreement. 
(4)  A copy of the claims reporting requirements must be submitted to city for review. 
(5)  These requirements shall survive expiration or termination of the article. 
11.  Upon request of city, licensee shall immediately furnish city with a complete copy of any insurance policy required under this agreement, including all endorsements, with said copy certified by the underwriter to be a true and correct copy of the original policy. This requirement shall survive the expiration or revocation of the license. 
12.  If at any time during the license, licensee fails to maintain the required insurance in full force and effect, all work licensed thereunder shall be discontinued immediately until notice is received by city that the required insurance has been restored to full force and effect and that the premiums therefore have been paid for a period satisfactory to city. Any failure to maintain the required insurance shall be sufficient cause for the city to revoke the license. 
13.  Note: The certificate of insurance must be accompanied by the additional insured, primary insurance and waiver of subrogation endorsements, as required above. 
14.  All of the above policies of insurance shall be primary insurance and shall name the city, its elected and appointed officers, employees and agents as additional insureds and any insurance maintained by city or its officers, employees or agents may apply in excess of, and not contribute with the above policies of insurance. 
15.  No permit may be issued pursuant to this chapter until the applicant for a medical cannabis dispensary permit has provided the city with certificates of insurance, additional insured endorsement forms or appropriate insurance binders evidencing the above insurance coverages and said certificates of insurance or binders are approved by the city. City reserves the right to inspect complete, certified copies of and endorsements to all required insurance policies at any time. 
G.  The regulations contained in this chapter shall not apply to a medical cannabis dispensary engaged in the following uses, as long as such use complies strictly with applicable law regulating such use and the location of such use, including, but not limited to, Health and Safety Code sections 11362.5 and 11362.7 et seq.; a clinic permitted pursuant to Chapter 1 of Division 2 of the Health and Safety Code; a health care facility permitted pursuant to Chapter 2 of Division 2 of the Health and Safety Code; a residential care facility for persons with chronic life-threatening illness permitted pursuant to Chapter 3.01 of Division 2 of the Health and Safety Code; a residential care facility for the elderly licensed pursuant to Chapter 3.2 of Division 2 of the Health and Safety Code; a residential hospice; or a home health agency permitted pursuant to Chapter 8 of Division 2 of the Health and Safety Code. 
( Ord. No. 2017-16 , § 3(Exh. C), 9-19-17; Ord. of 2018-01 , § 3(Exh. A), 3-20-18) 
5.50.110 - Fees. 
A.  Fees. An application fee set by resolution of the city council shall be required for formal processing of every application made under this chapter. The city council is authorized to pass resolutions to recover any and all fees and costs incurred by the implementation of this chapter through an appropriate fee recovery mechanism to be imposed upon delivery dispensaries and their operations. 
B.  State Board of Equalization Seller's Permit Required. The State Board of Equalization has determined that medical cannabis transactions are subject to sales tax, regardless of whether the individual or group makes a profit, and those engaging in transactions involving medical cannabis must obtain a seller's permit from the State Board of Equalization. 
( Ord. No. 2017-16 , § 3(Exh. C), 9-19-17) 
5.50.120 - Public nuisance and abatement. 
    In addition to the penalties set forth in this chapter, any delivery dispensary that is operating in violation of any provisions of this chapter is hereby declared to constitute a public nuisance and, as such, may be abated or enjoined from further operation, in accordance with the procedures set forth in Chapter 1.12 (Municipal Code Enforcement) of Title 1 (General Provisions) of the Hesperia Municipal Code. 
( Ord. No. 2017-16 , § 3(Exh. C), 9-19-17) 
5.50.130 - Suspension and revocation. 
A.  The director is authorized to suspend and/or revoke delivery dispensary permits issued pursuant to this chapter upon the determination through written findings of a failure to comply with any provision of this chapter, any condition of approval, or any agreement or covenant as required pursuant to this chapter. 
B.  The director may suspend or revoke a delivery dispensary permit if any of the following occur: 
1.  The director determines that the delivery dispensary has failed to comply with any aspect of this chapter, any condition or approval, or any agreement or covenant as required pursuant to this chapter; or 
2.  Operations cease for more than one hundred eighty calendar days (including during any change of ownership, if applicable); or 
3.  Ownership is changed without securing a new delivery dispensary permit; or 
4.  The delivery dispensary fails to maintain required security camera recordings; or 
5.  The delivery dispensary fails to allow inspection of the security recordings, the activity logs, the records, or of the premise by authorized city officials. 
C.  Conditions (if any) of suspension or revocation are at the discretion of the director and may include, but are not limited to, a prohibition on all owners, operators and employees of the suspended or revoked delivery dispensary from operating within the city for a period of time set forth in writing and/or a requirement (when operations may resume, if at all, pursuant to the director's determination) for the holder of the suspended or revoked delivery dispensary permit to resubmit an application for a delivery dispensary permit pursuant to the requirements of this chapter. 
D.  Suspension or revocation of a delivery dispensary permit pursuant to this chapter shall constitute a "revocation" for purposes of Business and Professions Code section 19320. 
( Ord. No. 2017-16 , § 3(Exh. C), 9-19-17) 
5.50.140 - Nonconforming use. 
    No use which purports to have distributed cannabis prior to the enactment of this chapter shall be deemed to have been a legally established use under the provisions of the Hesperia Zoning Code, the Hesperia Municipal Code, or any other local ordinance, rule or regulation, and such use shall not be entitled to claim legal nonconforming status. 
( Ord. No. 2017-16 , § 3(Exh. C), 9-19-17) 
Chapter 5.52 - BLINDER RACKS 
Sections: 

5.52.020 - Blinder newsracks. 
    No person shall display or exhibit in any public place or place open to the public, other than a location from which minors are excluded, any material which is harmful to minors, unless a devise commonly known as a "blinder rack" is in place so that the lower two-thirds thereof is not exposed to public view. For the purposes of this section, "harmful matter" is as defined in California Penal Code Section 313 as currently in effect and as may be amended. 
(Ord. 48 § 3, 1990) 
5.52.030 - Penalty for violation. 
    It is unlawful for any person, firm, partnership or corporation to violate any provision or to fail to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter. Any person, firm, partnership or corporation violating any provision of this chapter or failing to comply with any of its requirements shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine not exceeding two thousand dollars ($2,000.00), or by imprisonment in the county jail for not more than one year or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each such person, firm, partnership or corporation shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or any portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted by such person, firm, partnership or corporation, and shall be deemed punishable therefore as provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. 48 § 4, 1990) 
Chapter 5.56 - GARAGE SALES 
Sections: 

5.56.020 - Permit required. 
    No person, persons or organization shall sell or participate in the sale of personal property (excluding motor vehicles) to the general public by means of a "garage sale" unless a garage sale permit is approved by the planning director, or his/her designee. 
(Ord. 49 § 2, 1989) 
5.56.030 - Garage sale application and permit. 
A.  Any person, persons or sponsoring organization intending to conduct a garage sale to the general public shall file an application with the planning department for a permit not less than three days, nor more than fifteen (15) days prior to the date of such sale. 
B.  The applicant shall state the date and location of the proposed sale and the name(s) of the person(s) who will be conducting such sale. The permit shall be issued by the planning director or his/her designee for a period not to exceed three days. The subject permit may be revoked by the planning director after written notice has been mailed to the applicant that a violation has occurred, or false information/representation is contained within the application. If the applicant provides satisfactory explanation of the violation, false information/representation, the planning director may reactivate the permit. 
(Ord. 49 § 3, 1989) 
5.56.040 - Number and time of garage sales. 
A.  Lots With One Dwelling or Primary Sponsor (e.g., church). 
1.  No person, persons or sponsoring organization shall conduct more than four "garage sales" in a calendar year. 
2.  A minimum of eleven (11) days shall elapse between lawfully conducted garage sales on the lot or parcel. Said sale shall only be conducted between the hours of eight a.m. and eight p.m. of any given day. 
B.  Lots With More Than One Dwelling or Primary Sponsor. Lots or parcels having more than one dwelling unit or primary sponsor shall conduct garage sales as allowed by the following table. 
Number of Garage Sales Per Lot or Parcel 
No. of Units/Sponsors No. of Garage Sales Per Year 1 4 2-10 6 11-50 8 51+ 10  
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; Ord. 49 § 4, 1989) 
5.56.050 - Display of sale items. 
    Personal property offered for sale shall not be displayed or stored in adjoining public streets, alleys or right-of-way. All articles shall be removed from the front or side yard before the close of the last day on which the garage sale is to be lawfully conducted. 
(Ord. 49 § 5, 1989) 
5.56.060 - Signs concerning garage sales. 
    Except as otherwise provided below, signs advertising a garage sale or yard sale shall be displayed only on the premises on which the sale is conducted and no sign shall exceed four square feet. Two off-site directional signs may be permitted at the discretion of the planning director; provided, the premises upon which the sale is conducted is not on a major thoroughfare; and provided further, that written permission to erect or affix such signs is received from the property owners on whose property such signs are to be placed. The location of such signs shall be noted on the permit. Signs may be displayed only during the hours the sale is actively being conducted and shall be removed at the close of sale activities, or at nightfall, whichever first occurs, each day. No sign may be placed in any public right-of-way. Each sign shall bear the serial number of the permit for the sale it advertises. 
(Ord. 49 § 6, 1989) 
Chapter 5.60 - NON-PROFIT CAR WASHES 
Sections: 

5.60.020 - Permit required. 
    No person, persons or organization shall conduct a non-profit car wash unless a permit is approved by the planning director or his/her designee. 
(Ord. 21 § 3, 1990) 
5.60.030 - Non-profit car wash application and permit. 
A.  Any person, persons or organization intending to conduct a nonprofit car wash shall file an application with the planning department for a permit not less than three days, prior to the date of such car wash. 
B.  The applicant shall state the date and location of the proposed car wash, the name(s) of the person(s) primarily responsible for conducting such car wash and a description of the charitable nonprofit group or organization which will receive the proceeds. 
C.  The permit shall be issued by the planning director or his/her designee. The subject permit may be revoked by the planning director or his/her designee if the applicant violates any provisions of this chapter, or any false information/representation is contained within the application. If the applicant provides satisfactory explanation of the violation, false information/representation, the planning director may reactivate the permit. 
D.  The applicant shall provide proof to the satisfaction of the planning director or designee thereof that the organization or group which shall receive the proceeds is non-profit and/or charitable in nature. Such proof may include a written determination by any duly authorized taxing agency of such nonprofit or charitable status, or such non-profit or charitable status may be determined as a matter of law based upon statute. 
E.  There shall be no fee for said permit. 
F.  No permits may be issued or used during any period of time when a Stage 2 "threatened water supply shortage" or a Stage 3 "water shortage emergency" has been declared by the board of directors of the Hesperia Water District. 
(Ord. 21 § 4, 1990) 
5.60.040 - Permit on site during car wash. 
    The valid permit shall be present on site during all times when the car wash is being conducted. Said permit shall be produced upon request by any appropriate city official acting within his/her official capacity. 
(Ord. 21 § 5, 1990) 
5.60.050 - Number and time of non-profit car washes. 
A.  No person, persons or sponsoring organization shall conduct more than six non-profit car washes in any calendar year. 
B.  Each day or portion of a day on which a car wash is conducted shall count as one car wash. 
C.  Said car wash shall only be conducted between the hours of eight a.m. and eight p.m. 
(Ord. 21 § 6, 1990) 
5.60.060 - Water conservation methods required. 
A.  All water hoses shall have a shut-off nozzle attached so that the water will not run continuously. 
B.  Vehicles must be washed from a bucket. 
C.  If runoff becomes excessive, the permittees shall discontinue activities until the standing water subsides. 
(Ord. 21 § 7, 1990) 
5.60.070 - Signs and solicitation. 
A.  Notwithstanding any county code provisions to the contrary, signs advertising a non-profit car wash shall be displayed only on the premises on which the car wash is conducted and no sign shall exceed nine square feet. No signs may be placed on any sidewalks or within any public right of way. 
B.  No solicitation may be done from any sidewalk or within any public right-of-way in a manner which impedes or otherwise endangers or interferes with the publics use thereof. 
(Ord. 21 § 8, 1990) 
Chapter 5.64 - TELECOMMUNICATIONS REGULATIONS 
Sections: 
Article I. - General Provisions 

5.64.100 - Title. 
    This chapter is known and may be cited as the "Telecommunications Regulatory Ordinance" of the city of Hesperia. 
(Ord. 284 § 1 (part), 1999) 
5.64.110 - Purpose and intent. 
A.  The city council finds and determines as follows: 
1.  The development of cable television and other telecommunications systems may provide significant benefits for, and have substantial impacts upon, the residents of the city; 
2.  Because of the complex and rapidly changing technology associated with telecommunications services and systems, the public convenience, safety, and general welfare can best be served by establishing regulatory powers to be exercised by the city; 
3.  This chapter is intended to establish regulatory provisions that authorize the city to regulate telecommunications services and systems to the extent authorized by federal and state law, including but not limited to the Federal Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, the Federal Cable Television Consumer and Competition Act of 1992, the Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996, applicable regulations of the Federal Communications Commission, and applicable California statutes and regulations. 
B.  The purpose and intent of this chapter is to provide for the attainment of the following objectives: 
1.  To enable the city to discharge its public trust in a manner consistent with rapidly evolving federal and state regulatory policies, industry competition, and technological development; 
2.  To authorize and to manage reasonable access to the city's public rights-of-way and public property for telecommunications purposes on a competitively neutral and nondiscriminatory basis; 
3.  To obtain fair and reasonable compensation for the city and its residents for authorizing the private use of the public rights-of-way and public property; 
4.  To promote competition in telecommunications services, to minimize unnecessary local regulation of telecommunications service providers, and to encourage the delivery of advanced and competitive telecommunications services on the broadest possible basis to local government and to the businesses, institutions, and residents of the city; 
5.  To establish clear local guidelines, standards, and time frames for the exercise of local authority with respect to the regulation of telecommunications service providers; 
6.  To encourage the profitable deployment of advanced telecommunications infrastructures that satisfy local needs, deliver enhanced government services, and provide informed consumer choices in an evolving telecommunications market. 
(Ord. 284 § 1 (part), 1999) 
5.64.120 - Defined terms and phrases. 
    Various terms and phrases used in this chapter are defined below in Article V, Section 5.64.500. 
(Ord. 284 § 1 (part), 1999) 
Article II. - Cable Television Systems 

5.64.200 - Authority and findings. 
A.  In accordance with applicable federal and state law, the city is authorized to grant one or more nonexclusive franchises to construct, reconstruct, operate, and maintain cable television systems within the city limits. 
B.  The city council finds that the development of cable television and related telecommunications services may provide significant benefits for, and substantial impacts upon, the residents of the city. Because of the complex and rapidly changing technology associated with cable television, the city council further finds that the public convenience, safety, and general welfare can best be served by establishing regulatory powers to be exercised by the city. This article is intended to specify the means for providing to the public the best possible cable television and related telecommunications services, and every franchise issued in accordance with this article is intended to achieve this primary objective. It is the further intent of this article to adopt regulatory provisions that will enable the city to regulate cable television and related telecommunications services to the maximum extent authorized by federal and state law. 
(Ord. 284 § 1 (part), 1999) 
5.64.210 - Franchise terms and conditions. 
A.  Franchise Purposes. A franchise granted by the city under the provisions of this article may authorize the grantee to do the following: 
1.  To engage in the business of providing cable service and such other telecommunications services as may be authorized by law and which grantee elects to provide to its subscribers within the designated franchise service area; 
2.  To erect, install, construct, repair, rebuild, reconstruct, replace, maintain, and retain, cable lines, related electronic equipment, supporting structures, appurtenances, and other property in connection with the operation of the cable system in, on, over, under, upon, along and across streets or other public places within the designated franchise service area; 
3.  To maintain and operate the franchise properties for the origination, reception, transmission, amplification, and distribution of television and radio signals, and for the delivery of cable services and such other services as may be authorized by law. 
B.  Franchise Required. It is unlawful for any person to construct, install, or operate a cable television system within any street or public way in the city without first obtaining a franchise under the provisions of this article. 
C.  Term of the Franchise. 
1.  A franchise granted under this article will be for the term specified in the franchise agreement, commencing upon the effective date of the ordinance or resolution adopted by the city council that authorizes the franchise. 
2.  A franchise granted under this article may be renewed upon application by the grantee in accordance with the then-applicable provisions of state and federal law and of this article. 
D.  Franchise Territory. A franchise is effective within the territorial limits of the city, and within any area added to the city during the term of the franchise, unless otherwise specified in the ordinance or resolution granting the franchise or in the franchise agreement. 
E.  Federal or State Jurisdiction. This article will be construed in a manner consistent with all applicable federal and state laws, and it applies to all franchises granted or renewed after the effective date of this article, to the extent authorized by applicable law. 
F.  Franchise Nontransferable. 
1.  Grantee may not sell, transfer, lease, assign, sublet, or dispose of, in whole or in part, either by forced or involuntary sale, or by ordinary sale, contract, consolidation, or otherwise, the franchise or any of the rights or privileges therein granted, without the prior consent of the city council and then only upon such terms and conditions as may be prescribed by the city council, which consent may not be unreasonably denied or delayed. Any attempt to sell, transfer, lease, assign, or otherwise dispose of the franchise without the consent of the city council is null and void. The granting of a security interest in any assets of the grantee, or any mortgage or other hypothecation, will not be deemed a transfer for the purposes of this subsection. 
2.  The requirements of subsection (F)(1) of this section apply to any change in control of grantee. The word "control" as used herein is not limited to the ownership of major stockholder or partnership interests, but includes actual working control in whatever manner exercised. If grantee is a corporation, prior authorization of the city council is required where ownership or control of more than ten percent of the voting stock of grantee is acquired by a person or a group of persons acting in concert, none of whom, singularly or collectively, owns or controls the voting stock of the grantee as of the effective date of the franchise. 
3.  Grantee must notify the city in writing of any foreclosure or judicial sale of all or a substantial part of the grantee's franchise property, or upon the termination of any lease or other interest covering all or a substantial part of that franchise property. That notification will be considered by the city as notice that a change in control of ownership of the franchise has taken place, and the provisions of this paragraph that require the prior consent of the city council to that change in control of ownership will apply. 
4.  For the purpose of determining whether it will consent to an acquisition, transfer, or change in control, the city may inquire as to the qualifications of the prospective transferee or controlling party, and grantee must assist the city in that inquiry. In seeking the city's consent to any change of ownership or control, grantee or the proposed transferee, or both, must complete Federal Communications Commission Form 394 or its equivalent. This application must be submitted to the city not less than one hundred twenty (120) days prior to the proposed date of transfer. The transferee must establish that it possesses the legal, financial, and technical capability to operate and maintain the cable system and to comply with all franchise requirements during the remaining term of the franchise. If the legal, financial, and technical qualifications of the applicant are satisfactory, the city will consent to the transfer of the franchise. The consent of the city to that transfer will not be unreasonably denied or delayed. 
5.  Any financial institution holding a pledge of the grantee's assets to secure the advance of money for the construction or operation of the franchise property has the right to notify the city that it, or a designee satisfactory to the city, will take control of and operate the cable television system upon grantee's default in its financial obligations. Further, that financial institution must also submit a plan for such operation within ninety (90) days after assuming control. The plan must insure continued service and compliance with all franchise requirements during the period that the financial institution will exercise control over the system. The financial institution may not exercise control over the system for a period exceeding eighteen (18) months unless authorized by the city, in its sole discretion, and during that period of time it will have the right to petition the city to transfer the franchise to another grantee. 
6.  Grantee must reimburse the city for the city's reasonable review and processing expenses incurred in connection with any transfer or change in control of the franchise. These expenses include, without limitation, costs of administrative review, financial, legal, and technical evaluation of the proposed transferee, consultants (including technical and legal experts and all costs incurred by these experts), notice and publication costs, and document preparation expenses. No reimbursement may be offset against any franchise fee payable to the city during the term of the franchise, nor may such reimbursement be treated as an external cost under FCC rules and regulations. 
G.  Geographical Coverage. 
1.  Grantee must design, construct, and maintain the cable television system so as to have the capability to pass every dwelling unit in the franchise service area, subject to any service-area line extension requirements or territorial restrictions set forth in the franchise agreement. 
2.  After service has been established within all or any part of the franchise service area by activating trunk or distribution cables, grantee must provide service to any requesting subscriber within that activated part of the service area within thirty (30) days from the date of request, provided that the grantee is able to secure on reasonable terms and conditions all rights-of-way necessary to extend service to that subscriber within that thirty (30) day period. 
H.  Nonexclusive Franchise. Every franchise granted is nonexclusive. The city specifically reserves the right to grant, at any time, such additional franchises for a cable television system, or any component thereof, as it deems appropriate, subject to applicable state and federal law. If an additional franchise is proposed to be granted to a subsequent grantee, a noticed public hearing must first be held in accordance with the provisions of Government Code Section 53066.3. 
I.  Multiple Franchises. 
1.  The city may grant any number of franchises, subject to applicable state and federal law. The city may limit the number of franchises granted, based upon, but not necessarily limited to, the requirements of applicable law and specific local considerations, such as: 
a.  The capacity of the public rights-of-way to accommodate multiple cables in addition to the cables, conduits, and pipes of the existing utility systems, such as electrical power, telephone, gas and sewerage; 
b.  The benefits that may accrue to subscribers as a result of cable system competition, such as lower rates and improved service; 
c.  The disadvantages that may result from cable system competition, such as the requirement for multiple pedestals on residents' property, and the disruption arising from numerous excavations within the public rights- of-way. 
2.  The city may require that any new grantee be responsible for its own underground trenching and the associated costs if, in the city's opinion, the rights-of-way in any particular area cannot reasonably accommodate additional cables. 
(Ord. 284 § 1 (part), 1999) 
5.64.220 - Franchise applications and renewal. 
A.  Filing of Applications. Any person desiring an initial franchise for a cable television system must file an application with the city. A reasonable nonrefundable application fee in an amount established by resolution of the city council must accompany the application. That application fee will cover all costs associated with reviewing and processing the application, including without limitation costs of administrative review, financial, legal, and technical evaluation of the applicant, consultants (including technical and legal experts and at costs incurred by those experts), notice and publication requirements, and document preparation expenses. If those costs exceed the application fee, the applicant must pay the difference to the city within thirty (30) days following receipt of an itemized statement of those costs. 
B.  Applications-Contents. An application for an initial franchise for a cable television system must contain, as applicable: 
1.  A statement as to the proposed franchise service area; 
2.  A resume of the applicant's prior history, including the experience and expertise of the applicant in the cable television and telecommunications industry; 
3.  A list of the partners, general and limited, of the applicant, if a partnership, or the percentage of stock owned or controlled by each stockholder, if a closely-held corporation. If the applicant is a publicly-owned corporation, each owner of ten percent or more of the issued and outstanding capital stock must be identified; 
4.  A list of officers, directors, and managing employees of the applicant, together with a description of the background of each such person; 
5.  The names and addresses of any parent or subsidiary of the applicant, or any other business entity owning or controlling applicant in whole or in part, or that is owned or controlled in whole or in part by the applicant; 
6.  A current financial statement of the applicant verified by a certified public accountant or otherwise certified to be true, complete, and correct to the reasonable satisfaction of the city; 
7.  The proposed construction and service schedule, the proposed rate structure for cable services, and the proposed commitment to provide public, educational, and governmental access capacity, services, facilities, and equipment; 
8.  Any additional information that the city deems to be reasonably necessary. 
C.  Consideration of Initial Applications. 
1.  Upon receipt of an application for an initial franchise, the city manager or the city manager's designee must prepare a report and make recommendations to the city council concerning that application. 
2.  A public hearing will be noticed prior to any initial franchise grant, at a time and date approved by the city council. Within thirty (30) days after the close of the hearing, the city council will make a decision based upon the evidence received at the hearing as to whether the franchise should be granted, and, if granted, subject to what conditions. The city council may grant one or more franchises, or may decline to grant any franchise. 
D.  Franchise Renewal. Franchise renewals will be processed in accordance with then-applicable law and with the renewal terms, if any, of the franchise agreement. The city and grantee, by mutual consent, may enter into renewal negotiations at any time during the term of the franchise. 
(Ord. 284 § 1 (part), 1999) 
5.64.230 - Contents of cable television franchise agreements. 
A.  The terms and provisions of a franchise agreement for the operation of a cable television or related telecommunications services may relate to or include, without limitation, the following subject matters: 
1.  The nature, scope, geographical area, and duration of the franchise; 
2.  The applicable franchise fee to be paid to the city, including the percentage amount, the method of computation, and the time for payment; 
3.  Requirements relating to compliance with and implementation of state and federal laws and regulations pertaining to the operation of the cable television system; 
4.  Requirements relating to the construction, upgrade, or rebuild of the cable television system, as well as the provision of special services, such as outlets for public buildings, emergency alert capability, and parental control devices; 
5.  Requirements relating to the maintenance of a performance bond, a security fund, a letter of credit, or similar assurances to secure the performance of the grantee's obligations under the franchise agreement; 
6.  Requirements relating to comprehensive liability insurance, workers' compensation insurance and indemnification; 
7.  Requirements relating to consumer protection and customer service standards, including the resolution of subscriber complaints and disputes and the protection of subscribers' privacy rights; 
8.  Requirements relating to the grantee's support of local cable usage, including the provision of public, educational, and governmental access channels, the coverage of public meetings and special events, and financial support for governmental access channels; 
9.  Requirements relating to construction, operation, and maintenance of the cable television system within the public rights-of-way, including compliance with all applicable building codes and permit requirements of the city, the abandonment, removal, or relocation of facilities, and compliance with FCC technical standards; 
10.  Requirements relating to record keeping, accounting procedures, reporting, periodic audits, and performance reviews, and the inspection of grantee's books and records; 
11.  Acts or omissions constituting material breaches of or defaults under the franchise agreement, and the applicable penalties or remedies for such breaches or defaults, including fines, penalties, liquidated damages, suspension, revocation and termination; 
12.  Requirements relating to the sale, assignment, or other transfer or change in control of the franchise; 
13.  The grantee's obligation to maintain continuity of service and to authorize, under certain specified circumstances, the city's operation and management of the cable system; 
14.  Such additional requirements, conditions, policies, and procedures as may be mutually agreed upon by the parties to the franchise agreement and that will, in the judgment of city staff and the city council, best serve the public interest and protect the public health, welfare, and safety; 
B.  If there is any conflict or inconsistency between the provisions of a franchise agreement authorized by the city council and provisions of this Article II, the provisions of the franchise agreement will control. 
(Ord. 284 § 1 (part), 1999) 
Article III. - Open Video Systems 

5.64.300 - Applicability. 
    The provisions of this article are applicable to an open video system operator, as defined below in Article V, that intends to deliver video programming to consumers in the city over an open video system. 
(Ord. 284 § 1 (part), 1999) 
5.64.310 - Application required. 
A.  Before commencing the delivery of video programming services to consumers in the city over an open video system, the open video system operator must file an application with the city. That application must include or be accompanied by the following, as applicable: 
1.  The identity of the applicant, including all affiliates of the applicant; 
2.  Copies of FCC Form 1275, all notices of intent filed under 47 CFR Section 76.1503(b)(1), and the order of the FCC, all of which relate to certification of the applicant to operate an open video system in accordance with Section 653(a)(1) of the Communications Act and the FCC's rules; 
3.  The area or areas of the city that the applicant desires to serve; 
4.  A description of the open video system services that will be offered by the applicant over its existing or proposed facilities; 
5.  A description of the transmission medium that will be used by the applicant to deliver the open video system services; 
6.  Information in sufficient detail to establish the applicant's technical qualifications, experience, and expertise regarding the ownership and operation of the open video system described in the application; 
7.  Financial statements prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles that demonstrate the applicant's financial ability to: 
a.  Construct, operate, maintain and remove any new physical plant that is proposed to be constructed in the city, 
b.  Comply with the city's public, educational, and governmental access requirements as specified below in Section 5.64.330 B(4), 
c.  Comply with the city's requirement that gross revenue fees be paid in the sum of five percent, as specified below in Section 5.64.330(B)(2); 
8.  An accurate map showing the location of any existing telecommunications facilities in the city that the applicant intends to use, to purchase, or to lease; 
9.  If the applicant's operation of the open video system will require the construction of new physical plant and facilities in the city, the following additional information must be provided: 
a.  A preliminary construction schedule and completion dates, 
b.  Preliminary engineering plans, specifications, and a network map of any new facilities to be constructed in the city, in sufficient detail to identify: 
(i)  The location and route requested for the applicant's proposed facilities, 
(ii)  The locations, if any, for interconnection with the facilities of other telecommunications service providers, 
(iii)  The specific structures, improvements, facilities, and obstructions, if any, that the applicant proposes to remove or relocate on a temporary or permanent basis, 
c.  The applicant's statement that, in constructing any new physical plant, the applicant will comply with all applicable ordinances, rules, and regulations of the city, including the payment of all required permit and processing fees; 
10.  The information and documentation that is required to be submitted to the city by a video provider, as specified below in subsection B of Section 5.64.410; 
11.  Such additional information as may be requested by the city manager; 
12.  A nonrefundable filing fee in an amount established by resolution of the city council. 
B.  If any item of information specified above in subsection A of this section is determined under paramount federal or state law to be unlawful, the city manager is authorized to waive the requirement that such information be included in the application. 
(Ord. 284 § 1 (part), 1999) 
5.64.320 - Review of the application. 
    Within thirty (30) days after receipt of an application filed under Section 5.64.310 that is deemed to be complete, the city manager will give written notice to the applicant of the city's intent to negotiate an agreement setting forth the terms and conditions under which the operation of the proposed open video system will be authorized by the city. The commencement of those negotiations will be on a date that is mutually acceptable to the city and to the applicant. 
(Ord. 284 § 1 (part), 1999) 
5.64.330 - Agreement required. 
A.  No video programming services may be provided in the city by an open video system operator unless the operator and the city have executed a written agreement setting forth the terms and conditions under which the operation of the proposed open video system will be authorized by the city. 
B.  The agreement between the city and the open video system operator may contain terms and conditions that relate to the following subject matters, to the extent that such terms, conditions, and subject matters are not preempted by federal statute or regulations: 
1.  The nature, scope and duration of the agreement, including provisions for its renewal or extension; 
2.  The obligation of the open video system operator to pay to the city, at specified times, fees on the gross revenues received by the operator, as authorized by 47 CFR Section 76.1511, in accordance with the following standards and procedures: 
a.  The amount of the fees on the gross revenues will be five percent, and will be paid in lieu of the franchise fees permitted under Section 622 of the Communications Act; 
b.  The term "gross revenues" means (i) all gross revenues received by an open video system operator or its affiliates, including all revenues received from subscribers and all carriage revenues received from unaffiliated video programming providers; and (ii) all advertising revenues received by the operator or its affiliates in connection with the provision of video programming, where such revenues are included in the calculation of the cable franchise fee paid to the city by the franchised cable operator. The term "gross revenues" does not include revenues, such as subscriber or advertising revenues, collected by unaffiliated video programming providers; 
3.  The obligation of the open video system operator to comply with requirements relating to information collection and record keeping, accounting procedures, reporting, periodic audits and inspection of records in order to ensure the accuracy of the fees on the gross revenues that are required to be paid as specified above in subsection (B)(2); 
4.  The obligation of the open video system operator to meet the city's requirements with respect to public, educational, and governmental access channel capacity, services, facilities, and equipment, as provided for in 47 CFR Section 76.1505. In this regard, the following standards and procedures are applicable: 
a.  The open video system operator is subject to the same public, educational and governmental access requirements that apply within the cable television franchise service area with which its system overlaps, 
b.  The open video system operator must ensure that all subscribers receive all public, educational, and governmental access channels within the franchise service area in which the city's subscribers are located, 
c.  The open video system operator may negotiate with the city to establish the operator's obligations with respect to public, educational, and governmental access channel capacity, services, facilities, and equipment. These negotiations may include the city's franchised cable operator if the city, the open video system operator, and the franchised cable operator so desire, 
d.  If the open video system operator and the city are unable to reach an agreement regarding the operator's obligations with respect to public, educational, and governmental access channel capacity, services, facilities, and equipment within the city's jurisdiction, then the following obligations will be imposed: 
i.  The open video system operator must satisfy the same public, educational and governmental access obligations as the city's franchised cable operator by providing the same amount of channel capacity for public, educational, and governmental access and by matching the city's franchised cable operator's annual financial contributions in support of public, educational, and governmental access services, facilities, and equipment that are actually used by the city. For in-kind contributions, such as cameras or production studios, the open video system operator may satisfy its statutory obligation by negotiating mutually agreeable terms with the city's franchised cable operator, so that public, educational, and governmental access services to the city are improved or increased. If such terms cannot be agreed upon, the open video system operator must pay to the city the monetary equivalent of the franchised cable operators depreciated in-kind contribution, or, in the case of facilities, the annual amortization value. Any matching contributions provided by the open video system operator must be used to fund activities arising under Section 611 of the Communications Act. 
ii.  The city will impose upon the open video system operator the same rules and procedures that it imposes upon the franchised cable operator with regard to the open video system operator's use of channel capacity designated for public, educational, and governmental access use when that capacity is not being used for such purposes, 
e.  The city's franchised cable operator is required under federal law to permit the open video system operator to connect with its public, educational, and governmental access channel feeds. The open video system operator and the franchised cable operator may decide how to accomplish this connection, taking into consideration the physical and technical characteristics of the cable and the open video systems involved. If the franchised cable operator and the open video system operator cannot agree on how to accomplish the connection, the city has the right to decide. The city may require that the connection occur on city-owned property or on public rights-of-way, 
f.  All costs of connection to the franchised cable operator's public, educational, and governmental access channel feed must be borne by the open video system operator. These costs will be counted towards the open video system operator's matching financial contributions set forth above in subsection (B)(4)(d)(i) of this section, 
g.  The city will not impose upon the open video system operator any public, educational, or governmental access obligations that are greater than those imposed upon the franchised cable operator, 
h.  If there is no existing franchised cable operator, the provisions of 47 CFR Section 76.1 505(d)(6) will be applicable in determining the obligations of the open video system operator, 
i.  The open video system operator must adjust its system to comply with new public, educational, and access obligations imposed on the city's franchised cable operator following a renewal of the cable television franchise; provided, however, that the open video system operator will not be required to displace other programmers using its open video system to accommodate public, educational, and governmental access channels. The open video system operator must comply with such new public, educational, and governmental access obligations whenever additional capacity is or becomes available, whether it is due to increased channel capacity or to decreased demand for channel capacity; 
5.  If the city and the open video system operator cannot agree as to the application of the FCC's rules regarding the open video system operator's obligations to provide public, educational, and governmental access under the provisions of subsection (B)(4) of this section, then either party may file a complaint with the FCC in accordance with the dispute resolution procedures set forth in 47 CFR Section 76.1514. No agreement will be executed by the city until the dispute has been finally resolved; 
6.  If the open video system operator intends to maintain an institutional network, as defined in Section 611(f) of the Communications Act, the city will require that educational and governmental access channels be designated on that institutional network to the same extent that those channels are designated on the institutional network of the city's franchised cable operator; 
7.  The authority of an open video system provider to exercise editorial control over any public, educational, or governmental use of channel capacity will be restricted in accordance with the provisions of 47 CFR Section 76.1505(f); 
8.  The obligation of the open video system operator to comply with all applicable federal and state statutes and regulations relating to customer service standards, including the Cable Television and Video Customer Service and Information Act (Government Code Sections 53054, et seq.), and the Video Customer Service Act (Government Code Section 53088, et seq.); 
9.  If new physical plant is proposed to be constructed within the city, the obligation of the open video system operator to comply with the following rights-of-way use and management responsibilities that are also imposed by the city upon other telecommunications service providers in a nondiscriminatory and competitively neutral manner: 
a.  Compliance with all applicable city building and zoning codes, including applications for excavation, encroachment, and construction permits and the payment of all required permit and inspection fees, 
b.  The coordination of construction requirements, 
c.  Compliance with established standards and procedures for constructing lines across private property, 
d.  Compliance with all applicable insurance and indemnification requirements, 
e.  The repair and resurfacing of construction damaged streets, 
f.  Compliance with all public safety requirements that are applicable to telecommunications service providers using public property or public rights-of-way; 
10.  Acts or omissions constituting breaches or defaults of the agreement, and the applicable penalties, liquidated damages, and other remedies, including fines or the suspension, revocation or termination of the agreement; 
11.  Requirements relating to the sale, assignment, or transfer of the open video system; 
12.  Requirements relating to the open video system operator's compliance with and implementation of state and federal laws, rules and regulations pertaining to the operation of the open video system; 
13.  Such additional requirements, conditions, terms, policies, and procedures as may be mutually agreed upon by the city and the open video system operator and that will, in the judgment of the city council, best serve the public interest and protect the public health, welfare and safety. 
(Ord. 284 § 1 (part), 1999) 
Article IV. - Other Telecommunications Services and Systems 

5.64.400 - Other multichannel video programming distributors. 
    The term "cable system," as defined in federal law and as set forth in Article V below, does not include a facility that serves subscribers without using any public rights-of-way. Consequently, the categories of multichannel video programming distributors identified below are not deemed to be "cable systems" and are therefore exempt from the city's franchise requirements and from certain other local regulatory provisions authorized by federal law, provided that their distribution or transmission facilities do not involve the use of the city's public rights-of-way. 
A.  Multichannel multipoint distribution service (MMDS), also known as wireless cable, which typically involves the transmission by an FCC-licensed operator of numerous broadcast stations from a central location using line-of-sight technology. 
B.  Local multipoint distribution service (LMDS), another form of over-the-air wireless video service for which licenses are auctioned by the FCC, and which offers video programming, telephony and data networking services. 
C.  Direct broadcast satellite ("DBS"), also referred to as "direct-to-home satellite services," which involves the distribution or broadcasting of programming or services by satellite directly to the subscriber's premises without the use of ground receiving or distribution equipment, except at the subscriber's premises or in the uplink process to the satellite. Local regulation of direct-to-home satellite services is further proscribed by the following federal statutory provisions: 
1.  47 U.S.C. Section 303(v) confers upon the FCC exclusive jurisdiction to regulate the provision of direct-to-home satellite services; 
2.  Section 602 of the Communications Act states that a provider of direct-to-home satellite service is exempt from the collection or remittance, or both, of any tax or fee imposed by any local taxing jurisdiction on direct-to-home satellite service. The terms "tax" and "fee" are defined by federal statute to mean any local sales tax, local use tax, local intangible tax, local income tax, business license tax, utility tax, privilege tax, gross receipts tax, excise tax, franchise fees, local telecommunications tax, or any other tax, license, or fee that is imposed for the privilege of doing business, regulating, or raising revenue for a local taxing jurisdiction. 
(Ord. 284 § 1 (part), 1999) 
5.64.410 - Video providers-Registration-Customer service standards. 
A.  Unless the customer protection and customer service obligations of a video provider, as that term is defined in Article V, are specified in a franchise, license, lease or similar written agreement with the city, a video provider must comply with all applicable provisions of the following state statutes: 
1.  The Cable Television and Video Customer Service and Information Act (Government Code Sections 53054, et seq.); 
2.  The Video Customer Service Act (Government Code Sections 53088, et seq.). 
B.  All video providers that are operating in the city on the effective date of this chapter, or that intend to operate in the city after the effective date of this chapter, must register with the city; provided, however, that this registration requirement is not applicable to any video provider that has executed a franchise, license, lease or similar written agreement with the city. The registration form must include or be accompanied by the following: 
1.  The video provider's name, address and local telephone numbers; 
2.  The names of the officers of the video provider; 
3.  A copy of the video provider's written policies and procedures relating to customer service standards and the handling of customer complaints, as required by Government Code Sections 53054, et seq. These customer service standards must include, without limitation, standards regarding the following: 
a.  Installation, disconnection, service and repair obligations, employee identification, and service call response time and scheduling, 
b.  Customer telephone and office hours, 
c.  Procedures for billing, charges, refunds, and credits, 
d.  Procedures for termination of service, 
e.  Notice of the deletion of a programming service, the changing of channel assignments, or an increase in rates, 
f.  Complaint procedures and procedures for bill dispute resolution, 
g.  The video provider's written commitment to distribute annually to the city, and to its employees and customers, a notice describing the customer service standards specified above in subsections (B)(3)(a) through (B)(3)(f) of this section. This annual notice must include the report of the video provider on its performance in meeting its customer service standards, as required by Government Code Section 53055.2; 
4.  Unless a video provider is exempt under federal law from its payment, a registration fee in an amount established by resolution of the city council to cover the reasonable costs incurred by the city in reviewing and processing the registration form; 
5.  In addition to the registration fee specified above in subsection (B)(4), the written commitment of the video provider to pay to the city, when due, all costs and expenses reasonably incurred by the city in resolving any disputes between the video provider and its subscribers, which dispute resolution is mandated by Government Code Section 53088.2(o). 
C.  The city council may establish by ordinance a schedule of monetary penalties for the material breach by a video provider of its obligations under subparagraphs (a) through (n) of Government Code Section 53088.2. As used herein, the term "material breach" means any substantial and repeated failure to comply with the consumer service standards set forth in Government Code Section 53088.2. The provisions of that ordinance must be consistent with the provisions of Government Code Section 53088.2. The schedule of monetary penalties may also impose a penalty, as authorized by Government Code Section 53056(a), for the failure of a video provider to distribute the annual notice required by Government Code Section 53055.1, which penalty may not exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each year in which the notice is not distributed as required by state statute. 
(Ord. 284 § 1 (part), 1999) 
5.64.420 - Antennas for telecommunications services. 
    The city's zoning code sets forth the regulatory requirements that apply to the siting and construction of various categories of antennas that are commonly used in providing or receiving telecommunications services. 
(Ord. 284 § 1 (part), 1999) 
5.64.430 - Telecommunications service provided by telephone corporations. 
A.  The city council finds and determines as follows: 
1.  The Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996 preempts and declares invalid all state rules that restrict entry or limit competition in both local and long-distance telephone service. 
2.  The California Public Utilities Commission ("CPUC") is primarily responsible for the implementation of local telephone competition, and it issues certificates of public convenience and necessity to new entrants that are qualified to provide competitive local telephone exchange services and related telecommunications service, whether using their own facilities or the facilities or services provided by other authorized telephone corporations. 
3.  Section 234(a) of the California Public Utilities Code defines a telephone corporation as every corporation or person owning, controlling, operating, or managing any telephone line for compensation within this state. 
4.  Section 616 of the California Public Utilities Code provides that a telephone corporation may condemn any property necessary for the construction and maintenance of its telephone line. 
5.  Section 2902 of the California Public Utilities Code authorizes municipal corporations to retain their powers of control to supervise and regulate the relationships between a public utility and the general public in matters affecting the health, convenience, and safety of the general public, including matters such as the use and repair of public streets by any public utility and the location of the poles, wires, mains, or conduits of any public utility on, under, or above any public streets. 
6.  Section 7901 of the California Public Utilities Code authorizes telephone and telegraph corporations to construct telephone or telegraph lines along and upon any public road or highway, along or across any of the waters or lands within this state, and to erect poles, posts, piers or abatements for supporting the insulators, wires, and other necessary fixtures of their lines, in such manner and at such points as not to incommode the public use of the road or highway or interrupt the navigation of the waters. 
7.  Section 7901.1 of the California Public Utilities Code confirms the right of municipalities to exercise reasonable control as to the time, place, and manner in which roads, highways, and waterways are accessed, which control must be applied to all entities in an equivalent manner, and may involve the imposition of fees. 
8.  Section 50030 of the California Government Code provides that any permit fee imposed by a city for the placement, installation, repair, or upgrading of telecommunications facilities, such as lines, poles, or antennas, by a telephone corporation that has obtained all required authorizations from the CPUC and the FCC to provide telecommunications services, must not exceed the reasonable costs of providing the service for which the fee is charged, and must not be levied for general revenue purposes. 
B.  In recognition of and in compliance with the statutory authorizations and requirements set forth above in subsection A of this section, the following regulatory provisions are applicable to a telephone corporation that desires to provide telecommunications service by means of facilities that are proposed to be constructed within the city's public rights-of-way: 
1.  The telephone corporation must apply for and obtain, as may be applicable, an excavation permit, an encroachment permit, or a building permit (ministerial permit); 
2.  In addition to the information required by this code in connection with an application for a ministerial permit, a telephone corporation must submit to the city the following supplemental information: 
a.  A copy of the certificate of public convenience and necessity issued by the CPUC to the applicant, and a copy of the CPUC decision that authorizes the applicant to provide the telecommunications service for which the facilities are proposed to be constructed in the city's public rights-of-way; 
b.  If the applicant has obtained from the CPUC a certificate of public convenience to operate as a competitive local carrier, the following additional requirements are applicable: 
i.  As required by Decision No. 95-12-057 of the CPUC, the applicant must establish that it has timely filed with the city a quarterly report that describes the type of construction and the location of each construction project proposed to be undertaken in the city during the calendar quarter in which the application is filed, which information is sufficient to enable the city to coordinate multiple projects, as may be necessary, 
ii.  If the applicant's proposed construction project will extend beyond the utility rights-of-way into undisturbed areas or other rights-of-way, the applicant must establish that it has filed a petition with the CPUC to amend its certificate of public convenience and necessity and that the proposed construction project has been subjected to a full-scale environmental analysis by the CPUC, as required by Decision No. 95-12-057 of the CPUC, 
iii.  The applicant must inform the city whether its proposed construction project will be subject to any of the mitigation measures specified in the negative declaration (Competitive Local Carriers (CLCs) Projects for Local Exchange Communication Service throughout California) or to the mitigation monitoring plan adopted in connection with Decision No. 95-12-057 of the CPUC. The city's issuance of a ministerial permit will be conditioned upon the applicant's compliance with all applicable mitigation measures and monitoring requirements imposed by the CPUC upon telephone corporations that are designated as competitive local carriers. 
C.  In recognition of the fact that numerous excavations in the public rights-of-way diminish the useful life of the surface pavement, and for the purpose of mitigating the adverse impacts of numerous excavations on the quality and longevity of public street maintenance within the city, the following policies and procedures are adopted: 
1.  The city manager is directed to ensure that all public utilities, including telephone corporations, comply with all local design, construction, maintenance and safety standards that are contained within, or are related to, a ministerial permit that authorizes the construction of facilities within the public rights-of-way. 
2.  The city manager is directed to coordinate the construction and installation of facilities by public utilities, including telephone corporations, in order to minimize the number of excavations in the public rights-of-way. In this regard, based upon projected plans for street construction or renovation projects, the city manager is authorized to establish on a quarterly basis one or more construction time periods or windows for the installation of facilities within the public rights-of-way. Telephone corporations and other public utilities that submit applications for ministerial permits to construct facilities after a predetermined date may be required to delay such construction until the next quarterly window that is established by the city. 
D.  The city reserves all rights that it now possesses or may later acquire with respect to the regulation of any cable or telecommunications service that is provided, or proposed to be provided, by a telephone corporation. These reserved rights may relate, without limitation, to the imposition of reasonable conditions in addition to or different from those set forth in this section, the exaction of a fee or other form of consideration or compensation for use of public rights-of-way, and related matters; provided, however, that such regulatory rights and authority must be consistent with federal and state law that is applicable to cable or telecommunications services provided by telephone corporations. 
(Ord. 284 § 1 (part), 1999) 
Article VI. - Violations-Severability 

5.64.600 - Violations-Enforcement. 
A.  Any person who willfully violates any provision of this title is guilty of a misdemeanor and is punishable as provided for in Chapter 1.12 of Title 1 of this code. 
B.  The misdemeanor penalty specified above in subsection A of this section is not applicable to a violation of any provision of this chapter for which another sanction or penalty may be imposed under any franchise, license, lease or similar written agreement between the city and a multichannel video programming distributor or other telecommunications service provider. 
C.  The city may initiate a civil action in any court of competent jurisdiction to enjoin any violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. 284 § 1 (part), 1999) 
Chapter 5.68 - SERVICE ANIMALS 
Sections: 

5.68.010 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to prevent discrimination against persons who require the use of a service animal, including service animal species other than dogs, in access to public accommodations in Hesperia, including businesses open to the public and all other areas open to the public. 
(Ord. No. 2011-01, § 1, 3-15-11) 
5.68.020 - Definitions. 
A.  Except as described in subdivision (B), the terms in this chapter are as defined in Title III of the federal Americans with Disabilities Act (42 U.S.C. § 12181 et seq.), including but not limited to those definitions found in 42 U.S.C. §§ 12181, 12102, 12103, and section 36.104 of Title 28 of the Code of Federal Regulations (28 CFR 36.104). 
B.  Notwithstanding subdivision (A), the definition of the term "service animal" in this chapter is: "any guide dog, signal dog, or other animal of any species, that is individually trained to do work or perform tasks for the benefit of an individual with a disability, including, but not limited to, guiding individuals with impaired vision, alerting individuals with impaired hearing to intruders or sounds, detecting intermittent medical conditions and alerting individuals of same, providing minimal protection or rescue work, pulling a wheelchair, or fetching dropped items." 
(Ord. No. 2011-01, § 1, 3-15-11) 
5.68.030 - Access requirements. 
A.  General. A public accommodation shall modify policies, practices, or procedures to permit the use of a service animal by an individual with a disability, when the modifications are necessary to afford goods, services, facilities, privileges, advantages, or accommodations to individuals with disabilities, unless the public accommodation can demonstrate that making the modifications would fundamentally alter the nature of the goods, services, facilities, privileges, advantages, or accommodations. 
B.  Exceptions. A public accommodation may ask an individual with a disability to remove a service animal from the premises if: 
1.  The animal is out of control and the animal's handler does not take effective action to control it; or 
2.  The animal is not housebroken. 
C.  If an animal is properly excluded. If a public accommodation properly excludes a service animal under subdivision (B), it shall give the individual with a disability the opportunity to obtain goods, services, and accommodations without having the service animal on the premises. 
D.  Animal Under Handler's Control. A service animal shall be under the control of its handler. A service animal shall have a harness, leash, or other tether, unless either the handler is unable because of a disability to use a harness, leash, or other tether, or the use of a harness, leash, or other tether would interfere with the service animal's safe, effective performance of work or tasks, in which case the service animal must be otherwise under the handler's control (e.g., voice control, signals, or other effective means). 
E.  Care or Supervision. A public accommodation is not responsible for the care or supervision of a service animal. 
F.  Inquiries. A public accommodation shall not ask about the nature or extent of a person's disability, but may make two inquiries to determine whether an animal qualifies as a service animal. A public accommodation may ask if the animal is required because of a disability and what work or task the animal has been trained to perform. A public accommodation shall not require documentation, such as proof that the animal has been certified, trained, or licensed as a service animal. Generally, a public accommodation may not make these inquiries about a service animal when it is readily apparent that an animal is trained to do work or perform tasks for an individual with a disability (e.g., the dog is observed guiding an individual who is blind or has low vision, pulling a person's wheelchair, or providing assistance with stability or balance to an individual with an observable mobility disability). 
G.  Access to Areas of a Public Accommodation. Individuals with disabilities shall be permitted to be accompanied by their service animals in all areas of a place of public accommodation where members of the public, program participants, clients, customers, patrons, or invitees, as relevant, are allowed to go. 
H.  Surcharges. A public accommodation shall not ask or require an individual with a disability to pay a surcharge, even if people accompanied by pets are required to pay fees, or to comply with other requirements generally not applicable to people without pets. If a public accommodation normally charges individuals for the damage they cause, an individual with a disability may be charged for damage caused by his or her service animal. 
(Ord. No. 2011-01, § 1, 3-15-11) 
5.68.040 - Interpretation. 
    This chapter is to be interpreted and applied consistent with the interpretation and application of Title III of the Americans with Disabilities Act (42 U.S.C. § 12181 et seq.) and the federal regulations implementing same, except with respect to instances in which the language in this chapter expressly differs from the language of the ADA. 
(Ord. No. 2011-01, § 1, 3-15-11) 
5.68.050 - Defenses. 
    Defenses to an alleged violation of this chapter shall be those defenses established under Title III of the Americans with Disabilities Act (42 U.S.C. § 12181 et seq.), including but not limited to section 36.208 of title 28 of the Code of Federal Regulations, which provides that an individual and service animal need not be given access to a public accommodation when that access would pose a direct threat to the health or safety of others. 
(Ord. No. 2011-01, § 1, 3-15-11) 
5.68.060 - Liability. 
    Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter or who aids or assists in the violation of any provisions of this chapter shall be liable as follows: 
A.  For actual damages including compensatory damages for pain and suffering, or one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), whichever is greater; 
B.  For costs and attorney's fees; 
C.  For any equitable relief to remedy the wrong to the individual whose rights were violated and to prevent or end any future act or practice which would violate this chapter; 
D.  For civil, administrative, and/or criminal penalties under Chapter 1.12 of this code. 
(Ord. No. 2011-01, § 1, 3-15-11) 
5.68.070 - Enforcement. 
A.  Any aggrieved person may enforce this chapter in a civil action in any court with jurisdiction. 
B.  An action for equitable relief under this chapter may be brought by any aggrieved person or by any aggrieved person or entity which will fairly and adequately represent the interests of the class of persons who require service animals because of a disability. 
C.  In addition to the remedies above, violations of this chapter may be enforced by the city through the civil, administrative, and/or criminal enforcement provisions established in Chapter 1.12 of this code. 
(Ord. No. 2011-01, § 1, 3-15-11) 
5.68.080 - Nonexclusive. 
    Nothing in this chapter shall preclude any aggrieved person from seeking any other remedy provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 2011-01, § 1, 3-15-11) 
5.68.090 - Limitation on actions. 
    Actions by aggrieved persons or entities under this chapter must be filed within one year of the last occurrence of the alleged discriminatory acts. 
(Ord. No. 2011-01, § 1, 3-15-11) 
Title 6 - ANIMAL CARE AND CONTROL 
Chapters: 
Chapter 6.00 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Sections: 

6.00.010 - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this title, the words and phrases are defined in Section 1.04.050. 
(Ord. 2002-08 Exh. C (part), 2002) 
6.00.020 - Record keeping. 
    The shelter shall keep accurate records of each animal taken up, treated, or impounded. The records shall include all of the following information and any other information required by the California Veterinary Medical Board and shall be maintained for at least three years. 
A.  The date and circumstances the animal was taken up, impounded, treated, returned, adopted, or euthanized. 
B.  The license tag number if present. 
C.  The names of any employees or volunteers who treated, handled, or euthanized the animal. 
D.  A description of any treatment provided the animal and the name of the veterinarian of record. 
E.  The name and address of any adopting party. 
(Ord. 2002-08 Exh. C (part), 2002) 
6.00.030 - Duty to impound, treat, house, and dispose of animals. 
    The animal control officers are authorized and empowered to: 
A.  Capture, receive, and impound any animal observed or found running at large, any animal found molesting any person or other animal, any animal being kept or maintained in violation of any provision of this code or of any state law, any stray or abandoned animal, any animal unlicensed or unvaccinated as required by this code, any animal which has been released by its owner or keeper, or any animal for which the owner is unwilling or unable to care for or is unavailable. 
B.  Regularly and adequately feed, water, and care for all animals impounded under the provisions of this code. 
C.  Treat or cause to be treated any animal that, in their opinion, could become adoptable with reasonable efforts. 
D.  Release any unlicensed and spayed or neutered animal, not suffering from any infectious or contagious disease, to any adult person or humane society or rescue organization as defined in 501.3.c of the Revenue Code (IRS) that will pay fees for licensing, rabies vaccinations, and spaying or neutering. 
E.  Humanely destroy any animal that is suffering from an incurable or contagious disease as certified by a licensed veterinarian, or is suffering from a serious injury and euthanasia is the most humane action to take, or is an unlicensed vicious dog, or which has been ordered by the hearing officer, or which has been held for adoption for at least the minimum time period prescribed in State law and has not been taken for adoption. 
(Ord. 2002-08 Exh. C (part), 2002) 
6.00.040 - Public nuisances. 
    Any animal which endangers the life or health of persons or animals, or substantially interferes with a residents reasonable expectations or enjoyment of their property is declared to be a public nuisance. 
    Any animal shall be determined to be a public nuisance if its owner allows the animal to do any of the following: 
A.  Is found untethered and off its property more than two times in three years. 
B.  Damages the property of anyone other than its owner. 
C.  Molests or intimidates pedestrians or passersby while the animal is off the property of its owner. 
D.  Chases vehicles in a public right-of-way. 
E.  Habitually barks, crows, whines or makes other loud or unusual noises when the noise interferes with the reasonable enjoyment of a persons property by a person of ordinary sensitivities in residentially zoned property. 
    Exception: Habitually barking dogs in agricultural zones, under the same conditions as above. 
F.  Causes fouling of the air by odor by unclean or unmaintained enclosures and thereby creates unreasonable annoyance or discomfort to neighbors or others in close proximity to the premises where the animal is kept or harbored. 
G.  Causes unsanitary conditions in enclosures or surroundings where the animal is kept or harbored. 
H.  Is offensive or dangerous to the public health, safety, or welfare by virtue of the number and/or types of animals maintained; or attacks other domestic animals, including animals possessed by the owner of the attacking animal. 
I.  An unspayed female in estrus is left in an unfenced place so as to attract stray males. 
    Any animal owner or keeper that violates any federal, state, or local law shall be guilty of causing a public nuisance. Any person killing or butchering any animal within one hundred (100) feet of a public right-of-way shall screen the action from view of the public right-of-way, shall be guilty of a public nuisance. Any person killing or butchering small livestock, hogs or cattle shall be registered with the state or federal government to do so. 
(Ord. 2002-08 Exh. C (part), 2002) 
6.00.050 - Zoning compliance. 
    It is unlawful for any person to keep or maintain, or to cause to be kept or maintained, any animal, unless the keeping of such is permitted by the zoning ordinance of the city or this title. 
(Ord. 2002-08 Exh. C (part), 2002) 
6.00.060 - Cost recovery. 
    The enforcement officer is authorized to use any and all methods approved in Chapter 1.12 of this code in order to recover fees, enforcement costs, and abatement costs. 
(Ord. 2002-08 Exh. C (part), 2002) 
Chapter 6.04 - LICENSING 
Sections: 

6.04.010 - License required. 
    It shall be unlawful for persons to own, harbor, or keep any dog over four months of age within the city without such dog having and wearing a current and valid license tag issued by the city. Application for a dog license shall be made within thirty (30) days after obtaining the dog, or when the dog reaches four months of age. 
    Exception: Any dog spending more than fifty (50) percent of its time within another jurisdiction, which shall be a "visiting dog." Such visiting dog may be kept within the city for up to fourteen (14) days without a Hesperia license so long as it has a current and valid license from another jurisdiction, and the license tag is attached to the dog." 
(Ord. 2002-08 Exh. C (part), 2002) 
( Ord. No. 2014-14, § 3(Exh. A), 8-19-14 ) 
6.04.020 - License requirements. 
A.  Written application for licenses, which shall include the name and address of applicant, a California identification card or drivers license, description of the animal, the appropriate fee, and rabies certificate issued by a licensed veterinarian, and if applicable, a certificate of sterility shall be made to the city. 
B.  If not revoked, licenses for the keeping of dogs shall be issued for a period of one year or more, not to exceed three years or the expiration date of the current rabies vaccination certificate. 
C.  Upon acceptance of the license application and fee, the city shall issue a durable tag, stamped with an identifying number. 
D.  The city shall maintain a record of the identifying numbers of all tags issued and shall make this record available pursuant to the Government Code as a public record. 
E.  The licensing period shall run concurrently with the rabies vaccination certificate. 
F.  No person may use any license for any animal other than the animal for which it was issued. 
G.  Any dog not wearing a current Hesperia dog license tag is considered to be unlicensed. 
    Exception: Dogs on the owner's property may not be found in violation if evidence of a valid Hesperia license can be provided by the owner upon request, and/or by Animal Control Records check. 
(Ord. 2002-08 Exh. C (part), 2002) 
( Ord. No. 2014-14, § 3(Exh. A), 8-19-14 ) 
6.04.030 - License fees. 
    License fees shall be established by resolution of the Hesperia City Council. Any person who obtains a license not in conformity with the provisions of this chapter shall pay a penalty fee in addition to the license fee. 
(Ord. 2002-08 Exh. C (part), 2002) 
6.04.040 - License renewal and duplicate licenses. 
    Dog licenses are valid for one, two, or three years from date of issuance depending upon the fee paid and the rabies certificate's validity. Licenses shall be renewed within thirty (30) days of expiration. When an original license tag has been lost, a duplicate tag shall be obtained at a cost set by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. 2002-08 Exh. C (part), 2002) 
6.04.050 - Tags. 
    Except as provided for in Section 6.04.020, it shall be the responsibility of every resident who owns, harbors, cares for, or has in custody a licensed dog, to securely attach or fasten the license tag to the dog's collar or harness so that such tag is worn by the dog at all times. 
(Ord. 2002-08 Exh. C (part), 2002) 
( Ord. No. 2014-14, § 3(Exh. A), 8-19-14 ) 
6.04.060 - Misuse of tags. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to place upon or attach to a dog any false, counterfeit or unauthorized tag. 
    It shall be unlawful to attach a license tag on a dog to which said tag was not originally issued. 
    It shall be unlawful for an unauthorized person to remove from any dog, any collar or harness or other device to which is attached a city of Hesperia license tag for the current year or remove such tag therefrom. 
(Ord. 2002-08 Exh. C (part), 2002) 
6.04.070 - Transfer of license. 
    A license may be transferred from one to another Hesperia resident upon completion of an application and payment of a fee, established by the city council. If a dog licensed in Hesperia, is transferred to another Hesperia resident, the new owner shall complete the application. Animals transferred from a different jurisdiction, but appropriately licensed in their prior jurisdiction, shall pay a transfer fee as established by city council resolution, and a new tag will be issued. 
(Ord. 2002-08 Exh. C (part), 2002) 
6.04.080 - Vaccination of dogs. 
    Every person keeping, maintaining, or having custody of a dog over the age of four months shall cause the dog to be vaccinated with a canine rabies vaccine approved by the California Department of Health within thirty (30) days from obtaining the dog or within thirty (30) days of the dog attaining the age of four months. 
(Ord. 2002-08 Exh. C (part), 2002) 
6.04.090 - Duty to report animal bites. 
    It shall be the duty of any person having knowledge that any animal subject to rabies, whether or not the animal is suspected of having rabies, has bitten any human being within the city to immediately report that fact to the animal control department or the police department and provide full information regarding the incident. 
(Ord. 2002-08 Exh. C (part), 2002) 
6.04.100 - Confinement of biting animal. 
    Upon receipt of a report that a person has been bitten by an animal subject to rabies (all warm-blooded mammals), any person authorized to enforce the provisions of this chapter is hereby empowered to enter upon any private property, including the home or residence where the biting animal is kept or has strayed, to inspect, and strictly isolate, seize, or impound if necessary, in a place and manner approved by the animal control officer, any such animal for a period of ten days (for dogs and cats) and fourteen (14) days (for other animals). Rodents (members of the Rodentia), rabbits and hares (members of the order Lagomorpha) are not required to be quarantined. 
    The animal control officer or licensed veterinarian may authorize, with permission of the owner, if known, and other legal restrictions permitting, the euthanasia of a biting animal for the purpose of laboratory examination for rabies using the fluorescent rabies antibody (FRA) test. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to remove from any place of isolation or quarantine any animal which has been isolated or quarantined under the provisions of this chapter, without the consent of the animal control officer. 
(Ord. 2002-08 Exh. C (part), 2002) 
6.04.110 - Reporting and confinement of rabid animals. 
    It is the duty of any person having knowledge of the whereabouts of an animal known to have or suspected of having rabies to report the fact immediately to the animal control division. If such person is the owner or possessor or has custody of such animal, he or she shall immediately confine it and keep said animal strictly confined until it is established to the satisfaction of said official that such animal has or does not have rabies. 
    Where such owner or possessor does not have the proper facility for such confinement, or animal owner continually allows such animal to run loose and at large, or where the owner of such rabid or suspected rabid animal is not known, such animal shall be isolated in strict confinement under proper care and under the observation of a California licensed veterinarian, or California licensed registered veterinary technician, in a pound, veterinary hospital, or other adequate facility in a manner approved by the animal control officer, and shall not be killed or released for at least ten days after the onset of symptoms suggestive of rabies. If such animal creates a menace to the public health and safety, the animal control officer or his representative may kill or destroy the animal forthwith and have it examined for rabies using the fluorescent rabies antibody (FRA) test. 
    Whenever any such owned biting animal is quarantined in place other than the premises of its owner, all expenses incurred in its confinement shall be the liability of the owner, possessor or custodian of such biting animal. 
(Ord. 2002-08 Exh. C (part), 2002) 
6.04.120 - Disposition of animal bitten by rabid animal. 
    Any animal that is subject to rabies which has been exposed to a known rabid animal or suspected rabid animal shall, upon notification of its owner, possessor or custodian, be: 
A.  Immediately securely confined in a place and manner approved by the animal control officer for a period of six months; or 
B.  Immediately destroyed unless the biting animal is determined by laboratory examination to be negative from rabies, except that in the case of dogs and cats, the following alternative is permitted: 
1.  The dog or cat shall be revaccinated and then quarantined for a period of thirty (30) days provided such dog or cat has been vaccinated not less than thirty (30) days prior, with a rabies vaccine approved by the California State Department of Public Health. 
    The animal control officer may, at his discretion, destroy or quarantine the animal so bitten where the owner, possessor or custodian thereof is not readily accessible or is not known. 
    The carcass of any dead animal exposed to rabies will, upon demand, be surrendered to the animal control officer. 
    Upon the discretion of the animal control officer, specimens of high risk or medium risk animals involved in a biting incident shall be examined for rabies. Specimens of low-risk animals may be examined upon payment of reasonable laboratory fees. 
(Ord. 2002-08 Exh. C (part), 2002) 
6.04.130 - Posting of quarantine sign. 
    It shall be the duty of any person authorized to enforce the provisions of this chapter to post an appropriate sign in a conspicuous place at a location where a dog or cat or any biting, vicious or rabid animal is being quarantined or confined to warn the public of this fact. It shall be unlawful for anyone to obstruct the posting of such a sign or to remove or destroy such a posted sign without permission of the animal control officer. 
(Ord. 2002-08 Exh. C (part), 2002) 
6.04.140 - Vaccination. 
    Rabies vaccinations shall be performed only by a veterinarian who is duly licensed to practice in the state of California. Vaccination for rabies may be done in any veterinary clinic or hospital or in a low-cost rabies vaccination clinic. 
(Ord. 2002-08 Exh. C (part), 2002) 
6.04.150 - Exceptions to vaccination. 
    Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, a dog may be exempted from rabies vaccination if such vaccination would jeopardize the health of such dog due to infirmity or other disability provided the owner has in his possession a written certification from a licensed veterinarian attesting to such infirmity or disability. The owner or custodian of such dog shall, within ten days after the termination of such infirmity or disability, cause such dog to be vaccinated and licensed. Any such dog with infirmity or disability shall be securely confined within its owner's or harborer's premises so that it does not come in contact with any other animal or person. 
(Ord. 2002-08 Exh. C (part), 2002) 
6.04.200 - Service animal license or tag. 
    The city's animal control department shall issue a service animal license to any individual who requires the use of a service animal other than a dog, or a service animal tag to a service animal that is a dog, if all of the following requirements are satisfied: 
A.  The individual applies to the city's animal control department for a service animal license or tag. 
B.  The individual presents a written certification from a doctor that the animal meets the definition of a service animal under Section 5.68.020(B) of this code, as follows: "any guide dog, signal dog, or other animal of any species, that is individually trained to do work or perform tasks for the benefit of an individual with a disability, including, but not limited to, guiding individuals with impaired vision, alerting individuals with impaired hearing to intruders or sounds, detecting intermittent medical conditions and alerting individuals of same, providing minimal protection or rescue work, pulling a wheelchair, or fetching dropped items." 
(Ord. No. 2011-01, § 2, 3-15-11) 
6.04.210 - Affidavit for service dog tag. 
    If an individual applies for a service animal tag for a dog pursuant to Section 6.04.200, the individual shall sign an affidavit stating as follows: 
"By affixing my signature to this affidavit, I hereby declare I fully understand that Section 365.7 of the Penal Code prohibits any person to knowingly and fraudulently represent himself or herself, through verbal or written notice, to be the owner or trainer of any canine licensed as, to be qualified as, or identified as, a guide dog, signal dog, or service dog, as defined in subdivisions (d), (e), and (f), respectively, of Section 365.5 of the Penal Code and paragraph (6) of subdivision (b) of Section 54.1 of the Civil Code (which incorporate the Hesperia Municipal Code section 5.68.020(B) definition), and that a violation of Section 365.7 of the Penal Code is a misdemeanor, punishable by imprisonment in a county jail not exceeding six months, by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000), or by both that imprisonment and fine." 
(Ord. No. 2011-01, § 2, 3-15-11) 
6.04.220 - Presentation of service animal license or tag. 
    An individual who has obtained a service animal license or tag may present the license or tag to an owner or operator of a business or other public accommodation that is open to the public in Hesperia, as proof that the individual's animal is a service animal and that the individual must be permitted access to the public accommodation with the service animal pursuant to Section 5.68.030 of this code. A public accommodation shall not require an individual with a service animal to present a service animal license or tag. The service animal license or tag serves as proof that access must be provided pursuant to Section 5.68.030, but a public accommodation must provide access to any individual with an animal that meets the definition of a service animal in Section 5.68.020(B) whether or not the individual possesses a service animal license or tag. 
(Ord. No. 2011-01, § 2, 3-15-11) 
6.04.230 - Return of service dog tag. 
    Upon the death or retirement of a service dog, the owner or person in possession of the service dog tag shall immediately return the tag to the city's animal control department. 
(Ord. No. 2011-01, § 2, 3-15-11) 
Chapter 6.08 - ANIMAL CARE AND CONTROL 
Sections: 

6.08.010 - Care of animals. 
A.  Every person within the city who owns, possesses, or maintains an animal shall maintain their premises in a clean and sanitary condition, shall remove manure and excreta from animal enclosures every day and from yards at least every week, or more often so as to not become a nuisance to reasonable persons in the neighborhood. In no case shall a person maintain an animal in a condition that causes insect infestation or offensive odors. 
B.  All animals shall be supplied with sufficient good wholesome food and adequate water as often as necessary for the respective animals well being. 
C.  Animals shall be provided with an enclosure to prevent escape and to provide adequate protection from the elements. Enclosures or structures shall have adequate ventilation to prevent drafts and remove odors. 
D.  Every animal requiring medical attention shall be taken to a licensed veterinarian if so ordered by the enforcement officer. 
E.  It shall be unlawful to transport a dog in a motor vehicle upon any street within the city unless the dog is fully enclosed within the motor vehicle or is contained or tethered in a manner that will prevent the dog from falling, jumping, or being thrown from the motor vehicle. 
F.  No dog or animal shall be left in an enclosed, parked vehicle without adequate ventilation, or in such a way as to subject the animal to extreme temperatures, which may adversely affect the animals' health and welfare. 
(Ord. 2002-08 Exh. C (part), 2002) 
6.08.020 - Control of animals. 
A.  No person owning or having control of any animal shall permit such animal to stray or run at large upon any public street, sidewalk, school ground, public park, playground, place of public assembly, or any other public place, or any unenclosed private lot or other unenclosed private place, or upon any private place or property without the consent of the owner or person in control thereof. 
B.  Any person who finds any animal which has strayed or is running at large upon his own property or any other place contrary to the provisions of this chapter, may take possession of and hold same; provided, however, that he shall notify the animal control officer that he has such animal in his possession within twenty-four (24) hours after securing possession thereof and give such officer full information in regard to the animal, including a complete description of such animal and license number, if any and surrender the same to the animal control officer or division upon demand. While in the person's possession, said person shall accept all responsibility for care and control as described in this chapter. 
C.  Any person may lawfully take their dog off their property if they restrain it on a substantial leash, not over six feet in length and controlled by a person competent to restrain such dog, or humanely enclose it in an automobile, cage, or similar enclosure, or if the dog is used for law enforcement or herding livestock and under immediate command control. 
    Exception: Dogs found to be potentially dangerous or vicious and directed to remain on their owner's property. 
D.  Any dog found at large, running loose, or unrestrained off the owner's property may be impounded by the animal control officer for a period as prescribed by law. If such dog is properly licensed, the first such offense shall allow the dog to be returned to the owner without being spayed or neutered. The second such violation shall require such dog to be spayed or neutered at the owner's expense. If such dog is not properly licensed, such dog shall be required to be spayed or neutered and properly licensed at the owner's expense. Any dog impounded to enforce this requirement, and left unclaimed shall become the property of the city. 
E.  A person found to be in violation of any provision of this Title, including licensing under Section 6.04.010, and/or Hesperia Municipal Code Section 16.20.690 related to the number of animals allowed to be kept on property, shall require those animal(s) subject to the violation to be spayed or neutered, and (for dogs) properly licensed, at the owner's expense. 
F.  There shall be a reclaiming fee for all impounded animals. If an owner attempts to reclaim an animal, then refuses when told about the fees, the cost of the apprehension and boarding shall be considered a debt against the animal owners property and costs may be recovered by any means available to the city. 
(Ord. 2002-08 Exh. C (part), 2002) 
(Ord. No. 2012-13, §§ 3, 4, 7-17-12; Ord. No. 2014-14, § 3(Exh. A), 8-19-14 ) 
6.08.030 - Animal waste. 
    It shall be unlawful for any owner or responsible person in charge of any animal to allow said animal to deposit solid waste matter on any property other than that of the animal owner, unless the animal owner or responsible person in charge of the animal immediately picks up and removes the solid waste. Any solid waste deposited on the animal owner's property must be picked up and disposed of at most every seven days. Disposal may include sealing in a plastic waste bag and removal by the city's approved waste hauler, or removed to the county landfill by the owner. Solid waste from herbivorous animals may be by the preceding methods or may be tilled or disked into the soil on premises. 
(Ord. 2002-08 Exh. C (part), 2002) 
6.08.040 - Female dogs and puppies. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to permit any female dog owned, maintained, or controlled by him or her, when such dog is in heat, in season, or in breeding condition, to be unconfined in a manner that attracts stray male dogs. All dogs under four months of age and until vaccinated against rabies, shall be confined to the premises or kept under physical restraint of their owner. 
(Ord. 2002-08 Exh. C (part), 2002) 
6.08.050 - Wild animals. 
A.  No person shall have, keep, maintain, breed, sell, trade or let for hire, any wild, exotic, dangerous, or non-domestic animal without first applying to and receiving special authorization from the state of California, Department of Fish and Game and the city. The keeping or maintenance of such animals shall also conform to the city development code. 
B.  The animal control officer may authorize the keeping or maintaining of any wild, exotic, dangerous, or non-domestic animal when, in his/her opinion, any such animal may be kept or maintained without endangering the safety or any person, other animal or property, nor create a nuisance; provided, however, that the animal control officer may require any such animal to be properly caged, tethered, or restrained, and that he or she may create such additional requirements that may be necessary and proper under the circumstances. Any privately owned wild, exotic, dangerous, or non-domestic animal shall require a license fee as specified in the city fee schedule; the initial fee to be paid at the time of application. The animal control officer may revoke such authorization when, in his or her opinion, the safety of any person, other animal or property is endangered or that a nuisance is created by the keeping of such animal. 
C.  The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to licensed circuses, carnivals, zoos or other collections of wild animals under jurisdiction of the city, state or federal government. 
(Ord. 2002-08 Exh. C (part), 2002) 
6.08.060 - Dead animals. 
    When any animal owned by, or in the custody or control of any person, or found in any person's private property dies, such person shall within twenty-four (24) hours, provide for the burial, incineration, or other disposition of the body of such dead animal or fowl in a safe and sanitary manner. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to dispose of the body of such dead animal in or on any public or private property, other than his or her own, without proper authorization from the city animal control officer. 
(Ord. 2002-08 Exh. C (part), 2002) 
6.08.070 - Hesperia animal shelter. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any person to remove any animal from the custody of Hesperia animal control without first obtaining authorization for the release of the animal. 
B.  Any animal removed from Hesperia animal control without such authorization may be retaken by the enforcement officer and again impounded. The holding time period for any animal unlawfully removed from the shelter shall include all the time from the original impound date and include any time the animal was unlawfully removed from the shelter. 
C.  It shall be unlawful to attempt to adopt any animal from the shelter in order to avoid payment of costs or fees for the capture, impound, treatment, or boarding of the animal. 
(Ord. 2002-08 Exh. C (part), 2002) 
6.08.080 - Fight training prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful to fight train, keep, harbor, transport through the limits of the city, own, or in any way possess a dog for the purpose of dogfight exhibitions. Scars and wounds are rebuttable evidence of participation in dogfight exhibitions or training. "Fight training" is defined to include but not be limited to: 
A.  The use or possession of treadmills unless under the direction of a veterinarian; 
B.  Actions designed to torment, badger or bait any dog for purpose of encouraging said dog for fight exhibitions; 
C.  The use of weights on the dog unless under the direction of a veterinarian; 
D.  The use of other animals for blood sport training; 
E.  Any other activity the primary purpose of which is the training of dogs for aggressive or vicious behavior or dog-fighting exhibitions. 
(Ord. 2002-08 Exh. C (part), 2002) 
6.08.090 - Animal sales and transfers. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, trade, offer for sale or trade, barter or give away any dog, cat or other animal on any public property or any property not owned by that person. This section shall not pertain to any licensed commercial animal facility as long as the business is conducted within the licensed place of business. This section shall also not apply to an adoption program conducted or permitted by the city. 
(Ord. 2002-08 Exh. C (part), 2002) 
Chapter 6.12 - COMMERCIAL ANIMAL FACILITIES 
Sections: 

6.12.010 - Commercial animal facilities defined. 
    A commercial animal facility is any building, structure, enclosure, property, or premises whereupon dogs, cats, or other animals exceeding the zoning allowances are kept or maintained for any purpose. This section does not apply to wild birds unless they are contained on the property. This section shall mean any kennel, cattery, pet shop, grooming parlor, zoo, menagerie, breeding or boarding facility, aquarium, game bird farm, and any other place where animals allowed by the development code are exceeded. 
(Ord. 2002-08 Exh. C (part), 2002) 
6.12.020 - License required. 
    No person shall, within the city, operate a commercial animal facility without first obtaining a license from the city. The license form shall be available from animal control and shall not be deemed approved until an inspection by the enforcement officer verifies that all city requirements are met. 
(Ord. 2002-08 Exh. C (part), 2002) 
6.12.030 - Application for license. 
    An application for a license to operate a commercial animal facility shall be made in writing to the city on a form provided by the city. Prior to issuing said license, the enforcement officer will inspect the facilities for compliance with all general requirements. No license shall be issued or renewed unless all general requirements relating to animal facilities are met and a fee, established by the city council, has been received. Each license shall be renewed annually. Each commercial animal facility shall provide evidence that they possess a city business license prior to applying for the commercial animal facility license. 
(Ord. 2002-08 Exh. C (part), 2002) 
6.12.040 - General requirements. 
    Every person within the city who owns, conducts, manages, or operates any commercial animal facility, for which a license is required by this chapter, shall comply with each of the following conditions: 
A.  Housing facilities for animals shall be maintained in good repair to protect animals from injury and restrict entrance of other animals. 
B.  All animals and all animal buildings or enclosures shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition. Waste shall be removed and disposed of properly, at least, daily. 
C.  All animals shall be supplied with sufficient good wholesome food and water as often as the feeding habits of the respective animals require. 
D.  When dogs are maintained commercially, runs shall be provided. 
1.  Runs shall be enclosed with chain link, concrete block or other suitable material. 
2.  Indoor runs shall have floors constructed of concrete or asphalt and sloped one-quarter inch per foot to a drain or drain way. 
3.  Drains shall be constructed in conformance with the city's adopted plumbing code and shall drain into an approved sewage disposal system. 
4.  Outdoor runs may have floors of four-inch nominal thickness pea gravel. 
E.  All reasonable precautions shall be taken to protect the public from the animals and animals from the public. At least two gates must be passed through from public areas to the animal areas. 
F.  Every building or enclosure wherein animals are maintained shall be properly ventilated to prevent drafts and to remove odors. Heating and cooling shall be provided as required according to physical needs of the animals. 
G.  All animal rooms, cages and runs shall be of sufficient size to provide adequate and proper housing for animals kept therein. 
H.  All animals shall be taken to a licensed veterinarian for examination and treatment if so ordered by the enforcement officer. 
I.  Every precaution shall be taken to avoid the production of nuisances and any hazard to the public health as a result of the presence of these wild, dangerous, and/or exotic animals. 
J.  Every violation of applicable regulations shall be corrected within a reasonable time to be specified by the enforcement officer. 
K.  Failure of the applicant for said license to comply with any of the foregoing conditions shall be deemed just cause for the revocation of any license, whether original or renewal. 
(Ord. 2002-08 Exh. C (part), 2002) 
6.12.050 - Licenses general. 
A.  Any license issued under this chapter shall expire at the end of the fiscal year (June 30). 
B.  License renewal shall be subject to the same conditions as issuance of any original license. 
C.  A commercial animal facility license may be suspended for cause whenever it is determined from an inspection that the general requirements listed in Section 6.12.040, are not being met. Any suspension of a license shall be effective until all conditions of Section 6.12.040 have been complied with. Any inspections to restore a license shall be paid for by the owner or operator of the commercial animal facility at the regular hourly rates as established by city council resolution. 
D.  A license for a commercial animal facility shall not be transferable, except when the property upon which the business is located, is sold to a new person and the business remains on the original property. 
(Ord. 2002-08 Exh. C (part), 2002) 
6.12.060 - Kennel requirements. 
A.  All dogs, owned by or under control of the kennel operator, shall be licensed upon attaining the age of four months. All dogs within the kennel shall wear a current license tag or the kennel operator shall have in their possession a current license and certificate of rabies vaccination for each animal in the kennel. 
B.  Dogs owned by the kennel operator, which are allowed outside the confines of the kennel, shall be individually vaccinated and shall have a current dog license attached to the collar. 
C.  All kennels, runs, buildings and other equipment and facilities used for the care of dogs shall be cleaned daily and shall be disinfected as necessary to prevent the spread of disease. Boarding kennels shall disinfect all facilities used in the care of dogs between each separate usage. 
D.  All droppings shall be removed from the kennel daily. Soiled papers and bedding material shall be removed from the kennel as frequently as necessary to maintain the kennel in a clean, sanitary manner. All such waste material shall be disposed of in a manner satisfactory to the animal control officer. 
E.  It is a violation of this chapter to sell, give away, release, or otherwise dispose of an animal except for euthanasia, which has or is suspected of having or has been exposed to any contagious or infectious disease transmissible to other animals or to man. All such diseases shall be reported to the animal control officer or public health veterinarian. 
F.  Adequate provisions shall be made for the disposal of dead animals, which shall be satisfactory to the animal control officer. 
G.  All dogs when sold, adopted, or transferred shall be provided with a copy of the "certificate of vaccination" issued by the veterinarian and shall be advised to secure a dog license tag within thirty (30) days from date of purchase. 
H.  The requirements of this section shall also apply to humane societies, rescue organizations and pet shops. 
(Ord. 2002-08 Exh. C (part), 2002) 
6.12.070 - Cattery requirements. 
A.  All cats shall be confined in a cage, room, or similar space and shall not be allowed to run at large. If caged, all cages shall be constructed of fiberglass, stainless steel, or similar materials, shall be designed to permit easy cleaning, and shall occupy at least twelve (12) cubic feet with no dimension less than two feet. Not more than two adult cats shall be placed in a single cage. 
B.  Cages shall be constructed of wire, or other material, not permitting the cats paws to pass through the material. 
C.  Each cage or space shall have a scratching post. 
D.  Shelves shall be provided for resting and sleeping. 
(Ord. 2002-08 Exh. C (part), 2002) 
6.12.080 - Apiaries. 
    Due to the potential for takeover form "Africanized Honey Bees": 
A.  Apiaries shall not be permitted within the city. 
B.  Exceptions. 
1.  A single hive may be allowed when required by a prescription from a licensed medical doctor and used for the treatment of certain diseases. 
2.  Three or fewer hives may be maintained on agriculturally zoned and owner occupied land when the hives are placed at least three hundred (300) from any street, road or highway, any public school, park, "R" designation boundary or from any dwelling or place of human habitation other than that occupied by the owner or caretaker of the apiary. The hives must be located and maintained behind barriers (natural or otherwise) of at least six feet in height. 
3.  A permanent source of fresh water shall be provided within twenty-five (25) feet of any hive. 
C.  All other apiaries in existence within the city limits on the effective date of this ordinance may be allowed to stay for a period of one year (three hundred sixty-five (365) days) from that date, then must be removed or destroyed. 
D.  Nuisance Bees. Bees shall be considered a public nuisance when they interfere with the normal use of private or public property or have been involved in a multiple stinging incident of five or more stings to an animal or person. Bees known to be Africanized Honey Bees are declared a public nuisance in any situation. 
(Ord. 2002-08 Exh. C (part), 2002) 
(Ord. No. 2017-19 , § 3(Exh. A), 10-17-17) 
Title 8 - HEALTH AND SAFETY 
Chapter 8.04 - SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2014-13, § 4 , adopted May 20, 2014, repealed the former Chapter 8.04, §§ 8.04.010-8.04.300, and enacted a new Chapter 8.04 as set out herein. The former Chapter 8.04 pertained to garbage and refuse collection and disposal and derived from Ord. No. 56, 1989; Ord. No. 144, 1992 and Ord. No. 291, 2000. 

8.04.010 - Purpose, findings and intent. 
    The city council finds and determines it is necessary to promote the public health, welfare and safety of the community by establishing reasonable regulations relating to the storage, accumulation, collection and disposal of solid waste. 
( Ord. No. 2014-13, § 4, 5-20-14 ) 
8.04.020 - Definitions. 
    Terms used in this chapter shall be as defined in Chapter 1.04 or as defined herein. 
( Ord. No. 2014-13, § 4, 5-20-14 ) 
8.04.030 - Authorization by city council-Franchise requirement. 
    The city council may authorize, by franchise, an agreement to provide solid waste handling services for residential, and/or non-residential users or other customers. In the sole discretion of the city council, the solid waste handling services may be authorized on an exclusive or nonexclusive basis, and with or without competitive bidding, and may relate to any class or type of solid waste within all or any part of the city limits. 
    No person shall collect or dispose of solid waste in the city unless that person has entered into an agreement (the franchise agreement) with the city, except as otherwise specifically provided in this chapter. Any such agreement shall be in addition to any business license or permit otherwise required by this code. No permit issued by any other governmental agency authorizing collection of solid waste or recyclables shall be valid in the city. 
    Notwithstanding anything to the contrary herein, solid waste does not include recyclables unless such recyclables are discarded by the owner (including where the owner pays a fee or other consideration to have recyclables collected by another party). Nothing in this chapter or any franchise agreement shall prevent the ability of an owner to keep, collect and/or market his/her own non-discarded recyclables. 
( Ord. No. 2014-13, § 4, 5-20-14 ) 
8.04.040 - Franchise provisions. 
A.  A franchise issued pursuant to this chapter shall provide for the payment of franchise fees to city, shall contain additional provisions agreed to by and between city and franchisee and shall constitute a written agreement of the parties. 
B.  In emergencies such as the breakdown of equipment, or a declared emergency disaster such as fires, earthquakes, floods, epidemics, quarantine restrictions, riots, strikes, freight embargoes, wars, litigation, and/or acts of any governmental agency, including the city, that franchisee is delayed or otherwise unable to provide solid waste collection service during such emergency, the franchisee shall within ten days of the commencement of such delay notify the city manager or designee in writing of the causes of the delay. The city manager or designee shall ascertain the facts and the extent of delay, and extend the time for performing the services for the period of the enforced delay when and if in the judgment of the city manager or designee is that such a delay is justified. No extension of time for performance shall be granted, however, by reason of the unavailability of any disposal site or by reason of strikes, lockouts, or other labor disturbances, or breakage or accidents to vehicles, equipment, machinery or plants. 
( Ord. No. 2014-13, § 4, 5-20-14 ) 
8.04.050 - Transfer of franchise agreement. 
    No permit or franchise agreement which is authorized by, subject to or issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be transferred, delegated, sublet, subcontracted to or assigned to another person without the prior approval of the city council under the criteria and procedures agreed to between the city and franchisee in the franchise agreement. This restriction includes the transfer of ownership or the majority of the ownership or control in the franchise, and the transfer of a majority of stock in franchise to another person. 
( Ord. No. 2014-13, § 4, 5-20-14 ) 
8.04.060 - Establishing charges. 
    The property owner of record within the city where any solid waste accumulates shall pay to the franchisee a fee in such amounts and in such manner as shall be established by resolution of the city council for solid waste and recyclables collected and removed from the place or premises by the franchisee. This section shall apply to all residential and non-residential property within the city. Nothing in this section is intended to prevent an arrangement, or the continuance of an existing arrangement, under which payments of solid waste collection fees are made by a tenant or tenants or any agent on behalf of the owner. Any such arrangement shall not affect the property owner's obligation for payment to the franchisee. 
( Ord. No. 2014-13, § 4, 5-20-14 ) 
8.04.070 - Billing and collection of rates, fees and charges. 
A.  Every non-residential owner and residential owner shall pay the rates, fees and charges established from time to time by the franchisee and authorized by the city council for collection services rendered pursuant to this chapter in the manner set forth in this section and pursuant to the procedural and substantive requirements for such charges as provided in state law. 
B.  The billing and collection of the rates, fees and charges authorized by the city council for solid waste and recyclables collection services shall be the responsibility of the franchisee, and the city shall have no liability or responsibility for billing and collection. Billing and collection for service may be done on a monthly or bi-monthly basis in advance of service, providing the due date of said bill is not more than sixty-five (65) days prior to the end of the billing cycle where service is being provided. Franchisee shall refund any portion of charge for service which is not provided within ten days of cancellation of service. 
C.  Franchisee shall provide at least three monthly, written notices of delinquency/past-due account status to the occupants and/or property owner of any premises with a delinquent account. Further, franchisee shall be entitled to collect late charges at the rate of one and one-half percent per month and, in addition, to charge a reasonable rate for the redelivery of containers as approved in the rate structure. Franchisee shall also be entitled to utilize any remedies or lien procedures available to it for the collection of delinquent accounts as stated in this chapter, as such may be amended from time to time. 
D.  Unless prior arrangements for payment is made, franchisee may discontinue service to non-residential and multi-family residential accounts that are more than ninety (90) days past due, provided, however, before service is discontinued a stop service notice shall be given by written notice, which notice shall demand payment or arrangements for payment satisfactory to the franchisee. Should franchisee terminate service to any customer in the city, nothing herein waives or supersedes the city's rights to initiate code enforcement action(s) in response to the build-up, long-term stagnation, or misplacement of solid waste as a result of said termination of franchisee's service. 
E.  The city council shall be authorized to establish, by resolution, administrative charges and penalties for the collection of delinquent rates, fees and charges for solid waste and recyclables collection services. 
F.  The city may collect properly charged but delinquent rates, fees and any related penalties for solid waste and recyclables collection services authorized by this chapter by causing the delinquent fees to be placed on the San Bernardino County tax rolls through procedures established by the San Bernardino County tax collector, in accordance with procedures established by the city council by resolution, or by any other lawful manner provided by the laws of the state. 
( Ord. No. 2014-13, § 4, 5-20-14 ) 
8.04.080 - Vehicle use, identification and compliance with standards. 
    No person may operate any vehicle for the collection of solid waste other than a solid waste franchisee who has a valid business license and has paid all required licenses, permits or other state and local charges. Such vehicles used shall comply with the requirements of the franchise agreement established pursuant to this chapter. Any vehicles not subject to a franchise agreement and allowed to collect recyclables pursuant to this chapter shall comply with the Vehicle Code and other state and/or federal laws governing its transport. 
( Ord. No. 2014-13, § 4, 5-20-14 ) 
8.04.090-8.04.100 - Reserved. 
8.04.110 - Unlawful collection and exemptions. 
    No city resident, owner, or occupant shall employ or engage any solid waste collector, other than the franchisee, to haul or transport solid waste or recyclables to a transfer station, material recovery facility, landfill, or other waste processing or disposal facility; nor shall any city resident, owner, or occupant collect or dispose of solid waste generated elsewhere than in or on his or her residential premises. No provision of this chapter shall prevent city residents, owners, or occupants of premises from collecting and disposing of occasional loads of solid waste generated in or on his or her residential premises, or from composting green waste, or from selling, donating or disposing of recyclables generated in or on his or her residential premises except as follows: 
A.  Gardener/Landscaper Green Waste. Nothing in this chapter shall prevent a gardener, tree trimmer or person engaged in a similar trade from collecting and disposing of grass cuttings, pruning, and similar material not containing other solid waste when incidental to providing such gardening, tree trimming or similar services. 
B.  Recyclable Materials. Nothing in this chapter shall prevent an owner of premises from selling to a buyer, for a monetary or other valuable consideration, any recyclable material, generated in, on or by an owner of premises, and no longer useful to such owner of premises but having market value, whether such buyer is a recycler, junk dealer, or other enterprise engaged in the business of buying and marketing such materials in the stream of commerce; provided, however, that such buyer is not engaged in the business of collecting solid waste or recyclables for a fee or other charge or consideration, and that no such materials are transported for disposition to a landfill or transfer station (as defined in Public Resources Code Section 40200). A mere discount or reduction in price of third-party charges for the handling of recyclables is not a sale or donation within the meaning of this chapter. 
C.  Contractor's Construction and Demolition Waste. Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the following: 
1.  A licensed contractor having a contract for the demolition or reconstruction of a building, structure, pavement or concrete installation from marketing any saleable items salvaged from such demolition or reconstruction, or from causing such salvageable items or demolition waste to be collected, processed and transported by contractor's own employees and equipment from the premises on which such waste is generated. Asphalt, concrete and dirt shall be considered saleable items; 
2.  The collection, transport and disposal by a construction contractor of construction and demolition (C&D) waste from remodeling jobs which are generated as an incidental part of providing such remodeling services, provided that the construction contractor is not a hauling service or solid waste enterprise, does not separately or additionally charge for the incidental service of removing, transporting or disposing (except for tipping fee) of the C&D waste and utilizes own employees and equipment to collect, transport and dispose of the C&D waste. 
D.  Legally-required Exemptions. Other collection, removal or disposal activities required to be exempt from mandatory franchise services pursuant to law, or entities exempt from such franchise pursuant to state or federal law, including but not limited to non-city governmental entities located within city boundaries. 
E.  Unoccupied Units. Premises which have been unoccupied by any human habitation and upon which no refuse has been produced or accumulated for three consecutive months may be exempted from mandatory service by the city until such premises become occupied. The granting of an exemption shall be conditioned upon completion and approval of an exemption application. Exemptions shall expire on December 31, of each calendar year. An exemption may be renewed, provided that during three consecutive months prior to the application for renewal, the premises have been unoccupied by any human habitation and no refuse has been produced or accumulated. A unit shall be deemed "unoccupied" if the structure is both unoccupied and unused (such as without limitation, foreclosed or abandoned structures). Structures that are unoccupied by virtue of their continuing use as a vacation home or a seasonal business shall not be considered as "unoccupied." 
( Ord. No. 2014-13, § 4, 5-20-14 ) 
8.04.120 - General requirement for exemptions. 
    In all cases where the right to an exemption pursuant to this chapter is exercised, disposal shall be made at a transfer station, material recovery facility, landfill, or other waste processing or disposal facility which meets all applicable regulatory requirements. Any such disposal by a person exempted under this chapter shall not relieve such person from any obligation or liability imposed by this chapter or any other city ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation for the payment of the solid waste and recyclables collection fees charged by the franchisee, or of payment of any other applicable rates or fees. 
( Ord. No. 2014-13, § 4, 5-20-14 ) 
8.04.130 - Mandatory service. 
A.  Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, each residential owner and non-residential owner shall utilize the services of the franchisee for the collection of solid waste and recyclables from the residential or non-residential premises held or occupied by such owner and shall pay for such services through fees approved by the city council. No residential or non-residential owner shall enter into an agreement for solid waste handling services with any person, firm or corporation other than the franchisee, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. 
B.  No person, firm, corporation or solid waste enterprise, other than those referenced in subsection A of this section, shall negotiate or contract for, undertake to receive, collect or transport solid waste or recyclables from within the city for a fee, service charge or other consideration, except as specifically provided in this chapter. 
C.  Nothing in this chapter shall prevent a non-residential business which has its own recycling or resource recovery program for recyclables generated by such business and not utilizing a solid waste enterprise which provides collection services for a fee, service charge, or other consideration, from continuing such recycling or resource recovery program, and the recyclables included in such program are excepted from the exclusive franchise between the city and the franchisee. 
D.  Any person wishing to cancel service due to moving or relocating shall notify the franchisee in writing; otherwise the franchisee shall continue the regular mandatory service requirement and billing process. 
( Ord. No. 2014-13, § 4, 5-20-14 ) 
8.04.140 - Litter. 
    No person shall deposit or cause to be deposited any solid waste or recyclables on the public right-of-way or on private property, except in a container provided as specified in this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 2014-13, § 4, 5-20-14 ) 
8.04.150 - Unauthorized removal from containers. 
    No person other than the owner thereof, the owner's agents or employees or an officer, employee, or agent of the city, shall remove or tamper with, or remove any solid waste or recyclable material from, any franchisee owned container, other than the owner or occupant of the property served by such container. 
( Ord. No. 2014-13, § 4, 5-20-14 ) 
8.04.160 - Unauthorized containers. 
    No person other than the franchisee may place a container for the collection of solid waste within the city, except as specifically provided for in this chapter. Any container placed in violation of this section is hereby declared to be a nuisance, and is subject to abatement pursuant to applicable provisions of this code. 
( Ord. No. 2014-13, § 4, 5-20-14 ) 
8.04.170 - Hours of collection. 
    Solid waste operations shall be conducted so as to offer the least possible obstruction and inconvenience to public traffic or disruption to the peace or quiet of the area within which collections are affected. The collection hours shall be as specified by a franchise agreement or duly adopted resolution of the city council. 
( Ord. No. 2014-13, § 4, 5-20-14 ) 
8.04.180 - Ownership of solid waste and recyclable material. 
    Except as otherwise provided by law, once solid waste and recyclable material have been placed for collection in a franchisee-owned container, ownership of such material transfers to franchisee. 
( Ord. No. 2014-13, § 4, 5-20-14 ) 
8.04.190 - Burning, burying or dumping. 
A.  It is illegal to burn any solid waste within the city, except in an approved incinerator or transformation facility, or unless a special permit for such burning has been issued pursuant to authority conferred by the city council, and/or the agency providing fire protection service within the city, and which complies with all applicable permits and other regulations of air pollution control authorities, and provided any such act of burning in all respects complies with all other laws, rules and regulations. 
B.  Except as otherwise authorized by provisions of this title, no solid waste of any kind shall be buried anywhere in the city. 
C.  No person shall dispose of any solid waste, recyclable material, hazardous waste, electronic waste, or tires on public or private property in the city. 
( Ord. No. 2014-13, § 4, 5-20-14 ) 
8.04.200 - Hazardous material restrictions. 
A.  No person shall place any hazardous material in any container serviced by franchisee. In the event that any person places any hazardous material in a container serviced by the franchisee, franchisee shall not be required to either collect the material in the container or separate out the material before processing the entire container. Franchisee shall, in the event it inadvertently removes any hazardous material from any container, notify San Bernardino County Hazardous Materials Division or other authorized agency. Franchisee shall notify the person of any hazardous material found in container by placing a tag on the container, and such person shall be responsible for the cost of proper disposal. Franchisee shall keep a daily log with the address of each container not serviced and shall provide a copy of the log to the city upon request. 
B.  Medical waste (as defined in California Health and Safety Code Section 25117.5), including sharps waste, wearing apparel, bedding or other solid waste or from places where highly infectious or contagious diseases have been present shall not be deposited in franchisee collection containers. Such disposal shall be performed under the supervision and direction of the County of San Bernardino health officer. 
C.  Highly flammable or explosive or radioactive material shall not be deposited in franchisee collection containers, but shall be removed under the supervision of the city and/or the agency providing fire protection service within the city. 
D.  Liquid and dry caustics, acids, biohazards, flammable, explosive materials, waste tires, insecticides, and similar substance shall not be deposited in franchisee collection containers. 
E.  Animal waste from herbivorous animals may be placed in any franchisee-owned container, excluding residential carts, or collected and disposed of by methods described in Title 6 of this code. 
( Ord. No. 2014-13, § 4, 5-20-14 ) 
8.04.210 - Duration of storage. 
    No person shall keep any solid waste, or allow any solid waste to remain upon any premises within the city for more than seven days. At least once a week all solid waste generated within or on any premises in the city shall be removed from the premises and disposed of in accordance with the provisions of this chapter except under the following conditions: 
A.  Where the solid waste collector normally providing collection services at the premises is unable to perform collection services due to strikes; 
B.  Where severe weather conditions make it impossible for the solid waste collector normally providing collection services at the premises to perform collection services using normal collection equipment; 
C.  Official holidays interrupt the normal seven-day collection cycle, in which case collections may be postponed to the next working day of the solid waste collector. 
( Ord. No. 2014-13, § 4, 5-20-14 ) 
8.04.220 - General requirements-Solid waste containers. 
A.  All solid waste containers used in the city shall be the property of the franchisee and shall be nonabsorbent, watertight, vector-resistant, durable, easily cleanable, and designed for safe handling. In any case where the provisions of this chapter permit the storage of solid waste in plastic bags, the bags shall have sufficient strength to hold the solid waste and shall be designed for the containment of solid waste. 
B.  Except when the containers are set out for collection, all containers shall be kept and maintained within the side or rear yard of the premises (as defined in Title 16) where the solid waste is generated. 
C.  No person shall place any container in any place or in any manner such that the container impedes normal vehicular traffic, public transportation, bike lanes or pedestrian or wheelchair access to public rights-of-way. 
D.  No person shall cause or permit any container to be filled in any manner which causes solid waste to overflow from the container. 
E.  No person shall cause or permit solid waste to be so compacted or otherwise placed, kept or accumulated in any container in a manner which does not allow the contents of the container to fall out, by their own weight, upon the container being lifted and turned upside down. 
( Ord. No. 2014-13, § 4, 5-20-14 ) 
8.04.230 - General requirements-Handlers of recyclable materials. 
A.  Handlers of recyclable materials within the city shall, in addition to obtaining a business license, obtain a recyclable material collection and disposal permit from the city prior to commencing such handling and annually thereafter. 
B.  Persons operating under such permit shall, on a monthly basis or at such times as determined by the city, submit a report to the city specifying the amount of recyclable materials collected within the city, the location(s) from which the recyclable materials were collected, and the location(s) to which the recyclable materials were brought. 
( Ord. No. 2014-13, § 4, 5-20-14 ) 
8.04.240-8.04.290 - Reserved. 
8.04.300 - Residential collection-General. 
A.  No person shall engage in the business of collection of residential solid waste unless such person is authorized to do so pursuant to a franchise agreement then existing between such person and the city. 
B.  It shall be the duty of every property owner to subscribe to the collection service as stated in this chapter whether or not the property is occupied by the owner, residential unit tenant, lessee or occupant. 
( Ord. No. 2014-13, § 4, 5-20-14 ) 
8.04.310 - Residential collection-Solid waste containers. 
A.  Each single-family residential unit shall receive the following service: 
1.  Each single-family residential unit shall receive franchise-owned cart(s) at the basic service rate specified in the rate schedule adopted by resolution of the city council ("schedule") at the initiation of service in which all solid waste shall be collected and must be contained within the cart(s) with the lid closed, and shall be provided at least one weekly collection of solid waste. Notwithstanding the foregoing, an owner of the premises may request additional carts from the franchisee at an additional cost for each additional cart at the rate set forth in the schedule. 
2.  Single-family units generating less than ninety-five (95) gallons in solid waste or recyclables each week may apply to franchisee for enrollment in collection services as a "low volume" generator. Single-family units qualifying as low-volume generators shall receive only one cart at a lower service rate as reflected in the schedule. Franchisee may remove a customer from the low-volume generator service program if either: (1) the actual amount of solid waste or recyclables generated by the single-family unit actually exceeds ninety-five (95) gallons per week such that franchisee is forced to service the unit more than once-per-week or such that a nuisance condition results from the overflow of materials set out for disposal, or; (2) upon request of the city. 
3.  Single-family units whose household income (including income for all adult residents over the age of eighteen (18)) falls within the national reported extremely low income levels shall receive a discount on service rates. Income is considered the combined income of all persons living in the home, including: salary (before-tax), child support, alimony, interest earnings, rental income, and other temporary assistance. Residents qualifying for a hardship rate shall receive only one cart at a lower service rate. 
B.  Each multi-family complex shall receive the following service: 
1.  Multi-family complexes shall utilize one or more franchisee provided container(s) located at central on-site location(s) and shared by the complex, and shall be provided at least one weekly collection of solid waste. The location of container(s) shall be mutually-agreed as between the multi-family site property management and franchisee, excepting that any storage or placement of containers in public streets or right-of-ways shall not be permitted. 
2.  Recycling Requirement. Any multi-family complex consisting of five or more dwelling units shall comply with Public Resources Code 40004 ("Mandatory Commercial Recycling/Diversion") and reuse, recycle, compost, or otherwise divert its solid waste from disposal by taking one, or any combination, of the following actions: 
a.  Source separate recyclable materials from the solid waste being discarded and subscribe to the city's franchisee for the pick-up of the recyclable materials separately from the solid waste to divert the recyclable materials from disposal. 
b.  Subscribe to franchisee service that includes mixed waste processing that yields diversion results comparable to source separation. 
( Ord. No. 2014-13, § 4, 5-20-14 ) 
8.04.320 - Residential collection-Placement and removal of containers. 
A.  All carts shall be the property of franchisee, and shall be placed by franchisee, following collection, in an upright position where found; provided, however, if carts are found in a public street, the same shall be placed on the nearest curb, sidewalk, driveway, or parkway, and out of said street. Franchisee shall not place any cart or other container in a manner interfering with a public street or public right-of-way. 
B.  Unless otherwise directed by city, or necessary for safety reasons, single-family residential collections shall occur from the curb along the street in front of each single-family residential unit, except where paved alleys exist in the rear of such premises in which case collections shall be made from alleys (provided, however, that this requirement does not apply to a dead-end alley). Residents may elect to place containers at an alternate collection location, if approved by the city, provided that the placement and retrieval of containers complies with the requirements of this code. 
C.  Residential containers shall be placed for collection at curbside in front of residence. 
1.  Wheels of the container shall be placed in the gutter with handle facing the residence. 
    Where no gutter is present, containers shall be placed on the unpaved shoulder, immediately adjacent to the paved street with the handle facing the residence. 
2.  Containers shall be at least six feet from any obstruction that would prevent them from being emptied by the franchisee. 
3.  Containers shall not block pedestrian walkways, wheelchair or bicyclist access. 
D.  Should a residence only have alley access, containers shall be placed for collection on private property adjacent to the alley property line, with direct access from the alley. 
1.  Containers shall be placed on a stable, level surface with the handle facing the residence. 
2.  Containers shall be at least six feet from any obstruction that would prevent them from being emptied by the franchisee. 
E.  No person shall place, or cause to be placed, any container in the roadway portion of a public street or in any place or in any manner other than hereinabove provided or at any time other than the days established by the city for the collection of solid waste on the particular route involved, not earlier than sunset of the day preceding the day designated for collection. All containers shall be removed from the place of collection prior to 8:00 p.m. of the day the containers have been emptied. Each owner, occupant, tenant or lessee of a residential unit shall maintain containers in a sanitary condition. 
( Ord. No. 2014-13, § 4, 5-20-14 ) 
8.04.330 - Residential collection-Vacation services. 
    Franchisee shall permit customers who are going on vacation or who otherwise miss a scheduled collection due to absence from the premises to drop-off solid waste or recyclables at franchisee's facility during its normal business hours without incurring an additional charge (prior approval from franchisee is required). 
( Ord. No. 2014-13, § 4, 5-20-14 ) 
8.04.340-8.04.390 - Reserved. 
8.04.400 - Non-residential collection-General. 
A.  No person shall collect or transport solid waste from any non-residential premises unless such person is authorized to do so pursuant to a franchise agreement then existing between such person and the city. 
B.  Bins shall be a solid waste container of a capacity exceeding one hundred (100) gallons and generally unmovable by just one individual and provided to customers by franchisee. Under special circumstances and approved by the franchisee, a single non-residential customer may utilize a cart with one weekly services provided by the franchisee. 
C.  Recycling Requirement. Any non-residential use generating four or more cubic yards of solid waste per week shall comply with Public Resources Code 40004 ("Mandatory Commercial Recycling/Diversion"), and reuse, recycle, compost, or otherwise divert its solid waste from disposal by taking one, or any combination, of the following actions: 
1.  Source separate recyclable materials from the solid waste being discarded and subscribe to the city's franchisee, for the pick-up of the recyclable materials separately from the solid waste to divert the recyclable materials from disposal. 
2.  Subscribe to franchisee service that includes mixed waste processing that yields diversion results comparable to source separation. 
( Ord. No. 2014-13, § 4, 5-20-14 ) 
8.04.410 - Non-residential collection-Frequency of collection. 
A.  Non-residential units shall be provided with a minimum one-time weekly collection; the owner of non-residential units may make arrangements with franchisee for more frequent collection services as needed to dispose of all solid waste generated by the premises. Non-residential units may share containers with neighboring business establishments provided that all sharing units share the same premises and so long as the sharing of containers does not result in the overfilling of, or overflow from, containers. 
B.  Food Establishments. Non-residential units consisting of food processing operations shall subscribe to the franchise collection service as stated in this chapter for the disposal of food-related solid wastes (i.e., a container not shared with other non-residential units unless such units sharing the container are also food processing operations disposing of food-related solid wastes); if more than three cubic yards of food-related solid waste is generated, containers shall be serviced at least twice per week, except where compactors are used that require special handling. 
( Ord. No. 2014-13, § 4, 5-20-14 ) 
8.04.420 - Non-residential collection-Maintenance and placement of containers. 
A.  Containers shall be placed in city-approved trash enclosures or behind the building setback line. In the event the container is to be collected from a public alley, the container shall be placed within ten feet of the edge of the right-of-way of such alley. 
B.  No solid waste container shall otherwise be placed, kept or maintained within or upon any public sidewalk, curb, gutter, alley, street, or other public right-of-way. 
( Ord. No. 2014-13, § 4, 5-20-14 ) 
8.04.430 - Non-residential collection-Container condition. 
    All collection containers shall be maintained in good condition and repair. Containers which become unusable by reason of normal conditions of wear and tear shall be replaced. If damages occur to a container necessitating repairs or replacement of the container, and if said damages were incurred as a direct result of customer negligence, customer shall be liable for such repair costs and/or replacement costs for the container. 
( Ord. No. 2014-13, § 4, 5-20-14 ) 
8.04.440 - Non-residential collection-Special circumstances. 
    If particular non-residential business premises require collections at times, frequencies or in a manner such that the franchisee is unable to perform the collection in the normal course of business, or where unusual quantities of solid waste or special types of material are to be collected and disposed of, or where special methods of handling are required, such as compactors, or where the quantity of solid waste requires the use of multiple (more than three) containers, the franchisee and the non-residential business owner may make arrangements for such collection on mutually agreeable terms. If the business owner and the franchisee do not agree as to the methods for the service provided for in this section, the city manager shall determine the method of service. 
( Ord. No. 2014-13, § 4, 5-20-14 ) 
8.04.450 - Non-residential collection-Intergovernmental immunity. 
    All universities, school districts, other state agencies, and any other governmental entity that are not subject to the city's police powers and the exclusivity provisions of any ordinance to be adopted by the city shall be exempted from the franchise service. 
( Ord. No. 2014-13, § 4, 5-20-14 ) 
8.04.460-8.04.490 - Reserved. 
8.04.500 - Construction and demolition-Purpose. 
    The purpose of this section is to promote the recycling of construction and demolition ("C&D") debris which is recyclable and reusable to protect the public health, safety and welfare and to meet the city's obligations under state law, including Public Resources Code Section 40000. Accordingly, this section establishes regulations to require applicants for "covered projects" to divert a minimum of fifty (50) percent of construction and demolition debris from landfills. 
( Ord. No. 2014-13, § 4, 5-20-14 ) 
8.04.510 - Construction and demolition-Covered projects. 
A.  Unless otherwise determined to be exempt or unless a lower diversion rate is approved, projects meeting any of the following criteria shall be considered "covered projects" and shall submit a waste management plan (WMP) prior to beginning any construction and demolition activities and shall comply with all provisions of this section including, but not limited to, the fifty (50) percent diversion requirement for construction and demolition materials. 
B.  Projects subject to the requirements of this chapter shall include any construction or demolition work that consists of one or more of the following: 
1.  All new structures, additions, alterations, tenant improvements, accessory structures and demolition work one thousand (1,000) square feet or more. 
2.  Excavation or grading activities that result in the export of earth, soil, rocks, gravel, plant or other materials off the project site. 
( Ord. No. 2014-13, § 4, 5-20-14 ) 
8.04.520 - Construction and demolition-Diversion requirement exemptions. 
A.  Projects meeting any of the following criteria shall be exempt from the requirements of this chapter, provided that the applicant has provided the city with satisfactory evidence supporting the claimed exemption, and provided that the city has issued a written determination of exemption, which may take the form of a stamp or other notation of exemption on the application for a building permit: 
1.  Projects not meeting any of the criteria described in Section 8.04.510; 
2.  Immediate or emergency construction, repair, or demolition work required to protect the public health or safety in an emergency, as defined in Public Resources Code Section 21060.3; 
3.  Work for which a building permit is not required by Title 15 of this code; 
4.  A roofing project which does not include removal and/or replacement of an existing roof; 
5.  Installation of new fencing which does not include the replacement of existing fencing; 
6.  Excavation and construction of residential swimming pools; 
7.  Work for which a building permit for only plumbing, electrical or mechanical is required; 
8.  Seismic tie-down projects; 
9.  Installation of alternative energy facilities on developed property; 
10.  A project contaminated by hazardous substances or waste as defined by state or federal law; 
11.  One-story detached accessory structures used as tool and storage sheds, playhouses and similar uses, provided the floor area does not exceed one hundred twenty (120) square feet; or 
12.  Projects, as determined by the city manager or designee, not anticipated to generate construction or demolition debris. 
B.  While not required, it shall be encouraged that at least fifty (50) percent of all project-related construction and demolition waste from exempt projects be diverted. 
( Ord. No. 2014-13, § 4, 5-20-14 ) 
8.04.530 - Construction and demolition-Exemption to waste management plan. 
A.  If an applicant for a covered project experiences unique circumstances that the applicant believes make it unfeasible to comply with the diversion requirement, the applicant may apply for an exemption at the time the waste management plan (WMP) is submitted as required under Section 8.04.540. The applicant shall indicate on the WMP the maximum rate of diversion believed feasible for each material and the specific circumstances that make it infeasible to comply with the diversion requirement. 
B.  The city shall review the information supplied by the applicant and may meet with the applicant to discuss possible ways of meeting the diversion requirement. Based on the information supplied by the applicant the city shall determine whether it is possible for the applicant to meet the diversion requirement. 
C.  If the city determines that it is unfeasible for the applicant to meet the diversion requirement due to unique circumstances, the city shall determine the maximum feasible diversion rate for each material and shall indicate this rate on the WMP submitted by the applicant. The city shall return a copy of the WMP to the applicant marked "approved for exemption." 
D.  If the city determines that it is possible for the applicant to meet the diversion requirement, the city shall so inform the applicant in writing. The applicant shall resubmit a WMP form in full compliance with Section 8.04.540. If the applicant fails to resubmit the WMP, or if the resubmitted WMP does not comply with Section 8.04.540, the city shall deny the WMP. 
( Ord. No. 2014-13, § 4, 5-20-14 ) 
8.04.540 - Construction and demolition-Waste management plan. 
A.  Every applicant shall submit a properly completed waste management plan (WMP) as provided by the city as a requirement of the building permit process. The WMP shall be submitted as part of the building permit application packet and shall be accompanied by an administrative fee, as established by resolution of the city council, sufficient to cover the city's costs associated with reviewing and processing the plan. The WMP shall indicate those materials to be recycled and/or disposed of and such other project information as required by the city, including at least all of the following: 
1.  The estimated volume or weight of the project construction and demolition (C&D) debris to be generated, listed by material type; 
2.  The maximum volume or weight of the C&D debris to be feasibly diverted by reuse or recycling listed by material type; 
3.  The estimated volume or weight of C&D debris that will be landfilled listed by material type; 
4.  The facilities or service providers to be used by the applicant for recycling material and their expected diversion rates by material type; or 
5.  The vendor applicant proposes to use to haul the materials. 
B.  In estimating the volume or weight of materials identified in the WMP, the applicant shall use the standardized conversion rates established by the state for this purpose. 
C.  In preparing the WMP, applicants for building permits involving the removal of all or part of an existing structure shall consider deconstruction, to the maximum extent feasible, and shall make the materials generated thereby available for salvage rather than being disposed. 
D.  Applicants who use the franchisee's certified mixed waste processing facility for all C&D waste shall be granted full compliance or good faith effort upon city receipt of facility documentation and a completed WMP. 
( Ord. No. 2014-13, § 4, 5-20-14 ) 
8.04.550 - Construction and demolition-Review of waste management plan. 
A.  Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, no building permit shall be issued for any covered project unless and until the city has approved the waste management plan (WMP). 
B.  A WMP shall be approved or denied after a completed permit application is filed with the city. Any approval may include conditions reasonably necessary to meet the standards of this chapter. Approval shall not be required, however, where an emergency demolition is required to protect public health or safety as determined by the city. 
C.  The city shall only approve a WMP if it is determined that all the following conditions have been met: 
1.  WMP contains all of the information required by this chapter; 
2.  The WMP, if followed, represents a good faith effort by the applicant to divert at least fifty percent by weight of all construction and demolition debris generated by the project. Volume calculations converted to weight in a manner reasonably determined by the city may be utilized for this purpose as needed; 
3.  The applicant has submitted an appropriate security deposit for the project and paid all associated fees; and 
4.  If the city determines that all of the above conditions have been met, the city shall mark the WMP plan "approved," and return a copy of the approved plan to the applicant, and to the building official or the official's designee. 
D.  If the city determines that the WMP is incomplete, he or she shall return it to the applicant marked "denied, further explanation required." The applicant must then submit additional information before the WMP can be reviewed and the building permit issued. 
( Ord. No. 2014-13, § 4, 5-20-14 ) 
8.04.560 - Construction and demolition-Security deposit required. 
    A security deposit as determined by the city shall be submitted prior to building permit issuance. This security deposit shall be fully reimbursable, without interest, in total or pro-rated, upon compliance with this chapter. If a lesser percentage of construction and demolition waste tonnage than required is diverted, a proportionate share of the security deposit shall be returned. The security deposit shall be forfeited entirely or to the pro-rated extent that there is a failure to comply with the requirements of this chapter. Refunding of security deposit shall not be authorized except upon written request filed by original applicant no later than one hundred eighty (180) days after the issuance of certificate of occupancy or applicable approval. 
( Ord. No. 2014-13, § 4, 5-20-14 ) 
8.04.570 - Construction and demolition-On-site practices. 
    Applicants shall maintain on-site proof of compliance with this chapter during construction and/or demolition to demonstrate compliance with the project's waste management plan (WMP). During demolition or construction, the city may inspect project sites to determine compliance with the WMP. The applicant, if requested, must supply written proof of compliance with its WMP within five business days. Failure to comply with the WMP during construction or demolition is a violation of this chapter, and, in addition to any other penalty and/or remedy, shall be grounds for issuance of a "'stop work" order and/or issuance of an administrative citation. Each day that the applicant fails to comply with the requirements of this chapter constitutes a separate offense. 
( Ord. No. 2014-13, § 4, 5-20-14 ) 
8.04.580 - Construction and demolition-Reporting. 
    Within ten days following the completion of the demolition phase of a covered project, and again within thirty (30) days following the completion of the construction phase of a covered project, the applicant shall, as a condition precedent to issuance of any certificate of occupancy (or applicable approval) and refund of security deposit, submit documentation to the city that proves compliance with the requirements of the waste management plan (WMP). Proof of compliance to be submitted at the completion of a project shall include: 
A.  Submittal of a completed, city-provided waste management report; 
B.  Original receipts from the vendor or facility which collected or received each material showing the actual weight or volume of that material (recyclables and solid waste). Each receipt must clearly state the project address and date. If the receipt provides information for multiple projects, the project addresses and the amounts of material for each project must be clearly identified; 
C.  Weight slips/count of material salvaged or reused in the project. Each receipt must clearly state the project address and date. If the receipt provides information for multiple projects, the project address and the amounts of material for each project must be clearly identified; and 
D.  Any additional information the city reasonably determines is needed to demonstrate compliance with the applicant's approved WMP. 
    Applicants shall make reasonable efforts to ensure that all construction and demolition (C&D) waste, diverted or disposed, is measured and recorded using the most accurate method of measurement available. To the extent practical, all C&D waste shall be weighed. Regarding C&D debris for which weighing is not practical due to small size or other considerations, a volumetric measurement shall be used. For conversion of volumetric measurements to weight, the applicant shall use the standardized conversion rates approved by the city for this purpose. 
( Ord. No. 2014-13, § 4, 5-20-14 ) 
8.04.590 - Construction and demolition-Compliance of waste management plan. 
    To determine compliance with this chapter and issuance of the certificate of occupancy or other applicable approval, the city shall review the information submitted under Section 8.04.580 of this section and determine whether the applicant has complied with the diversion requirement, as follows: 
A.  Full Compliance. If the city determines that the applicant has fully complied with the diversion requirement applicable to the project, the city official shall give authorization for the certificate of occupancy or other applicable approval, to be issued to the applicant; 
B.  Good Faith Effort to Comply. If the city determines that the diversion requirement has not been achieved, the city may determine on a case-by-case basis whether the applicant has made a good faith effort to comply with the diversion requirement. In making this determination, the city shall consider the availability of markets for the construction and demolition (C&D) debris disposed, the size of the project, and the documented efforts of the applicant to divert C&D debris. If the city determines that the applicant has made a good faith effort to comply with the diversion requirement, the official shall authorize release of the certificate of occupancy or other applicable approval, to the applicant; 
C.  Noncompliance. If the city determines that the applicant has not made a good faith effort to comply with the diversion requirement, or if the applicant fails to submit the documentation required within the required time period for construction as specified in the codes then the city shall notify the applicant. The security deposit shall be forfeited and placed into a specialized account set forth by the city to be used for the purposes of recycling education programs and activities. Once the security deposit has been forfeited, the city shall issue the certificate of occupancy or other applicable approval. 
( Ord. No. 2014-13, § 4, 5-20-14 ) 
8.04.600 - Construction and demolition-Containment. 
    All solid waste and recyclables shall be contained on a routine, continuous basis for each construction site, and there shall be no loose materials permitted to accumulate on the site or to be carried away by wind or water. 
( Ord. No. 2014-13, § 4, 5-20-14 ) 
8.04.610 - Construction and demolition-Containers. 
    Containers used for storage of solid waste and recyclables until collection and/or transportation to an approved disposal or recycling facility shall be as follows: 
A.  A Bin Provided by the City Franchisee. Bins shall have lids, when available, which are kept in the closed position unless opened for placement or removal of materials. Bins shall be emptied when full and in no circumstances shall construction site waste be permitted to overfill the bin. Bins may be used for all occupancies with the following minimum sizes: 
1.  One and one-half cubic yards per dwelling unit; 
2.  Two cubic yards for each unit in a tract or for each three units in a multi-family complex; 
3.  Three cubic yards minimum for each non-residential building; 
4.  Sizes may be adjusted with approval of the building official. 
B.  A fenced or walled area of at least one hundred (100) cubic feet with side walls at least four feet in height and a wire lid. Material for side walls shall have no openings greater than four inches in either direction. The area shall be securely staked or braced in place and shall be emptied when full. Under no circumstances shall construction site trash, rubbish or debris be permitted to overfill the containment area. This method is approved for single-family residential developments on scattered lots only; 
C.  A bin for collection of recyclable materials for exempted materials as stated in Section 8.04.110 of this chapter; 
D.  Bins for source separation of all waste materials provided by the franchisee at discounted rates. The source separation option is available to reach a specific leadership in energy and environmental design (LEED) certification or higher voluntary Cal Green diversion requirements; 
E.  Other methods or devices showing adequate containment ability. This method may be used for any type project only when specifically approved by the building official. 
( Ord. No. 2014-13, § 4, 5-20-14 ) 
8.04.620 - Construction and demolition-Bin placement. 
A.  Bins shall be placed at the time construction or demolition site waste is first generated on the site, but no later than slab grade inspection. 
B.  Bins shall not be located in a manner or location that blocks or constricts passage of a right-of-way, easement, public thoroughfare or other area where right of access may be required for the public health, safety or welfare. Bins shall be located on the construction or demolition site for each development, project or structure; when multiple lots or structures are being developed, the container locations shall be as approved by the building official. 
( Ord. No. 2014-13, § 4, 5-20-14 ) 
8.04.630 - Construction and demolition-Solid waste and recyclables removal. 
    All solid waste and recyclables shall be removed in a timely manner from the bins as needed to prevent overfill of the bins. Solid waste and recyclables shall be removed from the site and transported to an approved disposal or recycling facility. Bins and all solid waste and recyclables shall be removed from the site prior to final inspection. Bins that remain after completion of the building may be emptied and placed in their permanent locations. 
( Ord. No. 2014-13, § 4, 5-20-14 ) 
8.04.640 - Construction and demolition-Contractor responsibility. 
    It shall be the responsibility of the contractor to provide for the construction site maintenance and the containment of all solid waste and recyclables during construction and for the proper removal thereof. 
( Ord. No. 2014-13, § 4, 5-20-14 ) 
Chapter 8.08 - HAZARDOUS MATERIALS 

8.08.010 - Hazardous waste management siting requirements. 
A.  All land use decisions, whether determined by city staff, city consultants, the various boards and commission of the city, or the city council shall, in all applicable respects, conform to the county of San Bernardino Hazardous Waste Management Plan as approved by the state of California Department of Health Services. 
B.  The city retains the authority to attach appropriate conditions to the issuance of any land use permit for a hazardous waste facility in order to protect the public health, safety and welfare; and further, the city retains the authority to establish more stringent planning requirements or siting criteria than those specified in the county hazardous waste management plan. 
C.  Severability. The city council declares that, should any provision, section, paragraph, sentence or word of the San Bernardino County Hazardous Waste Management Plan adopted be rendered or declared invalid by any final court action in a court of competent jurisdiction or by reason of any preemptive legislation, the remaining provisions, sections, paragraphs, sentences or words of the San Bernardino County Hazardous Waste Management Plan adopted shall remain in full force and effect. 
(Ord. 96 §§ 2-4, 1990) 
8.08.020 - Hazardous materials release response plans and inventory. 
A.  The city does assume responsibility for the implementation of the provisions of Chapter 6.95 of the California Health and Safety Code and designates the Hesperia Fire District as the administering agency responsible for administering and enforcing such provisions of said Chapter 6.95 within the boundaries of the city. 
B.  The schedule of fines and imprisonment set forth in Section 25515 of the California Health and Safety Code shall continue to be specifically applicable to persons and businesses within the boundaries of the city. 
C.  The definitions, standards, procedures and requirements as set forth in Chapter 6.95 of the California Health and Safety Code, and the specific guidelines adopted thereunder, are adopted as those regulations governing hazardous materials release response plans and inventory for the city. 
D.  The city council shall establish by resolution a schedule of fees to be paid by persons using or handling hazardous materials which are sufficient to cover the costs to the city of administering the provisions of this section. 
E.  If any subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this section is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by a decision of any court of competent jurisdiction or preempted by state legislation, such decision or legislation shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this section. The council declares that it would have passed this section and each and every subsection, sentence, clause or phrase not declared invalid or unconstitutional without regard to any such decision or preemptive legislation. 
(Ord. 100 §§ 2-6, 1990) 
8.08.030 - Underground storage of hazardous substances. 
A.  The city does assume responsibility for the implementation of the provisions of Chapter 6.7 of the California Health and Safety Code and designates the Hesperia Fire District as the administering agency responsible for administering and enforcing such provisions of said Chapter 6.7 within the boundaries of the city. 
B.  The definitions, standards, procedures and requirements as set forth in Chapter 6.7 of the California Health and Safety Code, and the specific guidelines adopted thereunder, are adopted as those regulations governing the underground storage of hazardous substances within the city. 
C.  The city council shall establish by resolution a schedule of fees to be paid by persons using or handling hazardous substances in underground storage containers which are sufficient to cover the costs to the city of administering the provisions of this section. 
D.  If any subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this section is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by a decision of any court of competent jurisdiction or preempted by state legislation, such decision or legislation shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this section. The council declares that it would have passed this section and each and every subsection, sentence, clause or phrase not declared invalid or unconstitutional without regard to any such decision or preemptive legislation. 
(Ord. 101 §§ 2-5, 1990) 
Chapter 8.12 - SMOKING 

8.12.010 - Title. 
    This chapter shall be known as the "City of Hesperia Smoking Pollution Control Ordinance." 
(Ord. 125 § 2, 1992) 
8.12.030 - Regulation of smoking in city-controlled facilities. 
    Smoking is prohibited in all enclosed areas owned, operated or controlled by the city. 
(Ord. 125 § 4, 1992) 
8.12.040 - Prohibition of smoking in certain enclosed places. 
    Smoking is prohibited in the following areas within the city, except as otherwise provided herein: 
A.  Retail stores, pharmacies, child care, and bank facilities; 
B.  Elevators, public restrooms, indoor service lines, buses, taxicabs and other means of public transportation while within the boundaries of the city, and in ticket, boarding and waiting areas of public transit depots; provided, however, that this prohibition does not prevent the establishment of a separate waiting area for smokers and nonsmokers; 
C.  Public areas of museums, galleries and libraries; 
D.  Enclosed theaters, auditoriums and halls which are used for motion pictures, stage dramas and musical performance, ballet, or other exhibitions or performances; except as to those persons actually participating in such performances; 
E.  Retail food marketing establishments, including grocery stores and supermarkets, except for those areas set aside for the purpose of serving food and drink, restrooms and private offices which are otherwise regulated by this chapter; 
F.  Hearing rooms, conference rooms, chambers and places of public assembly in which public business is conducted and when the public business requires or provides for direct participation or observation by the general public; 
G.  Polling places; 
H.  Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, any owner, operator, manager or other person who controls any establishment described in this section may declare that entire establishment as a nonsmoking establishment. 
(Ord. 125 § 5, 1992) 
8.12.050 - Prohibition of smoking in health facilities. 
    Smoking shall be prohibited in waiting rooms, hallways, and other public areas of health facilities including, but not limited to, hospitals, clinics, physical therapy facilities, doctors' offices and dentists' offices. 
(Ord. 125 § 6, 1992) 
8.12.060 - Regulation of smoking in eating establishments. 
    Every eating establishment shall establish at minimum a nonsmoking section not less than sixty (60) percent of the serving area. This prohibition shall not apply to enclosed rooms used for any private function. Any portion of an indoor eating establishment used primarily as a bar is excluded from the restrictions of this section. 
(Ord. 125 § 7, 1992) 
8.12.070 - Areas where smoking not prohibited. 
    Other than as provided in Section 8.12.030, the following areas shall not be subject to smoking restrictions: 
A.  Private residences, excepting a private residence which operates as any form of child care facility, in which case smoking is prohibited only during the operating hours of such facility; 
B.  Bars; 
C.  Hotel and motel rooms rented to guests; 
D.  Retail stores that deal exclusively in the sale of tobacco and smoking paraphernalia; 
E.  Restaurant, hotel and motel conference or meeting rooms, and public and private assembly rooms while these places are being used for private functions; 
F.  Private enclosed places occupied exclusively by smokers, even though such a place may be visited by non-smokers, excepting places in which smoking is prohibited by the fire department or by any law, ordinance, or regulation; 
G.  Private offices; 
H.  Unenclosed common areas of shopping centers and malls. 
(Ord. 125 § 8, 1992) 
8.12.080 - Posting requirements. 
A.  "Smoking Area" or "No Smoking" signs, whichever are appropriate, with letters not less than one inch in height or the international "no smoking" symbol (consisting of a pictorial representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle with a red bar across it) and citing this chapter number shall be clearly, sufficiently, and conspicuously posted in every building where smoking is controlled by this chapter, by the owner, manager or other person having control of such building or other place. Placement of such signs shall be designed so as to afford occupants reasonable notice as to areas subject to the city's smoking regulations. 
B.  Every restaurant regulated by this chapter shall have posted at its entrance a sign clearly stating that a nonsmoking section is available and every person shall be asked as to his or her preference. 
(Ord. 125 § 9, 1992) 
8.12.090 - Prohibition of vending machine sales. 
    No cigarette or other tobacco product may be sold, offered for sale or distributed by or from a vending machine or appliance, or any other coin operated mechanical device designed or used for vending purposes, except for vending machines located within the premises licensed by the state of California for on site liquor sales and located within areas of such premises to which access by minors is prohibited by law. 
(Ord. 125 § 10, 1992) 
Chapter 8.16 - VEHICLE ABATEMENT AND REMOVAL 

8.16.010 - Authority. 
A.  Pursuant to the authority cited in this code, California Vehicle Code §§ 22660 and 22669, California Government Code § 25845, and the authority granted by the state and California Constitution art. XI, § 7, the Hesperia city council authorizes the building official and designated employees to enforce the provisions of this chapter relating to abatement and removal of vehicles. This authority includes the right to enter private or public property for the purposes specified in this chapter, to examine a vehicle or parts thereof, to obtain information as to the identity of a vehicle and remove or cause the removal of a vehicle or part thereof declared to be a nuisance. 
B.  Any person interfering with or refusing entry to property to any city or contracted service employee performing duties under this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon arrest and conviction, shall be punished by a fine not in excess of five hundred dollars ($500.00), and imprisonment of not more than ninety (90) days, or both. This includes all attempts to retrieve, remove or relocate vehicles at the onset of or during the abatement and removal process by the county and/or its contractors. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; Ord. 139 Exh. A (SBCC § 33.121), 1992; Ord. 75 § 2 (part), 1990) 
8.16.030 - Public nuisances. 
    Pursuant to the determination made, and the authority granted by the state under § 22660 of the California Vehicle Code to abate and remove abandoned, dismantled, inoperative, junked, and wrecked vehicles, and or parts thereof as public nuisances, and in accordance with the city's constitutional police power authority, the city council makes the following findings and declaration: 
    The accumulation and storage of dismantled, wrecked, inoperative, junked, abandoned vehicles or parts thereof, on private or public property (other than streets and highways which are regulated by the Vehicle Code) is found to create a condition tending to reduce the value of private and public property, to promote blight and deterioration, invite plundering, to create fire hazards, to constitute an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the health and safety of minors, to create a harborage for rodents and insects and to be injurious to the health, safety and general welfare of the public. Therefore, the presence of abandoned, dismantled, inoperative, junked or wrecked vehicles or parts thereof on private or public property (other than on streets, public roadways, alleys, rights-of-way and highways) in the city limits of Hesperia except as expressly permitted in this chapter, is declared to constitute a public nuisance which may be abated as such in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 139 Exh. A (SBCC § 33.1210), 1992) 
8.16.040 - Exceptions. 
    This chapter shall not apply to any vehicle or parts thereof which is completely enclosed within a building consisting of four walls and roof in a lawful manner, where such vehicle is not visible from the street or other public or private property or a vehicle or parts thereof which is stored or parked in a lawful manner on property used in connection with the business of a licensed dismantler, garage, vehicle dealer or junkyard. This exception shall not authorize the maintenance of a public or private nuisance as defined under the provisions of law other than this chapter. 
(Ord. 139 Exh. A (SBCC § 33.1215), 1992) 
8.16.050 - Chapter supplement to existing law. 
    This chapter is not the exclusive regulation of abandoned, dismantled, inoperative, junked or wrecked vehicles or parts thereof, or public nuisances within the city. It shall supplement and be in addition to the other regulatory codes, statutes and ordinances heretofore or hereafter enacted by the city, the state, or any other legal entity or agency having jurisdiction. 
(Ord. 139 Exh. A (SBCC § 33.1220), 1992) 
8.16.060 - Prohibited uses. 
    Any abandoned, dismantled, inoperative, junked or wrecked vehicles or parts thereof, or fully or partially disassembled vehicle (including vehicles without hood, fenders, engines, body panels, headlights, trunk lid, wheels, windows or windshields) when placed or kept for more than seventy-two (72) hours in residential, commercial or industrial sites (except licensed vehicle impound storage yards, garages, vehicle dealers, junkyards and/or dismantling yards), and visible from outside the parcel of land upon which such is or are kept, is prohibited and constitutes a violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. 139 Exh. A (SBCC § 33.1225), 1992) 
8.16.070 - Duty to abate. 
    No person shall cause, permit, maintain, conduct or otherwise allow an abandoned, dismantled, inoperative, junked or wrecked vehicle or parts thereof to be openly stored, within the city. It shall be the duty of every owner and/or occupant, in control of any land located within the city to remove, abate, and prevent the recurrence of open storage of such a vehicle. Any recurrence of such condition of a specific vehicle on the same property may be deemed a continuation of the original condition and additional notification requirements under Sections 8.16.090 and 8.16.170 shall not be required. 
(Ord. 139 Exh. A (SBCC § 33.1230), 1992) 
8.16.080 - Emergency abatement and other services. 
A.  Emergency Abatement. When a vehicle defined by this chapter as a public nuisance constitutes an immediate hazard or threat of harm and the situation calls for abatement sooner than the abatement procedures herein allow, code enforcement or police department may take or cause emergency removal of such nuisance with such notice to parties concerned, or without notice, as the particular circumstances reasonably allow. Required notification procedures prior to disposal of such vehicle(s) shall be followed. 
B.  Request for Service. If any member of the public, except self storage operators, requests code enforcement in writing to remove abandoned, dismantled, inoperative, junked or wrecked vehicles or parts thereof, code enforcement is authorized to provide processing and removal for a fee which covers all code enforcement costs. The removed abandoned, dismantled, inoperative, junked or wrecked vehicles or parts thereof, through transfer of title or lien sale process shall become the property of the city of Hesperia and such will be the responsibility of the city to dispose of according to law. 
C.  Complaints. Code enforcement will investigate anonymous complaints associated with abandoned, dismantled, inoperative, junked or wrecked vehicles or parts thereof. The complaint may be phoned in or be writing and must have situs address and/or assessor parcel number with a description of the violation. The process referring to "notice of intent to abate and remove" will be utilized for abatement if such is determined to be appropriate. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; Ord. 139 Exh. A (SBCC § 33.1235), 1992; Ord. 75 § 2 (part), 1990) 
8.16.090 - Abatement procedures for vehicles which are a public nuisance. 
A.  A ten-day "notice of intent to abate and remove" shall be given to the property owner to remove the vehicle or parts thereof, as a public nuisance, unless the property owner and the owner of the vehicle have signed releases authorizing removal and waiving further interest in the vehicle or part thereof. Notification shall be given either by personal delivery or posting the property, and shall be mailed by registered or certified mail addressed to the property owner at his/her last known business or residence address as the same appears in the public records of the last equalized assessment roll, and to the last registered and/or legal owner of the vehicle by registered or certified mail to the last address listed with the Department of Motor Vehicles. If such a vehicle is in such condition that identification numbers are not available to determine ownership, notice need not be given to the last registered and/or legal owner of the vehicle. 
B.  The notice shall be substantially as follows: 
 You are hereby notified to abate this public nuisance by removal of the vehicle(s) or parts thereof within ten (10) days from the date of mailing of this notice. If you fail to do so, the public nuisance and such dismantled, wrecked, junked, inoperative, abandoned vehicles or parts thereof, will be abated and removed by Hesperia Community Development Department and/or contract services and all the costs for abatement and removal, together with administrative costs, may be assessed to the legal owner of the land on which the public nuisance and such dismantled, junked, abandoned, inoperative vehicle or parts thereof are located. 
C.  The notice shall also set forth the procedures and time period for filing an appeal. The notice shall contain a statement of the hearing rights of the owner of the property on which the vehicle is located and of the owner of the vehicle. The statement shall include notice to the property owner that he/she may appear in person at a hearing or may submit a sworn statement denying responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on the land, with his/her reasons for such denial, in lieu of appearing. 
D.  If the nuisance is not abated and a request for hearing has not been received within the time period given in the notice, code enforcement is authorized to abate the nuisance. 
E.  A "notice of intent to abate and remove" shall not be required for removal of a vehicle or parts thereof which is inoperable due to the absence of a motor, transmission or wheels and incapable of being towed; is valued at less than two hundred dollars ($200.00); and is determined to be a public nuisance presenting an immediate threat to public health or safety; provided, that the property owner has signed a release authorizing removal and waiving further interest in the vehicle or parts thereof. Notice of intent to dispose of the vehicle or parts thereof shall be provided to the last registered and legal owners prior to final disposition. If the vehicle or parts thereof are not claimed and removed within twelve (12) days after the notice is mailed, code enforcement may authorize disposal of the vehicle and parts thereof. This subsection shall only apply to inoperable vehicles located upon a parcel that is either zoned for agricultural use or is not improved with a residential structure containing one or more dwelling units. 
F.  Notice shall be given to the Department of Motor Vehicles within five days after the date of removal of vehicles under this section, identifying the vehicle or part thereof and any evidence of registration available, including, but not limited to, the registration card, certificates of ownership or license plates. 
G.  No vehicle which has been abated or removed as a public nuisance shall thereafter be reconstructed or made operable unless it is a vehicle which qualifies for either horseless carriage license plates or historical vehicle license plates. 
H.  Code enforcement and/or contract services shall not be liable for damage caused to a vehicle or part thereof by removal pursuant to this section. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; Ord. 139 Exh. A (SBCC § 33.1240), 1992; Ord. 75 § 2 (part), 1990) 
8.16.120 - Payment for abatement of abandoned vehicles. 
    The abandonment of any vehicle on public or private property shall constitute a prima facie presumption that the last registered owner of record is responsible for the abandonment and is thereby liable for the cost of removal and disposition of the vehicle. The building official shall present to the registered owner of the vehicle a demand for payment of the costs required for removal and disposition of the vehicle, not to exceed those for towing and seven days of storage. If payment is not made on behalf of the registered owner of the vehicle within sixty (60) days after mailing of such bill, the building official may issue an abandoned vehicle citation and/or notify the Department of Motor Vehicles. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; Ord. 139 Exh. A (SBCC § 33.1270), 1992; Ord. 75 § 2 (part), 1990) 
8.16.130 - Disposal of vehicles which are a public nuisance. 
    If a vehicle and parts thereof are removed from a property as a public nuisance, the vehicles or parts thereof shall be disposed of by removal to a scrap yard, licensed automobile dismantler's yard or any suitable site determined by code enforcement for processing as scrap. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; Ord. 139 Exh. A (SBCC § 33.1275), 1992; Ord. 75 § 2 (part), 1990) 
8.16.140 - Abatement procedures for vehicles which are abandoned. 
A.  If an abandoned vehicle and parts thereof are removed from a property, and the estimated value of the vehicle is three hundred dollars ($300.00) or less, a notice which states that the vehicle will be removed by code enforcement shall be securely attached to the vehicle not less than seventy-two (72) hours before the vehicle is removed. Immediately after removal of the vehicle, code enforcement and/or contract services shall notify the Stolen Vehicle System of the Department of Justice in Sacramento of the removal. 
B.  Within forty-eight (48) hours of the removal, excluding weekends and holidays, a notice shall be sent to the registered and legal owners of the vehicle by registered or certified mail to the last address listed with the Department of Motor Vehicles, and to any other person known to have an interest in the vehicle. This notice shall include the following information: 
1.  The name, address, and telephone number of code enforcement; 
2.  The location of the place of storage and description of the vehicle which shall include, if available, make, license plate number, vehicle identification number and mileage; 
3.  The authority and purpose for removing the vehicle; 
4.  A statement that the vehicle will be disposed of fifteen (15) days from the date of the notice; 
5.  A statement that the owners and interested persons, or their agents, have an opportunity for a post-storage hearing if the request is made in person, in writing, or by telephone within ten days from the date of the notice; 
6.  Any requested hearings shall be conducted by the Hesperia community preservation committee. 
C.  Failure of either the registered or legal owner or interested person or their agent to request or to attend a scheduled hearing shall satisfy due process post-storage hearing requirements. 
D.  If, after fifteen (15) days from the notification date, the vehicle remains unclaimed and the towing and storage fees have not been paid, and if no request for a post-storage hearing was made or a post-storage hearing was not attended, code enforcement may authorize disposal of the vehicle. 
E.  If the names and addresses of the registered and legal owners of the vehicle are not available from the records of the Department of Motor Vehicles, code enforcement may authorize disposal of the vehicle at any time after the removal. 
F.  Disposal of the vehicle may only be to a licensed dismantler or scrap iron processor. A vehicle disposed of pursuant to this section shall not be reconstructed or made operable, unless it is a vehicle which qualifies for either horseless carriage or historical vehicle license plates. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; Ord. 139 Exh. A (SBCC § 33.1280), 1992; Ord. 75 § 2 (part), 1990) 
8.16.150 - Abatement procedures for abandoned vehicles which are valued at greater than three hundred dollars. 
    After the abatement and removal process described in Section 8.16.140 has occurred, and the post-storage notification requirements described in Section 8.16.140 have been met, a lien sale will be conducted on every removed, abandoned vehicle with a value of over three hundred dollars ($300.00), and such sale will be carried out if all fees and costs for the removal, storage and application for lien sale have not been paid and the vehicle has not been redeemed by the registered or legal owner of the vehicle. Once legal ownership has been transferred to the city by lien sale, the vehicle(s) or parts thereof will be sold on a regular scheduled date by an auction or other authorized, legal method permitted for the city. 
(Ord. 139 Exh. A (SBCC § 33.1281), 1992) 
8.16.160 - Procedure for redemption of vehicles. 
A.  A vehicle which is valued at three hundred dollars ($300.00) or less, and which has been removed from a property by code enforcement and/or contract services as an abandoned vehicle, may be redeemed by the registered or legal owner of the vehicle after payment of reasonable removal and storage costs, excluding lien sale costs, within fifteen (15) days of the mailing date of notification of removal. 
B.  A vehicle which is valued at three hundred dollars ($300.00) or less, and which has been removed from a property by code enforcement and/or contract services as a public nuisance, may be redeemed by the registered or legal owner of the vehicle after payment of reasonable removal, storage and lien sale costs within ten days of the date of removal. 
C.  A vehicle which is valued at greater than three hundred dollars ($300.00), and which has been removed from a property by code enforcement and/or contract services, may be redeemed by the registered or legal owner of the vehicle after payment of reasonable removal, storage and lien sale costs, within fifteen (15) days of the mailing date of notification of removal if abated as an abandoned vehicle and within thirty (30) days of removal if abated as a public nuisance. 
D.  In no case shall the costs charged to the legal or registered owner for removal and disposition of an abandoned vehicle under this section exceed those for towing and seven days storage. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; Ord. 139 Exh. A (SBCC § 33.1285), 1992; Ord. 75 § 2 (part), 1990) 
8.16.170 - Authorization to enforce Vehicle Code provisions. 
    Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the building official and his designated employees are authorized to remove abandoned and unattended vehicles pursuant to the provisions of Vehicle Code § 22669. In exercising this authority, they shall follow all procedural and legal requirements applicable to said sections. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; Ord. 139 Exh. A (SBCC § 33.1290), 1992; Ord. 75 § 2 (part), 1990) 
8.16.180 - Determination of estimated value of vehicles. 
    For lien sale purposes, code enforcement shall determine the estimated value of vehicles and maintain proper documentation and give notifications as required by the California Vehicle Code with respect to vehicles which are abated and removed under this chapter. Code enforcement shall determine whether the estimated value of vehicle that has been ordered removed, towed or stored is three hundred dollars ($300.00) or less; or over three hundred dollars ($300.00) but less than or equal to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00); or over one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). All regularly employed and salaried employees of code enforcement (including contract employees) are authorized to make appraisals to determine the value of vehicles abated or removed under this chapter. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; Ord. 139 Exh. A (SBCC § 33.1295), 1992; Ord. 75 § 2 (part), 1990) 
Chapter 8.20 - CRIME FREE RENTAL HOUSING PROGRAM[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2017-13 , § 1, adopted July 18, 2017, amended Chapter 8.20 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Chapter 8.20, §§ 8.20.010-8.20.140, pertained to similar material, and derived from Ord. No. 2015-12 , adopted November 17, 2015. 

8.20.010 - Purpose and scope. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to identify, regulate, and assist the owners of rental dwelling units in the City of Hesperia, to ensure that such units afford tenants a safe and decent place to live, to hold tenants and owners accountable for their actions, and to reduce criminal activity. 
    Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to: 
A.  Excuse, waive, limit, or modify any other requirements or obligations in federal, state or local laws; 
B.  Limit any right or authority of the city to investigate and abate nuisances or to enforce any other provisions of federal, state or local the laws; 
C.  Otherwise prevent or waive compliance with all other federal, state or local laws; or 
D.  Discourage victims or witnesses of crime or physical or mental health crisis from reporting crime or seeking assistance with physical or mental health crisis. 
( Ord. No. 2017-13 , § 1, 7-18-17) 
8.20.020 - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this chapter, words and phrases used in this chapter shall mean as they are defined in Chapter 1.04 of this code, except as otherwise defined below: 
    "Annual inspection" means an inspection meeting the criteria and standards of crime free through environmental design (CFTED). 
    "Chief of police" means the Hesperia Chief of Police, i.e., the San Bernardino County Sheriff's Captain designated to serve as the chief of police, or any designee thereof. 
    "Crime free through environmental design" or "CFTED" means design standards and guidelines, adopted by resolution of the city council, which ensure the effective use of physical spaces and social environments of residential rental properties to reduce crime. 
    "Criminal activity" means behavior or actions that are in violation of established federal, state, or local criminal laws. 
    "Local property management company" shall mean an entity that is responsible for the day-to-day maintenance, upkeep and security of a rental property and is operated by a person who is licensed with the California Department of Real Estate as a real estate broker. 
    "Local property manager" shall mean a person who is responsible for the day-to-day maintenance, upkeep, and security of the rental property. The local property manager may be the owner of the property. 
    "Multi-family residences" means three dwellings or more on a single property. 
    "Owner" or "property owner" means a single individual, partnership or joint venture or any entity that has any kind of ownership interest in a single-family residential rental property, multi-family rental property, or residential rental dwelling unit (collectively, "residential rental property") whether as an individual, partner, joint venture, stock owner, or ownership interest in some other capacity or the owner's designee, which may include a local property management company. If more than one person or an entity owns the subject rental property, owner or property owner refers to each person or entity holding any kind of ownership interest in the property, and the property owners' obligations in this chapter are joint and several as to each property owner. Owner shall also mean any person having legal title to real property, including all individuals shown as owners on the last equalized assessment roll of the San Bernardino County Assessor's Office, or an owner's authorized representative. 
    "Program" means the crime free rental housing program as set forth in this chapter. 
    "Program guidelines" means the administrative guidelines established and adopted by the city manager for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this chapter. 
    "Single-family residence" means a dwelling configured for one group to live in with common areas such as a kitchen and common bathrooms on a single property. 
    "Single-family residential rental property," "multi-family rental property," or "residential rental dwelling unit" (collectively, "residential rental property") means a dwelling unit, all or part of which is occupied by a person(s) other than the owner of the unit where money, services or valuables are exchanged for the ability to reside whether this agreement is verbal or in writing. This includes the premises on which said residential rental property is situated and any common areas. The following types of dwelling units or facilities are not considered residential rental property: 
1.  Hotels or motels. 
2.  Accommodations in any hospital, extended care facility, residential care facility and convalescent home. 
3.  Mobile home parks. 
4.  Business, commercial or industrial properties unless there is a dwelling structure on the property. 
    "Tenant" means a person who occupies or is in possession of a residential rental property as a tenant or permittee of the owner. 
( Ord. No. 2017-13 , § 1, 7-18-17) 
8.20.030 - Rebuttable presumption. 
    For the purpose of this chapter, if the water, refuse, gas, electric or property tax bill is in a different name than that of the property owner, or if the water, refuse, gas, electric or property tax bill is in the owner of record's name but mailed to an address other than the property address, it shall be a rebuttable presumption that the property is residential rental property. This presumption can be rebutted by the owner of record, or by his or her designated representative, providing satisfactory documentation to the city that the property is owner-occupied or is not being used for rental income. 
( Ord. No. 2017-13 , § 1, 7-18-17) 
8.20.040 - Residential rental property registration. 
A.  Registration Required. As a condition of exercising the privilege of renting or leasing a residential rental property to any person and/or entity, the owner of the residential rental property, local property management company or local property manager shall annually register with the city. 
1.  Contents of Registration Form. The registration form shall be in a format determined by the city manager and shall contain the location of the residential rental property, the owner's name and contact information, the name of person acting on the owner's behalf and his or her contact information, and number of dwelling units. 
2.  The owner shall pay any adopted fees, which shall cover the city's annual costs of processing and maintenance as it relates to registration of the residential rental property. 
3.  Non-transferable. Registration of a residential rental property accepted by the city pursuant to this chapter is not transferable to a new owner of the residential rental property. Any new owner must re-register and provide current registration information. 
( Ord. No. 2017-13 , § 1, 7-18-17) 
8.20.050 - Crime free screening and notification program. 
A.  Crime Free Database. The chief of police will maintain a crime free database. This database will contain the registration information of residential rental properties registered pursuant to Section 8.20.040. This database shall be subject to the city's records retention and destruction policies. 
B.  Crime Free Screening Program. 
1.  Request. An owner whose residential rental property is registered pursuant to Section 8.20.040 may submit a request to the chief of police seeking information that must be disclosed pursuant to Government Code Section 6254(f)(1) about specifically-identified arrests within the City of Hesperia involving a prospective or current adult tenant. Such a request shall include the following: 
a.  Notarized written consent from the prospective or current adult tenant(s) stating that he or she affirmatively consents to providing identifying information, including a copy of a valid government-issued photo identification card, for the purpose of crime free screening, as provided herein. This written consent shall be in a form approved by the city manager. 
b.  A copy of a valid government-issued photo identification card of the prospective or current adult tenant(s), such as a California Driver's License. 
c.  The mailing address of the prospective or current adult tenant(s). 
d.  Payment for any adopted fees relating to the city's costs in providing the crime free screening program. 
2.  Report. To the extent permitted by law, the chief of police shall then provide the owner with a report that includes the information required to be disclosed pursuant to Government Code Section 6254(f)(1) within ten (10) business days after receipt of a request from an owner, as provided in Section 8.20.050(B)(1), including any requests for screening or reports, pursuant to this Section 8.20.050, made on or after August 17, 2017. This report shall be mailed to the mailing address of the subject prospective or current tenant at the same time it is provided to the owner. 
a.  If the chief of police determines that the information requested pursuant to Section 8.20.050(B)(1) does not exist or is not required to be disclosed under Government Code Section 6254(f)(1), then he or she shall issue a report to the requesting owner stating as such. 
b.  Extension of Time. The chief of police may extend this deadline by an additional fourteen (14) business days from the date that a report is due. 
3.  Upon receiving this report, the owner has the sole discretion to take actions that he or she determines to be legally appropriate. All reports issued shall contain an admonition in substantially the following form: "This report is for informational purposes only. The landlord or property owner has the sole discretion to take any action that he or she determines to be legally appropriate." 
4.  All requests and reports, made pursuant to Section 8.20.050(B), shall be subject to the city's records retention policies. 
C.  Crime Free Notification System. The chief of police shall establish a system in which owners may be notified of arrests on their residential rental property. Owners who desire to participate may, as part of the registration required pursuant to Section 8.20.040 or otherwise, request that the chief of police include an owner's residential rental property as part of the crime free notification system, provided that the owner and the residential rental property meets the qualifications established herein. 
1.  Qualification. In order to qualify for this program, an owner must submit a valid request, in a form approved by the city manager, to receive notifications pursuant to the crime free notification system and incorporate a crime free lease addendum into all new lease agreements executed after the residential rental property's inclusion in the crime free notification system. Owners who desire to participate in the crime free notification system shall also make reasonable efforts to integrate the crime free lease addendum into any extensions of an existing lease agreement. 
a.  The crime free lease addendum shall substantially include the following provisions: 
i.  That the tenant, or any member of the tenant's household, or a guest or other person under the tenant's control shall not engage in criminal activity that would violate any federal, state or local law, on, near, or related to the property premises, including in any common areas and facilities. 
ii.  That the tenant, any member of the tenant's household, or a guest or other person under the tenant's control shall not engage in any act intended to facilitate criminal activity that would violate any federal, state or local law, including drug-related criminal activity, on, near, or related to the property premises, including in any common areas and facilities. 
iii.  That the tenant or members of the household will not permit the dwelling unit to be used for, or to facilitate, criminal activity that would violate any federal, state or local law, including prostitution and drug-related criminal activity, regardless of whether the individual engaging in such activity is a member of the household or a guest. 
iv.  That the tenant or member of the household will not engage in the possession, manufacture, sale or distribution of illegal drugs, on, near, or related to the property premises, including in any common areas and facilities, that would violate any federal, state or local law. 
v.  That the tenant or member of the tenant's household, or a guest or other person under the tenant's control shall not engage in acts of violence that would violate any federal, state or local law, including but not limited to, the unlawful discharge of firearms, on, near, or related to the property, including in any common areas and facilities. 
vi.  That the tenant agrees that any single violation of the above provisions may be a material violation of the lease, be good cause for termination of tenancy, and be deemed a serious violation and a material noncompliance with the lease such that a single violation shall be good cause for termination of the lease. 
vii.  That failure to comply with the crime free lease addendum may be considered a material non-curable breach of the lease and may result in a three day notice to quit being served upon the tenant requiring that the tenant, every member of tenant's household, or a guest or other person(s) under tenant's control shall vacate said premises within three days, all in accordance with California Law and that California Law provides for extraordinary remedy to regain possession when illegal activity is being carried out on or near the premises which constitutes a public or private nuisance. 
b.  A request to receive notifications pursuant to the crime free notification system shall include the following information: 
i.  The address of the residential rental property that the owners seek to include to receive notices from the crime free notification system. 
ii.  Payment for any adopted fees relating to the city's costs in providing notices pursuant to the crime free notification system. Failure to pay such adopted fees, including any adopted annual fees, shall result in disqualification from the crime free notification system until payment thereof. 
iii.  Notarized written consent from the prospective or current adult tenant(s) of the residential rental property stating that he or she affirmatively consents to disclosure of information for the purpose of crime free notices as provided in Section 8.20.050(C)(2). This written consent shall be in a form approved by the city manager and shall be required upon the execution of any new lease agreement. However, a notarized written consent shall not be required if the owner seeks to receive crime free notices for arrests where a prospective or current adult tenant(s) is not the subject of the arrest. 
2.  Crime Free Notice. 
a.  Upon becoming aware of an arrest occurring at a registered residential rental property that meets the qualifications of Section 8.20.050(C)(1), the chief of police shall provide notice to owners concerning the arrest. This notice shall be provided to the tenant occupying such residential rental property at the same time it is provided to the owner. 
b.  To the extent that such information is available and to the extent that the chief of police determines that disclosure of a particular item of information would not endanger the safety of a person involved in an investigation or would not endanger the successful completion of the investigation or a related investigation, the notice provided by the chief of police shall include the information that must be disclosed pursuant to Government Code Section 6254(f)(1), and also provide the following information: 
i.  The relevant report or incident number. 
ii.  Information relating to the appeals process provided in this chapter. 
c.  Upon receiving this notice, the owner has the sole discretion to take actions that he or she determines to be legally appropriate. All notices issued shall contain an admonition in substantially the following form: "This notice is for informational purposes only. The landlord or property owner has the sole discretion to take any action that he or she determines to be legally appropriate." 
d.  The notice provided by the chief of police shall be in writing and sent by email with acknowledgement or certified mail with return receipt requested. All notices, made pursuant to Section 8.20.050(C), shall be subject to the City's records retention policies. 
D.  Appeals. 
1.  A person who is the subject of a tenant screening report, as provided in Section 8.20.050(B), or a crime free notice, as provided in Section 8.20.050(C), may file an appeal of such report or notice pursuant to Section 8.20.100. 
2.  An owner whose residential rental property is the subject of a tenant screening report, as provided in Section 8.20.050(B), or a crime free notice, as provided in Section 8.20.050(C), may file an appeal of such report or notice pursuant to Section 8.20.100. 
E.  Opt-Out Process. 
1.  An owner whose residential rental property is subject to the crime free notification system may, at any time, submit a form to the city manager opting out of the crime free notification system. 
2.  The opt-out form shall be in a format determined by the city manager and shall contain the location of the residential rental property, the owner's name and contact information, and the name of person acting on the owner's behalf and his or her contact information. The opt-out form shall contain the notarized signature of the owner. 
3.  Upon receipt of an opt-out form complying with Section 8.20.050(E), the city manager shall direct the chief of police to remove the owner's residential rental property from the crime free notification system. 
( Ord. No. 2017-13 , § 1, 7-18-17) 
8.20.060 - Monthly Reports 
A.  An owner whose residential rental property has been registered pursuant to this chapter may request, in a form approved by the city manager, that the chief of police provide him or her a monthly report containing information relating to law enforcement activities occurring at the owner's residential rental property. The chief of police shall not disclose information that is prohibited from disclosure by federal, state, or local law. In order to receive such monthly reports, an owner shall pay any adopted fees, including any adopted annual fees. 
( Ord. No. 2017-13 , § 1, 7-18-17) 
8.20.070 - CFTED Standards and administrative policies. 
A.  CFTED Standards. The city council shall adopt by resolution such standards and guidelines for the purpose of ensuring crime prevention and reduction. All residential rental property shall comply with adopted CFTED standards. 
B.  Administrative Policies. The city council may establish and adopt administrative policies for the implementation of this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 2017-13 , § 1, 7-18-17) 
8.20.080 - Inspections. 
A.  Annual Inspections. All residential rental property located in the city shall be subject to an annual inspection by the city for compliance with federal, state, or local laws, program guidelines, and CFTED standards. The owner or their designee will receive the results of the inspection. 
B.  Notice of Inspection and Procedures. 
1.  After receiving a completed registration form from an owner, the city will conduct an exterior inspection of the residential rental property to identify compliance with the federal, state, or local laws, program guidelines, and CFTED standards. 
2.  No prior notice of inspection will be made to the owner. An owner does not have to be present for the inspection. 
C.  Members of the city's police department will be responsible for conducting the inspections authorized by this chapter. However, the city may request that other city departments participate in the inspection process. The inspection will be from the exterior of the residential rental property's buildings and structures. It will cover compliance with federal, state, or local laws, program guidelines, and CFTED standards. 
D.  After completion of the inspection, a written report of the inspection will be sent to the owner. The report shall contain: 
1.  An itemization of any violations of the federal, state, or local laws, program guidelines, and CFTED standards identified during the inspection; 
2.  The period of time for correcting each of the identified violations; 
3.  A statement of a re-inspection at the end of the period of time for correction, if applicable; 
4.  The amount of the re-inspection fee and the date by which the re-inspection fee must be paid; and 
5.  A statement that if the violations are not corrected within the period of time for correction the city may pursue legal action as authorized under this code to abate such violations. 
6.  If no violations are found as a result of the inspection, the inspection report shall state so and city shall issue a certificate of registration to the owner. 
( Ord. No. 2017-13 , § 1, 7-18-17) 
8.20.090 - Fees. 
    The city council may establish such fees that are necessary for the administration and enforcement of this chapter. All such fees shall be set by resolution of the city council. 
( Ord. No. 2017-13 , § 1, 7-18-17) 
8.20.100 - Appeals. 
A.  If an appealing party desires to appeal the chief of police's notices or reports pursuant to Section 8.20.050(B) or 8.20.050(C)(3), the appealing party shall file a notice of appeal with the city clerk within thirty (30) days from the date of the chief of police's notices or reports together with any filing fee set by resolution of the city council. The notice of appeal shall contain the appealing party's mailing address and telephone number; the basis for appeal; and any other relevant documentation or evidence. 
B.  Appeal hearings shall be conducted by the city's administrative hearing officer. 
C.  The filing of any notice of appeal provided shall temporarily stay the chief of police's findings in the subject notices or reports, issued pursuant to Section 8.20.050(B) or 8.20.050(C)(3), until the issuance of a final administrative order by the administrative hearing officer. 
D.  Appeal hearings shall be held not less than thirty (30) days and not more than sixty (60) days from the date the notice of appeal is filed, provided that no appeal hearing shall be held unless any required filing fee has been deposited in advance. 
E.  The city shall provide the appealing party and any other party that is the subject of the notices or reports, issued pursuant to Section 8.20.050(B) or 8.20.050(C)(3), with written notice of the time and place of the appeal hearing at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing. If the chief of police submits an additional written report to the administrative hearing officer for consideration at the appeal hearing, a copy of the report shall be served on all parties with the notice of hearing. 
F.  The appealing party's failure to appear at the appeal hearing shall constitute a forfeiture of any deposited amounts and be deemed a failure to exhaust his or her administrative remedies. The final determination of the administrative hearing officer shall be served on the appealing party by mailing a copy of the determination by certified mail postage prepaid to the appealing party at his or her last known address. 
G.  The administrative hearing officer shall hear, receive and consider testimony and documentary evidence regarding the chief of police's determination and notice, as may be applicable and as provided in this chapter. The chief of police's initial determination and/or notice, as may be applicable, including any additional report submitted by the chief of police, shall constitute prima facie evidence of the respective facts contained in those documents. The appealing party and any other party that is the subject of the notices or reports, issued pursuant to Section 8.20.050(B) or 8.20.050(C)(3), shall be given the opportunity to testify at the hearing to present evidence concerning the chief of police's notice and/or report. The appeal hearing shall not be subject to the formal rules of evidence or discovery. The administrative hearing officer may continue the hearing and request additional information from the chief of police, the appealing party, or any other appearing party that is the subject of the notices or reports, issued pursuant to Section 8.20.050(B) or 8.20.050(C)(3), prior to issuing a final administrative decision. 
H.  After considering all of the testimony and evidence submitted at the appeal hearing, the administrative hearing officer shall issue a written decision to uphold, modify, cancel, or reverse the chief of police's determination and/or notice, as may be applicable, within sixty (60) days. 
I.  The written decision of the administrative hearing officer shall be final and conclusive. The written decision shall be served on the appealing party by mailing a copy of the order by certified mail, postage prepaid, to the appealing party at his or her last known address. 
( Ord. No. 2017-13 , § 1, 7-18-17) 
8.20.110 - Complaint-based inspections. 
    Nothing contained in this chapter shall prevent or restrict the city's authority to inspect any residential rental property in response to a complaint alleging code violations or violations of applicable federal, state, or local laws and to pursue all remedies permissible under such applicable laws. 
( Ord. No. 2017-13 , § 1, 7-18-17) 
8.20.120 - Voluntary inspection requests. 
    Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to prohibit a property owner or tenant from voluntarily requesting an inspection pursuant to this chapter to determine whether the residential rental property complies with applicable federal, state, or local laws. 
( Ord. No. 2017-13 , § 1, 7-18-17) 
8.20.130 - Enforcement. 
A.  Violations Identified During Inspection. If the owner fails to correct a violation of the federal, state, or local laws identified in the report of inspection within the time allowed, the city may issue an administrative citation, issue a notice of intent to abate, or may take any other action authorized by law to enforce the provisions of this code. 
B.  Failure to Pay Fees. Should an owner fail to timely pay any fees due under this chapter, the city may take appropriate action to recover the unpaid fees, including any accrued interest, penalties and personnel costs utilizing any remedies authorized by law. 
C.  Violations. Owners who fail or cause to fail to cooperate with inspections required under this chapter or fail to otherwise comply with the requirements of this chapter, including registration or eviction requirements, may be subject to enforcement pursuant to Chapter 1.12 of Title 1 of this Code or any other action authorized by law to enforce the provisions of this Chapter. 
D.  Strict Liability. Violations of this chapter shall be treated as a strict liability offense regardless of intent. Any person, firm and/or corporation that violates any portion of this chapter shall be subject to prosecution under applicable law. 
E.  Revenue and Taxation Code. The city may also utilize the provisions of the Revenue and Taxation Code Section 24436.5 to encourage the elimination of substandard conditions in rental housing. The city is also authorized to bring an action under the Business and Professions Code for unfair business practices. 
F.  Attorneys' Fees. In an action, administrative proceeding, or special proceeding to abate a violation of this chapter, the prevailing party may recover attorneys' fees pursuant to Government Code Section 38773.5. Recovery of attorneys' fees is limited to those individual actions or proceedings in which the city elects, at the initiation of that individual action or proceeding, to seek recovery of its own attorneys' fees. An award of attorneys' fees to a prevailing party shall not exceed the amount of reasonable attorneys' fees incurred by the city in an action, administrative proceeding, or special proceeding. 
( Ord. No. 2017-13 , § 1, 7-18-17) 
8.20.140 - Severability. 
    If any provision, section, paragraph, sentence or word of this chapter is determined or declared invalid by any final court action in a court of competent jurisdiction or if the application of any provision, section, paragraph, sentence or word of this chapter is inapplicable to a specific situation by reason of any preemptive state or federal legislation or regulation, the remaining provisions, sections, paragraphs, sentences or words of this chapter shall remain in full force and effect. 
( Ord. No. 2017-13 , § 1, 7-18-17) 
Chapter 8.28 - FLOOD HAZARD PROTECTIONS REGULATIONS 

8.28.010 - Statutory authorization, findings of fact, purpose and methods. 
A.  Statutory Authorization. The Legislature of the state of California has, in Government Code Sections 65302, 65560 and 65800, conferred upon local government units authority to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the city council of the city of Hesperia does hereby adopt the following floodplain management regulations. 
B.  Findings of Fact. 
1.  The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
2.  These flood losses are caused by uses that are inadequately elevated, flood-proofed or protected from flood damage. The cumulative effect of obstructions in areas of special flood hazards which increase flood heights and velocities also contribute to the flood loss. 
C.  Statement of Purpose. It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
1.  Protect human life and health; 
2.  Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
3.  Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
4.  Minimize prolonged business interruptions; 
5.  Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains; electric, telephone and sewer lines; and streets and bridges located in areas of special flood hazard; 
6.  Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future blighted areas caused by flood damage; 
7.  Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of special flood hazard; and 
8.  Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume responsibility for their actions. 
D.  Methods of Reducing Flood Losses. In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes methods and provisions to: 
1.  Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards or which result in damaging increases in erosion or flood heights or velocities; 
2.  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
3.  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels and natural protective barriers which help accommodate or channel flood waters; 
4.  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage; and 
5.  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards in other areas. 
(Ord. 2001-3 Exh. A (part), 2001) 
8.28.020 - Definitions. 
    Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application. 
    "Accessory use" means a use which is incidental and subordinate to the principal use of the parcel of land on which it is located. 
    "Alluvial fan" means a geomorphologic feature characterized by a cone or fan-shaped deposit of boulders, gravel and fine sediments that have been eroded from mountain slopes, transported by flood flows and then deposited on the valley floors and which is subject to flash flooding, high velocity flows, debris flows, erosion, sediment movement and deposition and channel migration. 
    "Apex" means the point of highest elevation on an alluvial fan, which on undisturbed fans is generally the point where the major stream that formed the fan emerges from the mountain front. 
    "Appeal' means a request for a review of the floodplain administrator's interpretation of any provision of this chapter. 
    "Area of shallow flooding" means a designated AO or AH zone on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM). The base flood depths range from one to three feet; a clearly defined channel does not exist; the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate; and velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. 
    "Area of special flood hazard." See "Special flood hazard area." 
    "Area of special flood-related erosion hazard" is the land within a community which is most likely to be subject to severe flood-related erosion losses. The area may be designated as Zone E on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM). 
    "Base flood" means a flood which has a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year (also called the "100 year flood"). Base flood is the term used throughout this chapter. 
    "Basement" means any area of the building having its floor subgrade, i.e. below ground level, on all sides. 
    "Building." see "Structure." 
    "City council" is the local governing unit, i.e. city of Hesperia, that is empowered to adopt and implement regulations to provide for the public health, safety and general welfare of its citizenry. 
    "Development" means any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials. 
    "Encroachment" means the advance or infringement of uses, plant growth, fill, excavation, buildings, permanent structures or development into a floodplain which may impede or alter the flow capacity of a floodplain. 
    "Existing manufactured home park or subdivision" means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community. 
    "Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision" means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
    "Flood," "flooding," or "flood water" means: 
A.  A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of inland or tidal waters; the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source; and/or mudslides (i.e., mudflows); and 
B.  The condition resulting from flood-related erosion. 
    "Flood Boundary and Floodway Map (FBFM)" means the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the floodway. 
    "Flood Hazard Boundary Map" means the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated the areas of flood hazards. 
    "Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM)" means the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
    "Flood Insurance Study" means the official report provided by the Federal Insurance Administration that includes flood profiles, the Flood Insurance Rate Map, the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map, and the water surface elevation of the base flood. 
    "Flood-related erosion" means the collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result of undermining caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical level or suddenly caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as a flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable event which results in flooding. 
    "Flood-related erosion area" or "flood-related erosion prone area" means a land area adjoining the shore of a lake or other body of water which, due to the composition of the shoreline or bank and high water levels or wind-driven currents, is likely to suffer flood-related erosion damage. 
    "Flood-related erosion area management" means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood-related erosion damage including, but not limited to, emergency preparedness plans, flood-related erosion control works and floodplain management regulations. 
    "Floodplain" or "flood-prone area" means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source. See "Flooding." 
    "Floodplain administrator" is the individual appointed to administer and enforce the floodplain management regulations. 
    "Floodplain management" means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage and preserving and enhancing, where possible, natural resources in the floodplain including, but not limited to, emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, floodplain management regulations and open space plans. 
    "Floodplain management regulations" means this chapter and other zoning chapters, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose chapters (such as grading and erosion control) and other application of police power which control development in flood-prone areas. This term describes federal, state or local regulations in any combination thereof which provide standards for preventing and reducing flood loss and damage. 
    "Floodproofing" means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures, and their contents. (Refer to FEMA Technical Bulletins TB 1-93, TB 3-93 and TB 7-93 for guidelines on dry and wet floodproofing.) 
    "Floodway" means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. Also referred to as "regulatory floodway." 
    "Floodway fringe" is that area of the floodplain on either side of the "regulatory floodway" where encroachment may be permitted. 
    "Fraud and victimization" as related to Section 8.28.060, Variance Procedure, of this chapter, means that the variance granted must not cause fraud on or victimization of the public. In examining this requirement the city council will consider the fact that every newly constructed building adds to government responsibilities and remains a part of the community for fifty (50) to one hundred (100) years. Buildings that are permitted to be constructed below the base flood elevation are subject during all those years to increased risk of damage from floods, while future owners of the property and the community as a whole are subject to all the costs, inconvenience, danger and suffering that those increased flood damages bring. In addition, future owners may purchase the property, unaware that it is subject to potential flood damage, and can be insured only at very high flood insurance rates. 
    "Functionally dependent use" means a use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers and ship building and ship repair facilities, and does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities. 
    "Hardship" as related to Section 8.28.060, Variance Procedure, of this chapter means the exceptional hardship that would result from a failure to grant the requested variance. The city council requires that the variance be exceptional, unusual and peculiar to the property involved. Mere economic or financial hardship alone is not exceptional. Inconvenience, aesthetic considerations, physical handicaps, personal preferences or the disapproval of one's neighbors likewise cannot, as a rule, qualify as an exceptional hardship. All of these problems can be resolved through other means without granting a variance, even if the alternative is more expensive or requires the property owner to build elsewhere or put the parcel to a different use than originally intended. 
    "Highest adjacent grade" means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
    "Historic structure" means any structure that is: 
A.  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
B.  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
C.  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of Interior; or 
D.  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either by an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior or directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
    "Levee" means a man-made structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding. 
    "Levee system" means a flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accord with sound engineering practices. 
    "Lowest floor" means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement (see "basement" definition). 
A.  An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure below the lowest floor that is usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor provided it conforms to applicable non-elevation design requirements including, but not limited to: 
1.  The wet floodproofing standard in Section 8.28.050 (A)(3)(c); 
2.  The anchoring standards in Section 8.28.050 (A)(l) 
3.  The construction materials and methods standards in Section 8.28.050 (A) 
4.  The standards for utilities in Section 8.28.050 (A)(2) 
B.  For residential structures, all subgrade enclosed areas are prohibited as they are considered to be basements (see "basement" definition), This prohibition includes. below-grade garages and storage areas. 
    "Manufactured home" means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle." 
    "Manufactured home park" or "subdivision" means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
    "Market value" shall be determined by estimating the cost to replace the structure in new condition and adjusting that cost figure by the amount of depreciation which has accrued since the structure was constructed. The cost of replacement of the structure shall be based on a square foot cost factor determined by reference to a building cost estimating guide recognized by the building construction industry. The amount of depreciation shall be determined by taking into account the age and physical deterioration of the structure and functional obsolescence as approved by the floodplain administrator but shall not include economic or other forms of external obsolescence. Use of replacement costs or accrued depreciation factors different from those contained in recognized building cost estimating guides may be considered only if such factors are included in a report prepared by an independent professional appraiser and supported by a written explanation of the differences. 
    "Mean sea level" means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map are referenced. 
    "New construction," for floodplain management purposes, means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by this community and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
    "New manufactured home park" or "subdivision" means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by this community. 
    "Obstruction" includes, but is not limited to, any dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, protection, excavation, channelization, bridge, conduit, culvert, building, wire, fence, rock, gravel, refuse, fill, structure, vegetation or other material in, along, across or projecting into any watercourse which may alter, impede, retard or change the direction and/or velocity of the flow of water or, due to its location, its propensity to snare or collect debris carried by the flow of water or its likelihood of being carried downstream. 
    "One hundred year flood" or "100 year flood." See "base flood." 
    "Public safety and nuisance" as related to Section 8.28.060, Variance Procedure, of this chapter means that the granting of a variance must not result in anything which is injurious to safety or health of an entire community or neighborhood or any considerable number of persons, or unlawfully obstructs the free passage or use, in the customary manner, of any navigable lake, or river, bay, stream, canal or basin. 
    "Recreational vehicle" means a vehicle which is: 
1.  Built on a single chassis; 
2.  Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
3.  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck; and 
4.  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use. 
    "Regulatory floodway" means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. 
    "Remedy a violation" means to bring the structure or other development into compliance with state or local floodplain management regulations or, if this is not possible, to reduce the impacts of its noncompliance. Ways that impacts may be reduced include protecting the structure or other affected development from flood damages, implementing the enforcement provisions of the chapter or otherwise deterring future similar violations or reducing state or federal financial exposure with regard to the structure or other development. 
    "Riverine" means relating to, formed by or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, etc. 
    "Sheet flow area." See "area of shallow flooding." 
    "Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA)" means an area in the floodplain subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. It is shown on an FHBM or FIRM as Zone A, AO, Al-A30, AB, A99, or AH. 
    "Start of construction" includes substantial improvement and other proposed new development and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement or other improvement was within one hundred eighty (180) days from the date of the permit The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring, of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling, nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
    "Structure" means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground, this includes a gas or liquid storage tank or a manufactured home. 
    "Substantial damage" means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
    "Substantial improvement' means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or other proposed new development of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before the "start of construction" of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage," regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either: 
1.  Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations or state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or 
2.  Any alteration of a "historic structure," provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an "historic structure." 
    "Variance" means a grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter which permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this chapter. 
    "Violation" means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with this chapter. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications or other evidence of compliance required in this chapter is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
    "Water surface elevation" means the height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 (or other datum, where specified), of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas. 
    "Watercourse" means a lake, river, creek, stream, wash, arroyo, channel or other topographic feature on or over which waters flow at least periodically. Watercourse includes specifically designated areas in which substantial flood damage may occur. 
(Ord. 2001-3 Exh. A (part), 2001) 
8.28.030 - General provisions. 
A.  Lands to Which this Chapter Applies. This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the jurisdiction of the city. 
B.  Basis for Establishing the Areas of Special Flood Hazard. The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Insurance Administration (FIA) of the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) in the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) dated January 17, 1997, and accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs) and Flood Boundary and Floodway Maps (FBFMs), dated March 18, 1996, and all subsequent amendments and/or revisions, are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. This FIS and attendant mapping is the minimum area of applicability of this chapter and may be supplemented by studies for other areas which allow implementation of this chapter and which are recommended to the city council by the floodplain administrator. The study, FIRMs, and FBFMs are on file at 15776 Main Street, City Hall, City of Hesperia, Development Services Department. 
C.  Compliance. No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted or altered without full compliance with the term of this chapter and other applicable regulations. Violation of the requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Nothing herein shall prevent the city council from taking such lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
D.  Abrogation and Greater Restrictions. This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another chapter, easement, covenant or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
E.  Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be: 
1.  Considered as minimum requirements; 
2.  Liberally construed in favor of the city council; and 
3.  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
F.  Warning and Disclaimer of Liability. The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of city council, any officer or employee thereof, the state of California or the Federal Insurance Administration, Federal Emergency Management Agency, for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. 
(Ord. 2001-3 Exh. A (part), 2001) 
8.28.040 - Administration. 
A.  Establishment of Development Permit. A development permit shall be obtained before any construction or other development begins within any area of special flood hazard established in Section 8.28.030(B). Application for a development permit shall be made on forms furnished by the floodplain administrator and may include, but not be limited to: plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions and elevation of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities; and the location of the foregoing. Specifically, the following information is required: 
1.  Site plan including, but not limited to: 
a.  For all proposed structures, spot ground elevations at building corners and twenty (20) foot or smaller intervals along the foundation footprint or one foot contour elevations throughout the building site; and 
b.  Proposed locations of water supply, sanitary sewer and utilities; and, if available, the base flood elevation from the Flood Insurance Study and/or Flood Insurance Rate Map; and 
c.  If applicable, the location of the regulatory floodway; and 
2.  Foundation design detail, including but not limited to: 
a.  Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level of the lowest floor (including basement) of all structures; and 
b.  For a crawl-space foundation, location and total net area of foundation openings as required in Section 8.28.050(A)(3)(c) of this chapter and FEMA Technical Bulletins 1-93 and 7-93; and 
c.  For foundations placed on fill, the location and height of fill and compaction requirements (compacted to ninety-five (95) percent using the Standard Proctor Test method); and 
3.  Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure will be floodproofed, required in Section 8.28.050(A)(3)(b) of this chapter and FEMA Technical Bulletin TB 3-93; and 
4.  All appropriate certifications listed in Section 8.28.040(C)(4) of this chapter; and 
5.  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development. 
B.  Designation of the Floodplain Administrator. The city engineer, or his designee, is hereby appointed to administer, implement and enforce this chapter by granting or denying development permits in accord with its provisions. 
C.  Duties and Responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator. The duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
1.  Permit Review. Review all development permits to determine that: 
a.  Permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied; 
b.  All other required state and federal permits have been obtained; 
c.  The site is reasonably safe from flooding; and 
d.  The proposed development does not adversely affect the carrying capacity of areas where base flood elevations have been determined but a floodway has not been designated. For purposes of this chapter, "adversely affects" means that the cumulative effect of the proposed development when combined with all other existing and anticipated developments will increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point. 
2.  Review, Use and Development of Other Base Flood Data. 
a.  When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with Section 8.28.030(B), the floodplain administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal or state agency or other source in order to administer Section 8.28.050. Any such information shall be submitted to the city council for adoption; or 
b.  If no base flood elevation data is available from a federal or state agency or other source, then a base flood elevation shall be obtained using one of two methods from the FEMA publication "Managing Floodplain Development in Approximate Zone A Areas - A Guide for Obtaining and Developing Base (100-year) Flood Elevations," dated July 1995, in order to administer Section 8.28.050: 
i.  Simplified Method. 
(A)  One hundred (100) year or base flood discharge shall be obtained using the appropriate regression equation found in a U.S. Geological Survey publication or the discharge-drainage area method; and 
(B)  Base flood elevation shall be obtained using the Quick-2 computer program developed by FEMA; or 
ii.  Detailed Method. 
(A)  One hundred (100) year or base flood discharge shall be obtained using the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers' HEC-HMS computer program; and 
(B)  Base flood elevation shall be obtained using the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers' HEC-RAS computer program. 
3.  Notification of Other Agencies. In alteration or relocation of a watercourse in a defined special flood hazard area: 
a.  Notify adjacent communities and the California Department of Water Resources prior to alteration or relocation; 
b.  Submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Insurance Administration, Federal Emergency Management Agency; and 
c.  Assure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse is maintained. 
4.  Documentation of Floodplain Development. Obtain and maintain for public inspection and make available as needed the following: 
a.  Certification required by Section 8.28.050(A)(3)(a) and (D), (lowest floor elevations); 
b.  Certification required by Section 8.28.050(A)(3)(b), (elevation or floodproofing of nonresidential structures); 
c.  Certification required by Sections 8.28.050(A)(3)(c), (wet floodproofing standard); 
d.  Certification of elevation required by Section 8.28.050(C)(2), (subdivision standards); 
e.  Certification required by Section 8.28.050(F)(l), (floodway encroachments); 
5.  Map Determinations. Make interpretations where needed, as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard. Where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions, grade and base flood elevations shall be used to determine the boundaries of the special flood hazard area. The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in Section 8.28.060. 
6.  Remedial Action. Take action to remedy violations of this chapter as specified in Section 8.28.030(C). 
D.  Appeals. The city council of the city shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision or determination made by the floodplain administrator in the enforcement or administration of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2001-3 Exh. A (part), 2001) 
8.28.050 - Provisions for flood hazard reduction. 
A.  Standards of Construction. In all areas of special flood hazards the following standards are required: 
1.  Anchoring. 
a.  All new construction and substantial improvements shall be adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy. 
b.  All manufactured homes shall meet the anchoring standards of Section 8.28.050(D). 
2.  Construction Materials and Methods. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed: 
a.  With flood resistant materials as specified in FEMA Technical Bulletin TB 2-93 and utility equipment resistant to flood damage; 
b.  Using methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
c.  With electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; and 
d.  If within Zones AH or AO, so that there are adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes to guide flood waters around and away from proposed structures. 
3.  Elevation and Floodproofing. (See Section 8.28.020 definitions for "basement," "lowest floor," "new construction," "substantial damage" and "substantial improvement.") 
a.  Residential construction, new or substantial improvement, shall have the lowest floor, including basement: 
i.  In an AO zone, elevated above the highest adjacent grade to a height equal to or exceeding the depth number specified in feet on the FIRM or elevated at least two feet above the highest adjacent grade if no depth number is specified; 
ii.  In an A zone, elevated to or above the base flood elevation; said base flood elevation shall be determined by one of the methods in Section 8.28.040(C)(2) of this chapter; 
iii.  In all other zones, elevated to or above the base flood elevation; 
iv.  Upon the completion of the structure, the elevation of the lowest floor including basement shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or surveyor and verified by the community building inspector to be properly elevated. Such certification and verification shall be provided to the floodplain administrator. 
b.  Nonresidential construction, new or substantial improvement, shall either be elevated to conform with Section 8.28.050(A)(3)(a) or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities: 
i.  Be floodproofed below the elevation recommended under Section 8.28.050(A)(3)(a) so that the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water; 
ii.  Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and 
iii.  Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the standards of this section are satisfied. Such certification shall be provided to the floodplain administrator. 
c.  All new construction and substantial improvement with fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor (excluding basements) that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, and which are subject to flooding, shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwater. Designs for meeting this requirement shall follow the guidelines in FEMA Technical Bulletins TB 1-93 and TB 7-93, and must exceed the following minimum criteria: 
i.  Have a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwater; or 
ii.  Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect. 
4.  Manufactured homes shall also meet the standards in Section 8.28.050(B). 
B.  Standards for Utilities. 
1.  All new and replacement water supply and sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate: 
a.  Infiltration of flood waters into the systems; and 
b.  Discharge from the systems into flood waters. 
2.  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
C.  Standards for Subdivisions. 
1.  All preliminary subdivision proposals shall identify the special flood hazard and the elevation of the base flood. 
2.  All subdivision plans will provide the elevation of the proposed structure(s) and pad(s). If the site is filled above the base flood elevation the lowest floor and pad elevations shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or surveyor and provided to the floodplain administrator. 
3.  All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage. 
4.  All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage. 
5.  All subdivisions shall provide adequate drainage to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
D.  Standards for Manufactured Homes. 
1.  All manufactured homes that are placed, or substantially improved, within Zones A1-30, AH and AE on the community's Flood Insurance Rate Map, on sites located: 
a.  Outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision; 
b.  In a new manufactured home park or subdivision; 
c.  In an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision; or 
d.  In an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on a site upon which a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as the result of a flood, shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated to or above the base flood elevation and be securely fastened to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement. 
2.  All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision within Zones A1-30, AH and AE on the community's Flood Insurance Rate Map that are not subject to the provisions of Section 8.28.050(D)(l) will be securely fastened to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement and be elevated so that either the: 
a.  Lowest floor of the manufactured home is at or above the base flood elevation; or 
b.  Manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than thirty-six (36) inches in height above grade; 
c.  Upon the completion of the structure the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement, shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or surveyor and verified by the community building inspector to be properly elevated. Such certification and verification shall be provided to the floodplain administrator. 
E.  Standards for Recreational Vehicles. 
1.  All recreational vehicles placed on sites within Zones A1-30, AH and AE on the community's Flood Insurance Rate Map will either: 
a.  Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days and be fully licensed and ready for highway use, meaning it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices and has no permanently attached additions; or 
b.  Meet the permit requirements of Section 8.28.040 of this chapter and the elevation and anchoring requirements for manufactured homes in Section 8.28.050(D)(l). 
F.  Floodways. Located within areas of special flood hazard established in Section 8.28.030(B) are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of flood waters, which carry debris, potential projectiles and erosion potential, the following provisions apply: 
1.  Encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvement and other new developments, are prohibited, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that encroachments shall not result in any increase in the base flood elevation during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
2.  If Section 828.050(F)(l) is satisfied, all new construction, substantial improvement and other proposed new development shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of Section 8.28.050. 
G.  Flood-Related Erosion-Prone Area. 
1.  The floodplain administrator shall require permits for proposed construction and other development within all flood-related erosion-prone areas as known to the community. 
2.  Permit applications shall be reviewed to determine whether the proposed site alterations and improvements will be reasonably safe from flood-related erosion and will not cause flood-related erosion hazards or otherwise aggravate the existing hazard. 
3.  If a proposed improvement is found to be in the path of flood-related erosion or would increase the erosion hazard, such improvement shall be relocated or adequate protective measures shall be taken to avoid aggravating the existing erosion hazard. 
(Ord. 2001-3 Exh. A (part), 2001) 
8.28.060 - Variance procedure. 
A.  Nature of Variances. The variance criteria set forth in this section of the chapter are based on the general principle of zoning law that variances pertain to a piece of property and are not personal in nature. A variance may be granted for a parcel of property with physical characteristics so unusual that complying with the requirements of this chapter would create an exceptional hardship to the applicant or the surrounding property owners. The characteristics must be unique to the property and not be shared by adjacent parcels. The unique characteristic must pertain to the land itself, not to the structure, its inhabitants, or the property owners. 
    It is the duty of the city council to help protect its citizens from flooding. This need is so compelling and the implications of the cost of insuring a structure built below flood level are so serious that variances from the flood elevation or from other requirements in the flood chapter are quite rare. The long term goal of preventing and reducing flood loss and damage can only be met if variances are strictly limited. Therefore, the variance guidelines provided in this chapter are more detailed and contain multiple provisions that must be met before a variance can be properly granted. The criteria are designed to screen out those situations in which alternatives other than a variance are more appropriate. 
B.  Appeal Board. 
1.  In passing upon requests for variances, the city council shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other sections of this chapter and the: 
a.  Danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others; 
b.  Danger of life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
c.  Susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the existing individual owner and future owners of the property; 
d.  Importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community; 
e.  Necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable; 
f.  Availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage; 
g.  Compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development; 
h.  Relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area; 
i.  safety of access to the property in time of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
j.  Expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the flood waters expected at the site; and 
k.  Costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water system and streets and bridges. 
2.  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice over the signature of a community official that: 
a.  The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for one hundred dollars ($100.00) of insurance coverage; and 
b.  Such construction below the base flood level increases risks to life and property. It is recommended that a copy of the notice shall be recorded by the floodplain administrator in the office of the San Bernardino county recorder and shall be recorded in a manner so that it appears in the chain of title of the affected parcel of land. 
3.  The floodplain administrator will maintain a record of all variance actions, including justification for their issuance, and report such variances issued in its biennial report submitted to the Federal Insurance Administration, Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
C.  Conditions for Variances. 
1.  Generally, variances may be issued for new construction, substantial improvement and other proposed new development to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing that the procedures of Sections 8.28.040 and 8.28.050 of this chapter have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases. 
2.  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of "historic structures" (as defined in Section 8.23.020 of this chapter) upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
3.  Variances shall not be issued within any mapped regulatory floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
4.  Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the "minimum necessary" considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. "Minimum necessary" means to afford relief with a minimum of deviation from the requirements of this chapter. For example, in the case of variances to an elevation requirement, this means the city council need not grant permission for the applicant to build at grade or even to whatever elevation the applicant proposes, but only to that elevation which the city council believes will both provide relief and preserve the integrity of the local chapter. 
5.  Variances shall only be issued upon a: 
a.  Showing of good and sufficient cause; 
b.  Determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional "hardship" (as defined in Section 8.28.020 of this chapter) to the applicant; and 
c.  Determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, or extraordinary public expense, create a nuisance (as defined in Section 8.28.020; see "Public safety or nuisance."), cause fraud or victimization (as defined in Section 8.28.020) of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or chapters. 
6.  Variances may be issued for new construction, substantial improvement and other proposed new development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that the provisions of Sections 8.28.060(C)(l) through 8.28.060(C)(3) are satisfied and that the structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and does not result in additional threats to public safety and does not create a public nuisance. 
7.  Upon consideration of the factors of Section 8.28.060(B)(1) and the purposes of this chapter, the city council may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2001-3 Exh. A (part), 2001) 
Chapter 8.32 - PUBLIC NUISANCES 

8.32.010 - Trash and debris. 
A.  Accumulated trash and debris shall be declared a public nuisance and shall not be kept, stored, or maintained by any person owning, leasing, occupying, or having charge or possession of any real property. It shall also be considered a public nuisance for any person to dump, drop, bury, or otherwise dispose of trash and/or debris on public or private property not under ownership of said person. Trash and debris shall include, but not be limited to, boxes, containers, broken or discarded furniture, household goods, appliances, inoperable equipment and/or machine parts, clothing, cans, bottles, lumber, wood, metals, garbage, rags, discarded bedding, plastics, tires, refuse, animal wastes not picked up on a weekly basis, excessive amounts of yard and tree trimmings, and any other material which interferes with the neighbors' reasonable enjoyment of their property. 
B.  Exceptions. 
1.  Materials safely stored within a legally permitted structure not violating any other provisions of this code; 
2.  Firewood (five cords or less) stored on site for use entirely by the building occupants on site; 
3.  Material storage permitted by other provisions of this code; 
4.  Materials which are bundled, boxed, or stored and waiting for the next available removal by the franchised waste hauler; 
5.  Refuse or containers or receptacles for refuse placed in the public street or right-of-way after sunset of the day preceding the designated collection day and by eight p.m. of the day after the containers or receptacles have been emptied. 
(Ord. 286 § 4 (Exh. A (part)), 1999) 
8.32.020 - Inoperative vehicles. 
A.  Inoperative vehicles as described in Section 1.04.050 are declared a public nuisance and shall not be kept, stored or maintained by any person owning, leasing, occupying or having charge or possession of any real property. Inoperative vehicles shall include the presence of any abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle or parts thereof on public or private property, not including highways. This section shall not preclude any other legal method enacted by the city or state to remove abandoned vehicles. 
B.  Exception. 
1.  Vehicles or parts completely enclosed within buildings permitted for such use and not visible from the public right-of-way or public or private property; 
2.  Vehicles or parts thereof, legally stored or parked on private property in connection with a licensed vehicle dealer, licensed dismantler, licensed junk dealer, or when such storage or parking is necessary to the operations of a lawfully established business; 
3.  Not more than two vehicles may be stored in a rear yard area at least fifteen (15) feet from any residence, if not encroaching within the building setback areas. 
(Ord. 286 § 4 (Exh. A (part)), 1999) 
8.32.022 - Nuisance vehicles. 
A.  Any vehicle used to illegally dump refuse, recyclable material, solid waste, septage, construction or demolition waste, or any other waste material is declared a public nuisance. 
B.  Any vehicle used to solicit an act of prostitution and/or used to acquire or attempt to acquire, or to transport any controlled substance is declared a public nuisance. 
C.  Any off-highway or other vehicle operated within the public right-of-way without a proper license, or operated in violation of any other section of this code or of the California Vehicle Code is declared a public nuisance. 
D.  Any off-highway vehicle driven or operated on lands belonging to or occupied by another, without having in the drivers or operators immediate possession, written permission of the landowner or responsible person, is declared a public nuisance. 
E.  Any off-highway vehicle driven or operated within two hundred (200) yards of an occupied dwelling, church, school, office, medical facility, assembly building, recreational facility or other facility occupied by human beings; or within two hundred (200) yards of a barn, stable, or pasture used for the keeping of animals, is declared a public nuisance. 
F.  This section shall not apply to the use of farm vehicles for agricultural purposes, vehicles used for construction and grading purposes, vehicles used for governmental purposes; golf carts being used on golf courses and, off-highway vehicles used on a permitted race track or off-highway vehicle park. 
(Ord. 2004-21 § 4 (Exh. B), 2004) 
8.32.030 - Health and safety. 
    The following health and safety concerns are declared a public nuisance and shall not be kept, stored, maintained or allowed by any person owning, leasing, occupying or having charge or possession of any real property. Health and safety nuisances shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
A.  Open, unused, or abandoned wells, pools, ponds, pits, shafts, and other unsafe and/or unsecured situations; 
B.  Manure or rubbish accumulations not disposed of on a weekly basis; 
C.  Animal carcasses for animals not weighing more than one hundred (100) pounds not buried or destroyed within twenty-four (24) hours of the animal's death. Animal carcasses for animals greater than one hundred (100) pounds must be removed by or delivered to a licensed disposal service within twenty-four (24) hours of the animal's death; 
D.  Any hazardous or infectious material including, but not limited to, explosives, dangerous substances, toxic substances, sewage, human waste, gray water and infectious wastes, not kept with appropriate permits. Gray water shall be used in compliance with state law; 
E.  Outdoor water usage causing water to run onto the public right-of-way; 
F.  Breeding or harborage places for animals known to carry or transmit disease to humans (e.g., mosquito breeding in stored tires where rainwater can be trapped); 
G.  Other conditions which may be detrimental to public health and safety as defined in the California Health and Safety Code; 
H.  Outside storage of operable or inoperable refrigerators, freezers, washing machines, dishwashers, televisions, clothes dryers or other appliances; 
I.  Any pool, pond or body of water which contains excessive or unhealthy levels of bacterial or algal growth, remains of animals or insects, refuse, debris, or any other foreign matter which may cause an unhealthy or unsafe condition. 
(Ord. 286 § 4 (Exh. A (part)), 1999) 
8.32.040 - Property maintenance. 
    Any property upon which any of the following unpermitted conditions exists shall be deemed to be a public nuisance: 
A.  Any grading or construction, including but not limited to walls and fences, which increases, concentrates, or redirects storm flows which can or may cause damage to adjacent or nearby public property; 
B.  Any hole, trench, ditch, or excavation greater than two feet in depth with sides steeper than two horizontal to one vertical (2:1); 
C.  Any attractive nuisance as defined in Section 1.04.050 where minors may be injured; 
D.  Improper maintenance of landscaping or irrigation systems required as part of a city land use approval; 
E.  Encroachment by any structure within required building setbacks; 
F.  Overgrown or unmaintained vegetation that may cause detriment to neighboring properties or may cause a hazardous condition for motorists or pedestrians; 
G.  Dead or dying plants or trees which may be dangerous to the public; 
H.  Any vehicle or trailer parked on or near the public right-of-way for the primary purpose of advertising or directing attention to a place of business. This shall not apply to the business owner's vehicle when located at his/her place of business; 
I.  A clothesline, or clothes, hanging in the front yard or on fences in other yards; 
J.  Buildings, structures, walls, fences, or yard enclosures constructed of unapproved materials or improperly maintained. Improperly maintained may include but not be limited to; listing from the vertical axis, moveable with a lateral force of ten pounds or less, dilapidation or similar structural deficiency. (See Chapter 16.20.080 for approved materials) 
(Ord. 286 § 4 (Exh. A (part)), 1999) 
(Ord. No. 2019-01 , § 3(Exh. A), 2-5-19) 
8.32.050 - Dangerous buildings. 
    Any building or structure which has any of the conditions described hereinafter shall be deemed to be a dangerous building and a public nuisance. 
A.  Whenever any door, aisle, passageway, stairway or other means of exit is not of sufficient width or size or is not so arranged as to provide safe and adequate means of exit in case of fire or panic. 
B.  Whenever the walking surface of any aisle, passageway, stairway or other means of exit is so warped, worn, loose, torn or otherwise unsafe as to not provide safe and adequate means of exit in case of fire or panic. 
C.  Whenever the stress in any materials, member or portion thereof, due to all dead and live loads, is more than one and one half times the working stress or stresses allowed in the building code for new buildings of similar structure, purpose or location. 
D.  Whenever any portion thereof has been damaged by fire, earthquake, wind, flood or by any other cause, to such an extent that the structural strength or stability thereof is materially less than it was before such catastrophe and is less than the minimum requirements of the building code for new buildings of similar structure, purpose or location. 
E.  Whenever any portion or member or appurtenance thereof is likely to fail, or to become detached or dislodged, or to collapse and thereby injure persons or damage property. 
F.  Whenever any portion of a building, or any member, appurtenance or ornamentation on the exterior thereof is not of sufficient strength or stability, or is not so anchored, attached or fastened in place so as to be capable of resisting a wind pressure of one half of that specified in the building code for new buildings of similar structure, purpose or location without exceeding the working stresses permitted in the building code for such buildings. 
G.  Whenever any portion thereof has wracked, warped, buckled or settled to such an extent that walls or other structural portions have materially less resistance to winds or earthquakes than is required in the case of similar new construction. 
H.  Whenever the building or structure, or any portion thereof, because of: 
1.  Dilapidation, deterioration or decay; 
2.  Faulty construction; 
3.  The removal, movement or instability of any portion of the ground necessary for the purpose of supporting such building; 
4.  The deterioration, decay or inadequacy of its foundation; or 
5.  Any other cause, is likely to partially or completely collapse. 
I.  Whenever, for any reason, the building or structure, or any portion thereof, is manifestly unsafe for the purpose for which it is being used. 
J.  Whenever the exterior walls or other vertical structural members list, lean or buckle to such an extent that a plumb line passing through the center of gravity does not fall inside the middle one third of the base. 
K.  Whenever the building or structure, exclusive of the foundation, shows thirty-three (33) percent or more damage or deterioration of its supporting member or members, or fifty (50) percent damage or deterioration of its nonsupporting members, enclosing or outside walls or coverings. 
L.  Whenever the building or structure has been so damaged by fire, wind, earthquake or flood, or has become so dilapidated or deteriorated as to become: 
(1)  an attractive nuisance to children; 
(2)  a harbor for vagrants, criminals or immoral persons; or as to 
(3)  enable persons to resort thereto for the purpose of committing unlawful or immoral acts. 
M.  Whenever any building or structure has been constructed, exists or is maintained in violation of any specific requirements or prohibition applicable to such building or structure provided by the building regulations of this jurisdiction, as specified in the building code or Section 8.32.060 or of any law or ordinance of this state or jurisdiction relating to the condition, location or structure of buildings. 
N.  Whenever any building or structure which, whether or not erected in accordance with all applicable laws and ordinances, has in any nonsupporting part, member or portion less than fifty (50) percent, or in any supporting part, member or portion less than sixty-six (66) percent of the (1) strength, (2) fire-resisting qualities or characteristics, or (3) weather-resisting qualities or characteristics required by law in the case of a newly constructed building of like area, height and occupancy in the same location. 
O.  Whenever a building or structure, used or intended to be used for dwelling purposes, because of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, decay, damage, faulty construction or arrangement, inadequate light, air or sanitation facilities, or otherwise, is determined by the health officer to be unsanitary, unfit for human habitation or in such a condition that is likely to cause sickness or disease. 
P.  Whenever any building or structure, because of obsolescence, dilapidated condition, deterioration, damage, inadequate exits, lack of sufficient fire-resistive construction, faulty electric wiring, gas connections or heating apparatus, or other cause, is determined by the fire marshal to be a fire hazard. 
Q.  Whenever any building or structure is in such a condition as to constitute a public nuisance known to the common law or in equity jurisprudence. 
R.  Whenever any portion of a building or structure remains on a site after the demolition or destruction of the building or structure or whenever any building or structure is abandoned for a period in excess of six months so as to continue such building or portion thereof an attractive nuisance or hazard to the public. 
S.  Any building or structure used for the purpose of unlawfully selling, serving, storing, keeping, manufacturing, or giving away any controlled substance as specified in California Health and Safety Code, Section 11570. 
T.  Any building or structure wherein any activity declared illegal or unlawful by any other applicable federal, state, county or local law or ordinance is conducted, including but not limited to, gang activity in California Penal Code Section 186.22(a). 
(Ord. 260 § 3 (part), 1997) 
8.32.060 - Substandard housing. 
    Any dwelling or building or structure used as a dwelling which has any of the conditions described hereinafter shall be deemed to be a public nuisance. 
A.  Inadequate sanitation shall include but not be limited to the following: 
1.  Lack of, or improper water closet, lavatory, bathtub or shower in a dwelling unit or lodging house. 
2.  Lack of, or improper water closets, lavatories and bathtubs or showers per number of guests in a hotel. 
3.  Lack of, or improper kitchen sink in a dwelling unit. 
4.  Lack of hot and cold running water to plumbing fixtures in a hotel. 
5.  Lack of hot and cold running water to plumbing fixtures in a dwelling unit or lodging house. 
6.  Lack of adequate heating facilities. 
7.  Lack of, or improper operation of required ventilating equipment. 
8.  Lack of minimum amounts of natural light and ventilation required by this code. 
9.  Room and space dimensions less than required by this code. 
10.  Lack of required electrical lighting. 
11.  Dampness of habitable rooms. 
12.  Infestation of insects, vermin or rodents. 
13.  General dilapidation or improper maintenance. 
14.  Lack of connection to required sewage disposal system. 
15.  Lack of adequate garbage and rubbish storage and removal facilities. 
B.  Structural Hazards. Structural hazards shall include but not be limited to the following: 
1.  Deteriorated or inadequate foundations. 
2.  Defective or deteriorated flooring or floor supports. 
3.  Flooring or floor supports of insufficient size to carry imposed loads with safety. 
4.  Members of walls, partitions or other vertical supports that split, lean, list or buckle due to defective material or deterioration. 
5.  Members of walls, partitions or other vertical supports that are of insufficient size to carry imposed loads with safety. 
6.  Members of ceilings, roofs, ceiling and roof supports or other horizontal members which sag, split or buckle due to defective material or deterioration. 
7.  Members of ceilings, roofs, ceiling and roof supports, or other horizontal members that are of insufficient size to carry imposed loads with safety. 
8.  Fireplaces or chimneys which list, bulge or settle due to defective material or deterioration. 
9.  Fireplaces or chimneys which are of insufficient size or strength to carry imposed loads with safety. 
C.  Occupancy Requirements. 
1.  Yards. Every yard having required window openings therein shall not be less than three feet in width for one-story and two-story buildings. For buildings more than two stories in height, the minimum width of the yard shall be increased at the rate of one foot for each additional story. Where yards completely surround the building, the required width may be reduced by one foot. For buildings exceeding fourteen (14) stories in height, the required width of yard shall be computed on the basis of fourteen (14) stories. 
2.  Courts. Every court as defined in the building code having required window openings therein shall not be less than three feet in width. Courts having windows opening on opposite sides shall not be less than six feet in width. Courts bounded on three or more sides by the walls of the building shall not be less than ten (10) feet in length unless bounded on one end by a public way or yard. For buildings more than two stories in height, the court shall be increased one foot in width and two feet in length for each additional story. For buildings exceeding fourteen (14) stories in height, the required dimensions shall be computed on the basis of fourteen (14) stories. 
    Adequate access shall be provided to the bottom of all courts for cleaning purposes. Every court more than two stories in height shall be provided with a horizontal air intake at the bottom not less than ten (10) square feet in area and leading to the exterior of the building unless abutting a yard or public way. The construction of the air intake shall be as required for the court walls of the building, but in no case shall be less than one-hour fire-resistive. 
3.  Ceiling Heights. Habitable space shall have a ceiling height of not less than seven feet six inches except as otherwise permitted in this section. Kitchens, halls, bathrooms and toilet compartments may have a ceiling height of not less than seven feet measured to the lowest projection from the ceiling. Where exposed beam ceiling members are spaced at less than forty-eight (48) inches on center, ceiling height shall be measured to the bottom of these members. Where exposed beam ceiling members are spaced at forty-eight (48) inches or more on center, ceiling height shall be measured to the bottom of the deck supported by these members, provided that the bottom of the members is not less than seven feet above the floor. 
    If any room in a building has a sloping ceiling, the prescribed ceiling height for the room is required in only one-half the area thereof. No portion of the room measuring less than five feet from the finished floor to the finished ceiling shall be included in any computation of the minimum area thereof. 
    If any room has a furred ceiling, the prescribed ceiling height is required in two-thirds the area thereof, but in no case shall the height of the furred ceiling be less than seven feet. 
4.  Floor Area. Dwelling units and congregate residences shall have at least one room which shall have not less than one hundred twenty (120) square feet of floor area. Other habitable rooms, except kitchens, shall have an area of not less than seventy (70) square feet. Where more than two persons occupy a room for sleeping purposes, the required floor area shall be increased at the rate of fifty (50) square feet for each occupant in excess of two. 
    Exception. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the use of an efficiency living unit within an apartment house meeting the following requirements: 
a.  The unit shall have a living room of not less than two hundred twenty (220) square feet of superficial floor area. An additional one hundred (100) square feet of superficial floor shall be provided for each occupant of such unit in excess of two. 
b.  The unit shall be provided with a separate closet. 
c.  The unit shall be provided with a kitchen sink, cooking appliance and refrigeration facilities, each having a clear working space of not less than thirty (30) inches in front. Light and ventilation conforming to this code shall be provided. 
d.  The unit shall be provided with a separate bathroom containing a water closet, lavatory and bathtub or shower. 
5.  Room Width. No habitable room other than a kitchen shall be less than seven feet in any dimension. 
    Each water closet stool shall be located in a clear space not less than thirty (30) inches in width and a clear space in front of the water closet stool of not less than twenty-four (24) inches shall be provided. 
6.  Light and Ventilation. 
a.  General. For the purpose of determining the light or ventilation required by this section, any room may be considered as a portion of any adjoining room when one half of the area of the common wall is open and unobstructed and provides an opening of not less than one tenth of the floor area of the interior room or twenty-five (25) square feet, whichever is greater. 
    Exterior openings for natural light or ventilation required by this section shall open directly onto a public way or a yard or court located on the same lot as the building. 
    Exceptions: 
a.  Required windows may open into a roofed porch where the porch: 
i.  Abuts a public way, yard or court; and 
ii.  Has a ceiling height of not less than seven feet; and 
iii.  Has a longer side at least sixty-five (65) percent open and unobstructed. 
b.  Skylights. 
b.  Light. Guest rooms and habitable rooms within a dwelling unit or congregate residence shall be provided with natural light by means of exterior glazed openings with an area not less than one tenth of the floor area of such rooms with a minimum of ten square feet. 
c.  Ventilation. Guest rooms and habitable rooms within a dwelling unit or congregate residence shall be provided with natural ventilation by means of openable exterior openings with an area of not less than one twentieth of the floor area of such rooms with a minimum of five square feet. 
    In lieu of required exterior openings for natural ventilation, a mechanical ventilating system may be provided. Such system shall be capable of providing two air changes per hour in all guest rooms, dormitories, habitable rooms and in public corridors. One fifth of the air supply shall be taken from the outside. 
    Bathrooms, water closet compartments, laundry rooms and similar rooms shall be provided with natural ventilation by means of openable exterior openings with an area not less than one twentieth of the floor area of such rooms with a minimum of one and one-half square feet. 
    In lieu of required exterior openings for natural ventilation in bathrooms containing a bathtub or shower or combination thereof, laundry rooms, and similar rooms, a mechanical ventilation system connected directly to the outside capable of providing five air changes per hour shall be provided. The point of discharge of exhaust air shall be at least three feet from any opening into the building. Bathrooms which contain only a water closet or lavatory or combination thereof, and similar rooms may be ventilated with an approved mechanical recirculating fan or similar device designed to remove odors from the air. 
d.  Hallways. All public hallways, stairs and other exitways shall be adequately lighted at all times in accordance with Section 1012.1 of the building code. 
7.  Sanitation. Buildings or portions thereof shall be deemed substandard when they are unsanitary. 
a.  Dwelling Units, Lodging Houses and Congregate Residences. Dwelling units, lodging houses and congregate residences shall be provided with a bathroom equipped with facilities consisting of a water closet, lavatory, and either a bathtub or shower. 
b.  Hotels. Hotels or subdivisions thereof where both sexes are accommodated shall contain at least two separate toilet facilities which are conspicuously identified for male or female use, each of which contains at least one water closet. 
    Exception. Hotel guest rooms may have one unidentified toilet facility. 
    Additional water closets shall be provided on each floor for each sex at the rate of one for every additional ten guests, or fractional part thereof, in excess of ten. 
c.  Kitchen. Each dwelling unit shall be provided with a kitchen. Every kitchen shall be provided with kitchen sink. Wooden sinks or sinks of similarly absorbent material shall not be permitted. 
d.  Fixtures. All plumbing fixtures shall be connected to a sanitary sewer or to an approved private sewage disposal system. All plumbing fixtures shall be connected to an approved system of water supply and provided with hot and cold running water necessary for its normal operation. 
    All plumbing fixtures shall be of an approved glazed earthenware type or of a similarly nonabsorbent material. 
e.  Water Closet Compartments. Walls and floors of water closet compartments, except in dwellings, shall be finished in accordance with Section 806 of the building code. 
f.  Room Separations. Every water closet, bathtub or shower required by this code shall be installed in a room which will afford privacy to the occupant. 
g.  Installation and Maintenance. All sanitary facilities shall be installed and maintained in a safe and sanitary condition and in accordance with applicable requirements of the plumbing code. 
8.  Heating and Ventilation. 
a.  Heating. Dwelling units, guest rooms and congregate residences shall be provided with heating facilities capable of maintaining a room temperature of seventy (70) degrees F at a point three feet above the floor in all habitable rooms. Such facilities shall be installed and maintained in a safe condition and in accordance with Section 3102 of the building code, the mechanical code, and all other applicable laws. Unvented fuel-burning heaters are not permitted. All heating devices or appliances shall be of an approved type. 
b.  Electrical Equipment. All electrical equipment, wiring and appliances shall be installed and maintained in a safe manner in accordance with all applicable laws. All electrical equipment shall be of an approved type. 
    Where there is electrical power available within three hundred (300) feet of any building, such building shall be connected to such electrical power. Every habitable room shall contain at least two electrical convenience outlets or one convenience outlet and one electric light fixture. Every water closet compartment, bathroom, laundry room, furnace room and public hallway shall contain at least one electric light fixture. 
c.  Ventilation. Ventilation for rooms and areas and for fuel-burning appliances shall be provided as required in the mechanical code and in this code. Where mechanical ventilation is provided in lieu of the natural ventilation, such mechanical ventilating system shall be maintained in operation during the occupancy of any building or portion thereof. 
9.  Exits. Dwelling units or guest rooms shall have access directly to the outside or to a public corridor. All buildings or portions thereof shall be provided with exits, exitways and appurtenances as required by Chapter 10 of the building code. 
    Sleeping rooms below the fourth story shall have at least one operable window or exterior door approved for emergency escape or rescue. The units shall be operable from the inside to provide a full clear opening without the use of separate tools. 
    Inadequate Exits. Except for those buildings or portions thereof which have been provided with adequate exit facilities conforming to the provisions of this code, buildings or portions thereof whose exit facilities were installed in violation of code requirements in effect at the time of their construction or whose exit facilities have not been increased in number or width in relation to any increase in occupant load due to alterations, additions or change in use or occupancy subsequent to the time of construction shall be considered substandard. 
    Notwithstanding compliance with code requirements in effect at the time of their construction, buildings or portions thereof shall be considered substandard when the building official finds that an unsafe condition exists through an improper location of exits, a lack of an adequate number or width of exit, or when other conditions exist which are dangerous to human life. 
D.  Hazardous Electrical Wiring. Electrical wiring which was installed in violation of code requirements in effect at the time of installation or electrical wiring not installed in accordance with generally accepted construction practices in areas where no codes were in effect or which has not been maintained in good condition or which is not being used in a safe manner shall be considered substandard. 
E.  Hazardous Plumbing. Plumbing which was installed in violation of code requirements in effect at the time of installation or plumbing not installed in accordance with generally accepted construction practices in areas where no codes were in effect or which has not been maintained in good condition or which is not free of cross-connections or siphonage between fixtures shall be considered substandard. 
F.  Hazardous Mechanical Equipment. Mechanical equipment which was installed in violation of code requirements in effect at the time of installation or mechanical equipment not installed in accordance with generally accepted construction practices in areas where no codes were in effect or which has not been maintained in good and safe condition shall be considered substandard. 
G.  Faulty Weather Protection. Buildings or portions thereof shall be considered substandard when they have faulty weather protection which shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
1.  Deteriorated, crumbling or loose plaster. 
2.  Deteriorated or ineffective waterproofing of exterior walls, roof, foundations or floors, including broken windows or doors. 
3.  Defective or lack of weather protection for exterior wall coverings, including lack of paint, or weathering due to lack of paint or other approved protective covering. 
4.  Broken, rotted, split or buckled exterior wall coverings or roof coverings. 
H.  Fire Hazard. All buildings or portions thereof shall be provided with the degree of fire-resistive construction as required by the building code for the appropriate occupancy, type of construction and location on property, and shall be provided with the appropriate fire-extinguishing systems or equipment required by Chapter 9 of the building code. 
    Any building or portion thereof, device, apparatus, equipment, combustible waste or vegetation which, in the opinion of the chief of the fire department, is in such a condition as to cause a fire or explosion or provide a ready fuel to augment the spread and intensity of fire or explosion arising from any cause shall be considered a substandard building. 
    Inadequate Fire-Protection or Firefighting Equipment. Buildings or portions thereof shall be considered substandard when they are not provided with the fire-resistive construction or fire-extinguishing systems or equipment required by this code except those buildings or portions thereof which conformed with all applicable laws at the time of their construction and whose fire-resistive integrity and fire-extinguishing systems or equipment have been adequately maintained and improved in relation to any increase in occupant load, alteration or addition, or any change in occupancy. 
I.  Improper Occupancy. All buildings or portions thereof occupied for living, sleeping, cooking or dining purposes which were not designed or intended to be used for such occupancies shall be considered substandard. 
(Ord. 260 § 3 (part), 1997) 
8.32.070 - Signs. 
    Any sign for which any of the following conditions apply shall be deemed a public nuisance. 
A.  The maintenance or display of signs on real property which advertise a use, product or service that is no longer offered. 
B.  Signs, other than permitted billboards, advertising any business or activity which is not currently licensed or otherwise permitted in the city. 
    Exception. Signs advertising public facilities or public events sponsored by governmental agencies. 
C.  Signs for which all required permits and city approvals have not been first obtained or signs which are otherwise prohibited by the Hesperia Municipal Code. 
D.  Signs, any support structures and copy surfaces thereof, which are in a state of disrepair or deterioration, or which are not legible for any reason from the perimeter of the real property on which they are located. 
(Ord. 260 § 3 (part), 1997) 
8.32.080 - Development code violations. 
    Any violation of any provision of Title 16, commonly known as the development code or its successor sections, is declared a public nuisance. 
(Ord. 260 § 3 (part), 1997) 
8.32.090 - Animals habitually making noise deemed a nuisance. 
    Any animal kept, allowed to be kept or permitted to remain on the premises of property that is zoned for residential use that habitually barks, crows, whines or makes other loud or unusual noises, regardless of the time, shall be declared a nuisance when the noise interferes with the reasonable enjoyment of a persons property by a person of ordinary sensitivities. 
(Ord. 2001-2 § 4, 2001) 
Chapter 8.34 - FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS 

8.34.010 - Scope. 
    The provisions of this section for the inspection grading of food establishments shall apply at all times, or at those times herein specified, anywhere within the city that food and/or beverage products are sold or served. 
(Ord. 2005-26 § 3 (part), 2005) 
8.34.020 - Adoption of San Bernardino County Ordinance. 
A.  The city of Hesperia adopts and makes a part of this section by reference, San Bernardino County Ordinance No. 3930 related to the inspection and grading of food establishments. 
B.  The aforementioned sections of the San Bernardino County Code, adopted by San Bernardino County Ordinance No. 3930, are adopted as the inspection grading and food establishments program of the city of Hesperia. 
(Ord. 2005-26 § 3 (part), 2005) 
8.34.030 - Enforcement agency designated. 
    The county of San Bernardino, Department of Public Health, Division of Environmental Health Services is designated as the enforcement agency for the city and is authorized to provide the qualified personnel necessary to enforce the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. 2005-26 § 3 (part), 2005) 
8.34.040 - Schedule and collection of fees. 
    The schedule of fees contained within San Bernardino County Ordinance No. 3930, adopted herein, is hereby adopted as the fees in effect in the city and shall be applicable within the city to provide for the costs of administration and enforcement of this section. The city council finds and determines that the fees adopted herein are reasonably related to the actual cost of administration and enforcement of the program. The San Bernardino County, Division of Environmental Health Services shall collect these fees for deposit with the county treasurer to offset the costs assumed by the county in administering and enforcing the program, for and within the city of Hesperia. 
(Ord. 2005-26 § 3 (part), 2005) 
8.34.050 - Violations-Penalty. 
A.  It is unlawful to operate a food establishment, unless the letter grade card issued by the Division of Environmental Health Services is posted in a prominent place, easily viewed by the public. 
B.  In accordance with Section 33.1406(c) of the San Bernardino County Code, adopted by reference herein and applicable to this section, the letter grade card posted in accordance with the program shall not be defaced, marred, camouflaged, hidden or removed. 
C.  Removal of the letter grade card is a violation of this section and may result in the suspension or revocation of the public health permit and shall be punishable as specified in Section 33.0112 of the San Bernardino County Code, which is adopted herein and incorporated by reference. 
(Ord. 2005-26 § 3 (part), 2005) 
Title 9 - PUBLIC PEACE, MORALS AND WELFARE 
Chapters: 
Chapter 9.04 - CURFEW REGULATIONS 
Sections: 

9.04.010 - Curfew hours. 
    Every person under the age of eighteen (18) years who loiters about the public streets, avenues, alleys, sidewalks, parks or public places of the city of Hesperia, state of California, between the hour of ten p.m. and the time of sunrise the following day, when not accompanied by his parent or legal guardian having legal custody and control of such person, or spouse of such person over twenty-one (21) years of age, is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 25.011) 
9.04.020 - Responsibility of parents. 
    Every parent, guardian, or other person having the legal care, custody or control of any person under the age of eighteen (18) years who allows or permits such person to violate any provisions of this chapter, is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 25.012) 
Chapter 9.08 - GRAFFITI 
Sections: 

9.08.010 - Purpose and intent. 
A.  The city council of the city specifically finds that graffiti on public or private property is a blighting factor which not only depreciates the value of property which has been the target of such vandalism but also depreciates the value of the adjacent and surrounding properties so as to create a negative impact upon the entire city. 
B.  California Government Code Section 53069.3 authorizes the city, under certain circumstances, to provide for the removal of graffiti and other inscribed materials from private as well as public property. The council finds and determines that graffiti is obnoxious and a public nuisance and, unless the city causes it to be removed from public and private property, it tends to remain. Other properties then become the target of graffiti with the result that entire neighborhoods are affected and become less desirable places in which to be. Graffiti also has been found to be a means of identification utilized by gangs and its presence may encourage further gang-related activities. 
C.  It is the purpose and intent of the city council, through the adoption of this chapter, to provide additional enforcement tools to protect public and private property from acts of vandalism and defacement, including the application of graffiti on privately and publicly owned walls and structures. Such acts are inimical to, and destructive of, the rights and values of private property owners as well as the total community. It is the further intent of the city council, through the adoption of this chapter, to provide notice to all of those who disregard the property rights of others, that the law enforcement agencies of the city will strictly enforce the law and vigorously prosecute those persons engaging in the defacement of public and private properties. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; Ord. 173 § 2 (1), 1993) 
9.08.030 - Unlawful to apply graffiti. 
    It is unlawful for any person to apply graffiti to any public or privately owned tree, rock, or structure, including, but not limited to, buildings, walls, fences, poles, signs, flood control channels, concrete, and paving ("structures" hereinafter in this chapter) located within the city. It is also unlawful for any person to apply or affix any adhesive backed label, sticker, "bumper sticker" or similar item, to any tree, rock, or structure not owned or lawfully possessed by such person. 
(Ord. 2008-13 § 1, 2008: Ord. 250 (part), 1997; Ord. 173 § 2 (3), 1993) 
9.08.040 - Possession of graffiti implements by minors prohibited. 
    It is unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen (18) years to have in his or her possession any graffiti implement while upon public property or upon private property without the consent of the owner of such private property, whose consent to such possession and presence is given in writing in advance. This provision shall not apply to the possession of felt tip markers by minors attending or traveling to or from a school at which the minor is enrolled, if the minor is participating in a class at the school which formally requires the possession of such felt tip markers. The burden of proof in any prosecution for violation of this section shall be upon the minor student to establish the need to possess a felt tip marker. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; Ord. 173 § 2 (4), 1993) 
9.08.050 - Possession of graffiti implements prohibited in designated public places. 
    It is unlawful for any person to have in his or her possession any graffiti implement while in any public park, playground, swimming pool, recreational facility, or while in or within ten feet of an underpass, bridge abutment, storm drain or other similar type of infrastructure not normally used by the public, except as may be authorized by the city. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; Ord. 173 § 2 (5), 1993) 
9.08.060 - Accessibility to graffiti implements. 
A.  Furnishing to Minors Prohibited. It is unlawful for any person, other than a parent or legal guardian, to sell, exchange, give, loan or otherwise furnish, or cause or permit to be exchanged, given loaned or otherwise furnished, any graffiti implement to any minor without the consent of the parent or lawful guardian which consent shall be given in advance in writing. 
B.  Display Requirements. No person or business engaged in a commercial enterprise shall display for sale, trade or exchange, any graffiti implement except in an area from which the public shall be securely precluded without employee assistance. Two such acceptable methods for displaying graffiti implements for sale shall be by containment in: (1) a completely enclosed cabinet or other storage device which shall be permanently affixed to a building or structure, and which shall, at all times except during access by authorized representatives, remain securely locked; or (2) in an enclosed area behind a sales or service counter from which the public is precluded from entry. Nothing herein shall relieve such person or business entity from, at all times, complying with the requirements of California Penal Code Section 594.1(c) by posting signs as described therein. 
C.  Storage Requirements. No person or business engaged in the business of selling, providing or trading graffiti implements shall store any graffiti implement except in either: (1) a completely enclosed room which shall, at all times except during access or actual occupancy by the owner or an authorized adult representative of the owner, remain securely locked; or (2) in a completely enclosed cabinet or other storage device which shall be permanently affixed to a building or building structure, and which shall, at all times except during access by the owner or an authorized adult representative of the owner, remain securely locked. For purposes of this section, an owner or authorized representative of the owner, shall be deemed to actually occupy a room even during brief periods of absence if the room is contained within a larger structure which is occupied by the owner. 
D.  Civil Responsibility for Damages for Wrongful Display or Storage. Any person who displays or stores or permits the display or storage, of any graffiti implement in violation of the provisions of this section shall be personally liable for any and all costs, including attorneys fees and court costs, incurred by any party in connection with the removal of graffiti, the repair of any property containing graffiti, or such party's prosecution of a civil claim for reimbursement or damages resulting from such graffiti removal or property repair, arising from the use by any person of such wrongfully displayed or stored graffiti implement in violation of the provisions of any of the California Penal Code Sections set forth in Section 9.08.080, or in violation of Section 9.08.030. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; Ord. 173 § 2 (6), 1993) 
9.08.070 - Graffiti removal provisions. 
A.  Right of City to Require Removal. It is unlawful for any person who is the owner, or who has primary responsibility for control, of property or who has primary responsibility for the repair or maintenance of property ("responsible party" hereinafter in this section), to permit the property to be defaced with graffiti for a period of seven days after service by city, by first class mail of notice of same, unless: (1) the person shall demonstrate by a preponderance of evidence that he or she does not have the financial ability to remove the defacing graffiti; or (2) it can be demonstrated that the responsible party has an active program for the removal of graffiti and has scheduled the removal of the graffiti as part of that program, in which case it is unlawful to permit such property to remain defaced with graffiti for a period of fifteen (15) days after service by first class mail of notice of same. 
B.  Declaration of Nuisance. 
1.  Graffiti as a Nuisance. The city council hereby declares and finds graffiti to be a nuisance subject to abatement according to the provisions and procedures herein contained and as authorized by California Government Code Sections 38773, et seq. 
2.  Graffiti Attracting Surface as a Nuisance. The existence of any surface of a structure on any privately owned parcel of land which has been defaced with graffiti after removal more than five times in twelve (12) months is deemed to be a nuisance, and may be abated by the city's requiring modifications thereto, or to the immediate area surrounding same. Such modifications may include, but are not limited to: retrofitting of such surfaces at the expense of the property owner(s) of the lot, not to exceed a total cost of five hundred dollars ($500.00), or at the cost of the city at the city's option, with such features or qualities as may be established by the city as necessary to reduce the of attractiveness of the surface for graffiti, or as necessary to permit more convenient, expedient or efficient removal of graffiti therefrom. 
C.  Right of City to Remove. 
1.  Use of Public Funds. Whenever the city becomes aware, or is notified and determines that graffiti is so located on public or privately owned property viewable from a public or quasi-public place within the city, the city shall be authorized to use public funds for the removal of same, or for the painting or repairing of same, but shall not authorize or undertake to provide for the painting or repair of any more extensive area than that where the graffiti is located, unless the city manager, or designee, determines in writing that a more extensive area is required to be repainted or repaired in order to avoid aesthetic disfigurement to the neighborhood or community, or unless the responsible party agrees to pay for the costs of repainting or repairing the more extensive area. 
2.  Right of Entry on Private Property. 
a.  Securing Owner Consent. Prior to entering upon private property or property owned by a public entity other than the city, for the purposes of removal of graffiti, the city shall attempt to secure the consent of the responsible party, and a release of the city from liability for private or public property damage. 
b.  Failure to Obtain Owner Consent. If a responsible party fails to remove the offending graffiti within the time specified, or if the city shall have requested consent to remove or paint over the offending graffiti and the responsible party shall have refused consent for entry on terms acceptable to the city consistent with the terms of this section, the city may commence abatement and cost recovery proceedings for the removal of the graffiti pursuant to the nuisance abatement authority granted by California Government Code Sections 38773, et seq., which authority includes the recovery of all costs incurred by the city in abating graffiti and recordation of a lien as to affected property. 
D.  Ease of Removal Provisions. 
1.  Common Utility Colors and Paint-type. Any gas, telephone, water, sewer, cable, telephone and other utility operating in the city, other than an electric utility, shall paint their above-surface metal fixtures which are installed after the effective date of this chapter, with a uniform paint type and color as directed by the city manager. 
2.  Conditions on Encroachment Permits. Encroachment permits issued by the city may, among other things, be conditioned on: (1) the permittee applying an anti-graffiti material to the encroaching object or structure of a type and nature that is acceptable to the city manager, or his or her designee; (2) the immediate removal by the permittee of any graffiti; (3) the right of the city to remove graffiti or to paint the encroaching object or structure; (4) the permittee providing city with sufficient matching paint and/or anti-graffiti material on demand for use in the painting of the encroaching object or structure containing graffiti. 
3.  Conditions on Discretionary Approvals. In imposing conditions upon conditional use permits, variances, building permits or other similar land use entitlements or development or design applications, the city may impose graffiti removal requirements or any or all of the following conditions, or other similar or related conditions: 
a.  Use of Anti-graffiti Material. Applicant shall apply an anti-graffiti material of a type and nature that is acceptable to the city manager, or his or her designee, to such of the publicly-viewable surfaces to be constructed on the site deemed by the city manager, or designee, to be likely to attract graffiti ("graffiti attracting surfaces" hereinafter in this section). 
b.  Right of Access to Remove Graffiti. Applicant shall grant in writing, the right of entry over and access to such parcels, upon forty-eight (48) hours posted notice, by authorized city employees or agents, for the purpose of removing or "painting over" graffiti on graffiti attracting surfaces previously designated by the city manager, or designee. Such grant shall be made an express condition of approval and shall be deemed to run with the land. 
c.  Supply City with Graffiti-removal Material. Applicant, and any and all successors in interest, shall, for a specified period of years after approval, provide the city with sufficient matching paint and/or anti-graffiti material on demand for use in the painting over or removal of designated graffiti attracting surfaces. 
d.  Owner to Immediately Remove Graffiti. Persons applying for subdivision maps shall, as part of any conditions, covenants and restrictions, covenant, which covenant shall run with the land, in a form satisfactory to the city, that the owners of the lots shall immediately remove any graffiti placed on publicly viewable trees and structures thereon to city's satisfaction. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; Ord. 173 § 2 (7), 1993) 
9.08.080 - Rewards. 
A.  Reward Authority. 
1.  Pursuant to Section 53069.5 of the California Government Code, the city does offer a reward in an amount as may be set by resolution of the city council, for information leading to the arrest and conviction of any person for violation, within the city, of California Penal Code Sections 594 or 594.3 by the use of graffiti, Penal Code Sections 640, 640.5, 640.6, or Sections 9.08.030, 9.08.040 or 9.08.050 of this chapter. In the event of multiple contributions of information, the reward amount shall be divided by the city in the manner it shall deem appropriate. For the purposes of this section, diversion of the violator to a community service program, or a plea bargain to a lesser offense, shall constitute a conviction. 
2.  Claims for rewards under this section shall be filed with the city. Each claim shall: 
a.  Specifically identify the date, location and kind of property damaged or destroyed; 
b.  Identify by name the person who was convicted; 
c.  Identify the court and the date upon which the conviction occurred; 
3.  No claim for a reward shall be allowed by the city council unless the city investigates and verifies the accuracy of the claim and determines that the requirements of this section have been satisfied. 
4.  The person committing the graffiti-vandalism, and if an unemancipated minor, then the parent or lawful guardian of the minor, shall be civilly liable for any reward paid pursuant to this section pursuant to the provisions of California Government Code Section 53069.5. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; Ord. 173 § 2 (8), 1993) 
9.08.090 - Reimbursement of cellular phone costs. 
    The city shall reimburse to any person reporting by means of a cellular phone an act of graffiti vandalism presently occurring within the city, the amount of the actual phone charges, exclusive of taxes, incurred by said person. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; Ord. 173 § 2 (9), 1993) 
9.08.100 - Penalties and civil liability of parents. 
A.  Criminal Penalties. Any violation of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor punishable by either six months in jail, a one thousand dollar ($1000.00) fine, or by such fine and imprisonment, and by the performance of community service in the form of graffiti clean-up to the maximum extent permitted by California Penal Code Section 594 and/or any other provision of law. 
B.  Additional Penalties Available. Whenever deemed appropriate, it is the city's intent to petition a sentencing court to impose the following additional penalties upon conviction: 
1.  Litter or graffiti cleanup pursuant to California Vehicle Code Section 42001.7, upon conviction of violation of California Vehicle Code Sections 23111, 23112 or 23113(a); 
2.  Suspension or delay of issuance of a driver's license pursuant to California Vehicle Code Section 13202.6 upon a graffiti-vandalism conviction; 
3.  Performance of community service, including graffiti removal service by any minor determined to be a ward of the court as a result of committing a vandalism-related offense in the city, as provided in California Welfare and Institutions Code Sections 728 and/or 729.6; 
4.  Performance of community service, including graffiti removal service of up to one hundred (100) hours by any minor determined to be a ward of the court as a result of committing a drug-related offense in the city, as provided in California Welfare and Institutions Code Section 729.8. 
C.  It is the city's further intent that pursuant to California Penal Code Section 640.6(a), all acts of graffiti-vandalism occurring within the city shall be prosecuted as misdemeanors pursuant to California Penal Code Section 594, et seq., or this chapter. 
D.  Pursuant to California Civil Code Section 1714.1, any parent or legal guardian whose minor child possesses a graffiti implement, shall be personally liable for any and all costs to any person or business incurred in connection with the removal of graffiti caused by the child, or by the graffiti implement, and for all attorney's fees and court costs incurred in connection with the civil prosecution of any claim for damages or reimbursement, up to ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00). 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; Ord. 173 § 2 (10), 1993) 
9.08.105 - Defendant's liability for cost of graffiti abatement. 
A.  Defendant Determined to be the Responsible Party. When the disposition of a criminal case or a proceeding pursuant to Welfare and Institutions Code Section 602 determines that the defendant in that case is responsible for creating, causing or committing the graffiti which was abated by the city, that same defendant shall be liable for all costs incurred by the city. These costs shall include, but are not limited to, court costs, attorney's fees, costs of removal of the graffiti or other inscribed material, costs of repair and replacement of defaced property, and the law enforcement costs incurred by the city in the identification and apprehension of the defendant responsible for the graffiti or other inscribed material on publicly or privately owned permanent real or personal property within the city, as prescribed within Government Code Sections 38772 through 38773.6 and 53069.3. 
1.  The determination of responsibility shall be presumed by any confession, admission, guilty plea, or plea of nolo contendere to any violation of Penal Code Sections 594, 594.3, 640.5, 640.6, or 640.7. 
2.  In the case of a minor defendant, responsibility shall be determined upon a conviction by final judgment or by the minor being made a ward of the juvenile court pursuant to Welfare and Institutions Code Section 602 by reason of the commission of any act prohibited under Penal Code Sections 594, 594.3, 640.5, 640.6, or 640.7. 
B.  City Funds to be Recovered. City shall recover all city funds used to remove graffiti, or to repair or replace graffiti-damaged real or personal property within the city. These costs shall be recovered from the defendant who has been determined to be the responsible party as outlined above. These costs shall be recovered as follows: 
1.  Adult Defendants. A civil action may be pursued to obtain a money judgment against the defendant for any amount not ordered or collected by the criminal court in which the matter was heard. Such money judgments may be filed or recorded to create a lien against personal or real property as permitted by Code of Civil Procedure Sections 697.010, et seq. 
2.  Juvenile Defendants. A civil action may be pursued to obtain a money judgment against the juvenile defendant and/or his or her parent(s) or guardian(s) having custody and control of the minor for any amount not ordered or collected by the juvenile court in which the matter was heard. Such money judgments will be filed or recorded to create a lien against personal or real property as permitted by Government Code Sections 38772, et seq. 
a.  Lien and Personal Obligation. The expense of abating the graffiti nuisance may result in a lien against the property of a minor and a personal obligation against the minor. The parent(s) or guardian(s) having custody and control of the minor shall be jointly and severally liable with the minor pursuant to Government Code Sections 38772, 38773.2 and 38773.6. 
i.  Notice of Intent to Lien. Notice of intent to record a lien shall be given to the owner of record of any parcel prior to the recordation of any lien. The owner may be the minor, or the parent(s) or legal guardian having custody and control of the minor. Said notice shall be served by personal service in the same manner as a civil action in accordance with the Code of Civil Procedure Section 415.10. If the owner of record, after diligent search cannot be found, the notice may be served by posting a copy of the notice in a conspicuous place upon the property for a period of ten days and publication thereof in a newspaper of general circulation published in the county in which the property is located pursuant to Government Code Section 6062. 
ii.  Recordation. A nuisance abatement lien shall be recorded in the county recorder's office in the county in which the parcel of land is located and from the date of recording shall have the force, effect, and priority of a judgment lien. 
iii.  Specific Data. A graffiti nuisance abatement lien authorized by this section shall specify the amount of the lien; the name of the agency on whose behalf the lien is imposed; the date of the abatement order; the street address, legal description, and assessor's parcel number of the parcel on which the lien is imposed; and the name and address of the recorded owner of the parcel. 
iv.  If the lien is discharged, released, or satisfied through payment or foreclosure, notice of the discharge containing the information specified in subsection (B)(2)(a)(iii) of this section shall be recorded by the governmental agency. A graffiti nuisance abatement lien and the release of the lien shall be indexed in the grantor-grantee index. 
v.  A graffiti nuisance abatement lien may be satisfied through foreclosure in an action brought by the city. 
vi.  The city may recover from the property owner any costs incurred regarding the processing and recording of the lien and providing notice to the property owner as part of its foreclosure action to enforce the lien. 
b.  Special Assessment. As an alternate to the nuisance lien, the city may recover its costs, as delineated above, a special assessment against the parcel of land owned by the minor or by the parent or guardian having custody and control of the minor. The assessment may be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary municipal taxes are collected and shall be subject to the same penalties and the same procedure and sale in case of delinquency as provided for ordinary municipal taxes. 
c.  Second or Subsequent Criminal Judgment. Upon the entry of a second or subsequent criminal judgment within a two-year period, the city may find that an owner of property is responsible for a condition that may be abated in accordance with this code section, may request the court order treble damages pursuant to Government Code Section 38773.7. 
C.  Liability in Addition to Penalties. The liability for the cost of graffiti abatement described in this section shall be in addition to and shall not replace or supersede any penalties or civil liability of parents described in Section 9.08.100. 
(Ord. 2008-13 § 2, 2008) 
Chapter 9.12 - WEAPONS 
Sections: 

9.12.010 - Discharge of firearms. 
A.  Except as hereinafter provided, it is unlawful to fire or discharge, or cause to be fired or discharged, within the city limits, any firearm, rifle, pistol, shotgun, or cannon, other than a B.B. gun, pellet gun, bow, crossbow, air rifle, gas operated gun, spring gun or slingshot, which discharges or propels any single solid projectile capable of causing injury. 
B.  Except as hereinafter provided, it is unlawful to fire or discharge, or cause to be fired or discharged within the city limits, any firearm which discharges or propels multiple shot, any airgun, B.B. gun, pellet gun, gas operated gun, spring gun, slingshot, bow, crossbow, air rifle or any other weapon not described in subsection (A) of this section, which is designed to discharge or propel any single solid projectile capable of causing injury, within one hundred fifty (150) yards of any of the following: 
1.  Aircraft; 
2.  Airport; 
3.  Train, or any portion thereof; 
4.  Railroad track; 
5.  Domestic livestock; 
6.  Public street, road or highway; 
7.  Public easement normally utilized by motor vehicles, pedestrians, horseback riders, or bicyclists; 
8.  Any building, tent, motor home, trailer, or other temporary or permanent residence or encampment of persons, without written permission of the owner, tenant or occupant having right to possession thereof. 
C.  The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to peace officers when acting in the line of duty, persons otherwise lawfully acting to protect life or property, or to persons so firing or discharging in or upon a business establishment licensed by the city for such purposes. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; Ord. 60 § 3, 1989) 
Chapter 9.14 - REGULATION OF SKATEBOARDS, ROLLER SKATES, INLINE SKATES AND SIMILAR DEVICES ON POSTED PROPERTY 
Sections: 

9.14.010 - Skateboards, roller skates, inline skates and similar wheeled devices prohibited on posted property. 
    It is unlawful and a public nuisance for any person to ride a skateboard, or utilize roller skates, inline skates or any similar self-powered wheeled device having wheels less than six inches in diameter, upon any public property or private property within any commercial or industrial zone in the city, where notice of such prohibition has been posted and is clearly visible in at least two entrances to the prohibited area or in the immediate area where such activity is prohibited. This section shall not apply to persons participating in any city-sponsored program, event or class in which use of the self-powered wheeled devices described herein are utilized, permitted or required. 
(Ord. 272 § 1 (part), 1998) 
9.14.020 - Penalty for violation. 
    It is unlawful for any person to violate any provision, or fail to comply with any of the requirements, of this chapter. Any person violating any provision of this chapter or failing to comply with any of its requirements shall be deemed guilty of an infraction and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable by: 
A.  A fine not exceeding one hundred dollars for a first violation; 
B.  A fine not exceeding two hundred dollars for a second violation within one year; 
C.  A fine not exceeding five hundred dollars for each additional violation within one year. 
(Ord. 272 § 1 (part), 1998) 
Chapter 9.16 - LOITERING 
Sections: 

9.16.010 - Definitions. 
    Unless the context otherwise requires, the definitions set forth in this section shall govern the construction of this chapter. 
    "Loiter" shall mean to commit any act prohibited by California Penal Code Section 653b in or about a school or public place at or near which children attend or normally congregate. 
(Ord. 2007-07 § 2 (part), 2007) 
( Ord. No. 2014-15, § 3, 8-19-14 ) 
9.16.020 - Loitering by sex offenders prohibited. 
    No individual that has served a term of imprisonment or jail time for an offense for which registration is required pursuant to Section 290 of the Penal Code, shall knowingly loiter, as that term is defined in Section 9.16.010 of this code. 
(Ord. 2007-07 § 2 (part), 2007) 
( Ord. No. 2014-15, § 4, 8-19-14 ) 
9.16.100 - Penalties. 
    In addition to any other remedies provided for in this code, any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable in accordance with subsection A of Section 1.12.030. 
(Ord. 2007-07 § 2 (part), 2007) 
Chapter 9.18 - HANDBILLS 
Sections: 

9.18.010 - Definitions. 
    The definitions set forth in this section shall apply to the regulation and enforcement of this chapter. 
    "Commercial handbill" means any printed or written material which is reproduced and does any of the following: 
1.  Advertises for sale any merchandise product, commodity or thing; 
2.  Directs attention to any business or commercial establishment or activity for the purpose of either directly or indirectly promoting the interests thereof; 
3.  Directs attention or advertises any meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition or event of any kind for which admission is charged for the purpose of private gain or profit. This shall not include such activities involving a clearly religious activity. 
    "Newspaper" means any newspaper of general circulation as defined by general law; any newspaper entered with the United States Postal Service in accordance with federal statute or regulation; any newspaper filed and recorded with any recording officer as provided by general law and any periodical or magazine regularly published with not less than four issues per year and sold to the public. 
    "Noncommercial handbill" means any printed or written material not included in the definition of a commercial handbill or newspaper. 
    "Public place" means any and all streets, alleys, sidewalks and parkways within the public right-of-way and any and all public parks, grounds, buildings, parking lots, spaces and/or squares or other property owned by a public agency. 
(Ord. 2008-16 § 2 (Exh. A) (part), 2008) 
9.18.020 - Distribution of handbills-Generally. 
    Distribution of commercial or noncommercial handbills shall be allowed subject to compliance with all other subsections with this chapter and provided all of the following are met: 
A.  The property owner of the private property on which handbill distribution is to occur has given prior consent. 
B.  The handbill is distributed to a person willing to accept it. No handbill shall be placed on or in any automobile or motor vehicle, unless the owner of said vehicle has given consent to such placement. 
C.  Any handbill discarded during the course of distribution so as to create litter, trash, solid waste or debris as defined under Chapter 8.04 of this code shall be collected and either removed or placed in a proper refuse receptacle. 
D.  Handbills shall not be affixed to any stationary object, including, but not limited to, light poles, refuse receptacles, building walls or windows and mail receptacles. 
E.  Distribution of Handbills Prohibited. In the event private property is posted with a sign or signs displayed at the public entrances to the property, such sign(s) shall constitute an expressed objection to such conduct and shall be prohibited. 
(Ord. 2008-16 § 2 (Exh. A) (part), 2008) 
9.18.030 - Distribution of handbills in public places. 
    No person shall distribute any commercial handbill on any public place, including on any sidewalk and/or street right-of-way without consent of the agency owning the public place and provided that the public's use is not impeded. A person may distribute any noncommercial handbill on such public places as provided by state and federal law, provided that the public's use is not impeded. 
(Ord. 2008-16 § 2 (Exh. A) (part), 2008) 
Chapter 9.22 - REGULATIONS IN CIVIC PLAZA PARK 
Section: 

9.22.010 - Regulations in Civic Plaza Park. 
A.  The regulations herein shall apply to special or organized events that are sponsored or authorized by the City of Hesperia (the city) and/or the Hesperia Recreation and Park District (the district). Special or organized events shall include, but not limited to any festival, ceremony, competition, fundraiser, concert, fair, contest, movie showing, farmer's market, swap meet, or Christmas Tree lighting ceremony. Exceptions to this chapter may be granted by the city or the district to authorized programs or events involving dogs or wheeled devices. 
B.  It is unlawful and a public nuisance for any person to conduct any of the following acts within the limits of Civic Plaza Park during special or organized events: 
1.  Possess an unleashed dog as prohibited by Section 6.08.020. 
2.  Ride bicycles, scooters, segways, skates, in-line skates, skateboards, or self-powered wheeled devices having wheels less than six inches in diameter. Exceptions would be devices for disabled persons or seniors, and children's strollers. 
C.  During special or organized events, as defined in Section 9.22.010(A), the city at its discretion may impose additional restrictions if it finds that certain acts will interfere with the program or event. 
( Ord. No. 2014-07, § 3(Exh. A), 4-15-14 ) 
Title 10 - VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC 
Chapters: 
Chapter 10.04 - TRAFFIC REGULATIONS 
Sections: 

10.04.020 - Scope. 
    The provisions of this title shall apply to the driver of any vehicle owned by or used in the service of the United States Government, the state, or any county or city. It is unlawful for any driver to violate any of the provisions of this title except as otherwise permitted in this title or by state statute. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 52.015) 
10.04.030 - Exemption of certain vehicles. 
A.  The provisions of this title regulating the operation, parking and standing of vehicles shall not apply to any vehicle that has qualified under the vehicle code as an authorized emergency vehicle, when any such vehicle is operated in the manner specified in the vehicle code in response to an emergency call. 
B.  The foregoing exemption shall not, however, protect the driver of any such vehicle from the consequences of his wilful disregard of the safety of others. 
C.  The provisions of this title regulating parking or standing of vehicles shall not apply to any vehicle of the city or of the State Department of Transportation, while necessarily in use for the construction, repair work, survey work or traffic engineering investigations on any highway or any vehicle owned by the United States while in use for the collection, transportation or delivery of the United States mail. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 52.016) 
10.04.040 - Traffic control devices. 
A.  Signs. The city engineer shall determine and designate the size, shape and character of all official warning, regulatory, and direction signs, other than signs the size, shape and character of which have been established by the State Department of Transportation pursuant to the vehicle code. 
1.  Violation. No provision of this title for which signs are required, shall be enforced against an alleged violator thereof, unless appropriate signs are in place and sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person, giving notice of such provision. 
B.  Authorization and Placing of Signals. 
1.  The city council shall by resolution designate, upon the basis of a traffic engineering investigation, what intersections shall be controlled by official traffic control signals. 
2.  Whenever the city council finds, upon the basis of a traffic engineering investigation, that the conditions, because of which traffic control signals have been placed at an intersection pursuant to subsection (B)(1) of this section no longer exist, the city council shall by resolution direct that such traffic control signals be removed. 
3.  The city engineer is authorized to place, maintain, operate or remove, or cause to be placed, maintained, operated or removed, all official traffic control signals authorized by the city council as herein provided. Such official traffic signals shall conform to the provisions of the vehicle code. 
C.  Hours of Operation. The city engineer is authorized to determine, upon the basis of a traffic engineering investigation, the hours and days during which any traffic control device shall be in operation or be in effect, except in those cases where such hours or days are specified in this title or established by resolution of the city council. 
D.  Installation by City Engineer. 
1.  The city engineer may place and maintain such traffic control devices in addition to those authorized by other provisions of this title as may be necessary to regulate, guide or warn traffic, but the city engineer shall make such determination upon the basis of traffic engineering principles and traffic investigations and in accordance with such standards, limitations and rules as may be established by ordinance or resolution of the city council. 
2.  Whenever the city engineer finds, upon the basis of a traffic engineering investigation, that the conditions, because of which such traffic control devices have been installed as provided in subsection (D)(1) of this section no longer exist, the city engineer shall remove such traffic control devices. 
E.  Traffic Markings. 
1.  The city engineer is authorized to place, upon the basis of a traffic engineering investigation, traffic guide lines, dividing highways into the number of traffic lanes that are proper and necessary, and may place such other pavement markings as are necessary to direct vehicular movements in accordance with requirements of this title and the Vehicle Code. 
2.  Whenever the city engineer finds, upon the basis of a traffic engineering investigation, that the conditions, because of which traffic guide lines or other markings were placed as provided in subsection (E)(1) of this section no longer exist, the city engineer shall remove such traffic guide lines or such markings. 
F.  Temporary Removal. Whenever, because of the construction, alteration, repair or improvement of any highway, or because of other emergency, compliance with any prohibition of this title, including a prohibition pursuant to any action of the city council taken in accordance with this title, will create a traffic hazard and the city engineer so finds, he is authorized to either remove or cover up any traffic control device which informs persons of such prohibition. While such traffic control device is removed or covered, the effect of such prohibition is suspended. At the end of such emergency, unless otherwise determined by the city council, the city engineer shall replace or uncover such traffic control device. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 52.017) 
10.04.050 - Turning movements. 
A.  Restricted Turn Signals. 
1.  Pursuant to the vehicle code, whenever the board determines, upon the basis of a traffic engineering investigation, that the prohibition of the making of any turning movement by any vehicle at any intersection or between any designated intersections is necessary, the city council shall by resolution direct the city engineer to erect any appropriate sign or signs stating the prohibition of such turning movements. The sign or signs may be supplemented by appropriate pavement markings. 
2.  Whenever the city council finds, upon the basis of a traffic engineering investigation, that the conditions because of which such turning movements at such intersections or between such intersections has been prohibited as provided in subsection (A)(1) of this section no longer exist, the city council shall by resolution direct the city engineer to remove such sign or signs and pavement markings. 
B.  Turn Markers and Multiple Lanes. 
1.  Pursuant to the vehicle code, the city council authorizes the city engineer, upon the basis of a traffic engineering investigation, to place markers, buttons or signs within or adjacent to intersections and thereby require and direct that a different course from that specified in the vehicle code be traveled by vehicles turning at an intersection or may allocate and indicate more than one lane of traffic from which drivers of vehicles may make right- or left-hand turns. 
2.  Whenever the city engineer finds, upon the basis of a traffic engineering investigation, that any turning movement within or adjacent to any intersection which has been required by the placing of markers, buttons or signs as provided in subsection (B)(1) of this section is no longer necessary, the city engineer shall remove such markers, buttons or signs. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 52.018) 
10.04.060 - One-way streets. 
A.  Pursuant to the vehicle code, whenever the board determines, upon the basis of a traffic engineering investigation, that it is necessary to designate particular highways or portions thereof as one-way highways and require that all vehicles thereon move in one specified direction, the city council shall by resolution direct the city engineer to erect appropriate signs indicating the direction of travel at each highway intersecting such one-way highway upon such particular highway or portion thereof. 
B.  Whenever the city council finds, upon the basis of a traffic engineering investigation, that the conditions, because of which such highway or portions thereof has been designated as a one-way highway as provided in subsection (A) of this section no longer exist, the city council shall by resolution direct the city engineer to remove such signs from such one-way highway. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 52.019) 
10.04.070 - Closing of streets. 
A.  Streets Dividing School Property. Pursuant to the vehicle code, whenever the city council determines on the basis of a traffic engineering investigation that it is necessary to close a street that divides school grounds to vehicular traffic, the city council shall by resolution direct the city engineer to place appropriate signs indicating such closure. 
B.  Hours, Days and Conditions. Whenever the board, pursuant to Section 10.04.060 of this chapter, orders the closing of streets, the city engineer shall, on the basis of traffic engineering investigation, determine the hours of the day, the days of the week and the conditions under which such street shall be closed. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 52.0110) 
10.04.080 - Through highways. 
A.  Establishment. Pursuant to the vehicle code, the city council may determine, upon the basis of a traffic engineering investigation, by resolution that it is necessary: (1) to designate any highway as a through highway and to require that all vehicles stop before entering or crossing the same; (2) to designate any intersection as a stop intersection and to require all vehicles to stop at one or more entrances to such intersections; (3) to control traffic within an intersection and require it to stop, when signs are erected as provided by the vehicle code. 
B.  Railroad Stop Signs. Pursuant to the vehicle code, the city council may determine, upon the basis of a traffic engineering investigation, by resolution that all vehicles shall stop before entering or crossing the tracks at any highway railroad grade crossing when signs are in place giving notice thereof, but no such ordinance shall be effective unless approved by an order of the Public Utilities Commission of the State. 
C.  Stop Signs. When the city council has adopted resolutions pursuant to subsections (A) and (B) of this section, the city engineer shall erect a stop sign on each and every street intersecting such through street or portion thereof so designated and at those entrances to or locations within other intersections where a stop is required and at any railroad grade crossing so designated. Every such sign shall conform with and shall be placed as provided in the vehicle code. Such signs may be supplemented by appropriate pavement markings. 
1.  Removal. Whenever the city council finds, on the basis of a traffic engineering investigation, that the conditions, because of which such highways have been designated as through highways or such intersection has been designated as a stop intersection or such location within an intersection has been designated where vehicles are required to stop, or such highway railroad grade crossing has been designated at which vehicles are required to stop before entering or crossing the tracks, as provided in subsections (A) and (B) of this section, no longer exist, the city council shall by resolution direct the city engineer to remove such signs and pavement markings from such intersections or railroad grade crossings. 
D.  Emergency Stop Signs. The city engineer is authorized when any emergency condition, as indicated by a traffic engineering investigation, exists at any highway intersection or intersections, to place and maintain stop signs as provided in subsection (C) of this section for the duration of such emergency condition. Such stop signs shall be removed when such emergency condition ceases to exist unless otherwise determined by the city council. 
1.  Removal. The city engineer is authorized, when because of temporary detours, or other emergency, it would be impractical and a hazard to require vehicles to stop at an intersection where stop signs have been erected pursuant to this chapter, to either remove such signs or so cover them that no portion of the word "stop" remains visible. At the termination of such emergency, the city engineer shall restore such signs or uncover such signs unless otherwise determined restore such signs or uncover such signs unless otherwise determined by the city council. 
E.  Obedience to Stop Signs. Where stop signs have been erected pursuant to this chapter, any vehicle approaching such signs shall stop in accordance with the provisions of the vehicle code except that no stop is required where: 
1.  An officer is on duty and directs traffic to proceed; 
2.  A traffic signal is in operation and indicates that traffic may proceed; 
3.  A stop sign has been removed or covered pursuant to subsection (D)(1) of this section. 
F.  Yield-Right-of-Way Signs. 
1.  Pursuant to the vehicle code, whenever the board determines, upon the basis of a traffic engineering investigation, that it is necessary to require vehicles entering an intersection at one or more of its approaches to slow and yield the right-of-way as provided in the vehicle code, the city council shall by resolution direct the city engineer to erect and maintain "yield-right-of-way" signs on such approaches. 
2.  Whenever the city council determines, upon the basis of a traffic engineering investigation, that the conditions, because of which the "yield right-of-way" signs were erected as provided in subsection (F)(1) of this section no longer exist, the city council shall by resolution direct the city engineer to remove such signs. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 52.0111) 
10.04.090 - Weight limitations. 
A.  Limits on Unimproved Highways. 
1.  Whenever the city council determines, upon the basis of an engineering investigation, that a highway is unimproved as the word "unimproved" is used in the vehicle code, and that the nature of the pavement or surface is such that it will be damaged if vehicles of over a certain gross weight are permitted to operate thereon, the city council shall by resolution direct the city engineer to erect signs specifying the maximum gross weight limits which shall be permitted to operate on such highway. 
2.  The city engineer shall erect and maintain signs upon all unimproved highways upon which a weight limit is imposed at the entrances thereto from all improved highways, from all highways upon which no weight limit has been imposed, and from all highways upon which a greater weight limit has been imposed. 
3.  Whenever such weight limit signs have been placed as provided in this section, it shall be a misdemeanor for any person to drive or operate a vehicle upon such unimproved highway when the maximum gross weight of such vehicle, plus the weight of the load thereon, exceeds the weight limit stated by such signs except that any commercial vehicle shall not be prohibited from using any city street by direct route to or from a state highway for the purpose of delivering or loading for transportation, goods, wares, or merchandise as provided in the vehicle code. 
4.  Whenever the city council finds that because of repaving or repair of an unimproved highway, that a weight limit is no longer necessary upon such highway, the city council shall by resolution direct the city engineer to remove the weight limit signs from such highway or entrances thereto. 
B.  Temporary Limits on Improved Highways. 
1.  Whenever the city council, upon the basis of an engineering investigation, determines that an improved highway as defined in the vehicle code, will be destroyed by reason of deterioration if vehicles of over a certain gross weight are permitted to operate thereon, the city council shall by resolution direct the city engineer to erect temporary signs, as provided in subsection (A)(2) of this section for unimproved highways, specifying the maximum gross weight limits upon such highway. No such reduced weight limits shall extend for a period of more than ninety (90) days unless actual repair of such highway is begun within such time and thereafter continuously carried on to completion. 
2.  Whenever such temporary weight limit signs have been placed as provided in this section, it shall be a misdemeanor for any person to drive or operate a vehicle upon such improved highway when the maximum gross weight of such vehicle, plus the weight of the load thereon, exceeds the weight limit stated by such signs, except that any commercial vehicle shall not be prohibited from using any city street by direct route to or from a state highway for the purpose of delivering or loading for transporting goods, wares, or merchandise as provided in the vehicle code. 
C.  Closing Highways to Commercial Vehicles. 
1.  Pursuant to the vehicle code, whenever the city council determines, upon the basis of a traffic engineering investigation, that it is necessary to prohibit the use of any street, road, or highway in an unincorporated residential subdivision area to commercial vehicles exceeding a gross weight of fourteen thousand (14,000) pounds, the city council shall by resolution direct the city engineer to erect and maintain signs indicating such prohibition. 
2.  Whenever the city council determines, upon the basis of a traffic engineering investigation, that the conditions because of which a load limit was established as provided in subsection (C)(1) of this section no longer exist, the city council shall by resolution direct the city engineer to remove such weight restriction signs. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 52.0125) 
10.04.100 - Weight limits on bridges. 
A.  Whenever the city council determines, upon the basis of a structural engineering investigation, that the structure of a bridge on a highway is such that it is unsafe for vehicles over a certain weight to use such bridge, the city council shall by resolution direct the city engineer to place signs at both entrances to such bridge specifying the maximum gross weight limits of any vehicle or combination of vehicles which shall be permitted to cross such bridge. 
B.  Whenever the city council finds, because of rebuilding, repairing, or strengthening such bridge, that such weight limits are no longer necessary, the city council shall by resolution direct the city engineer to remove such weight limit signs from the entrances to such bridge. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 52.0126) 
10.04.110 - Driving through funeral processions. 
    No driver of a vehicle shall drive between vehicles comprising a funeral procession while they are in motion and when the vehicles in such procession are conspicuously so designated. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 52.0127(c)) 
10.04.120 - Driving on new pavement prohibited. 
    No person shall ride or drive any animal or any vehicle over or across any newly-made pavement or freshly painted marking on any street when a barrier or sign is in place warning persons not to drive over or across such pavement or marking or sign stating that the street or any portion thereof is closed. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 52.0127(d)) 
10.04.130 - Driving on limited access roadway prohibited. 
    No person shall drive a vehicle onto or from any limited access roadway except at such entrances and exits as are established by public authority. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 52.0127(e)) 
10.04.140 - Tampering with traffic survey devices. 
    It is unlawful for any person to move, molest, tamper with or damage any survey device used for the purpose of making traffic investigations located on any city street. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 52.0127(f)) 
Chapter 10.08 - PARKING 
Sections: 

10.08.010 - Application of stopping, standing and parking regulations. 
A.  The provisions of this chapter prohibiting the stopping, standing or parking of a vehicle shall apply at all times or at those times herein specified, except when it is necessary to stop a vehicle to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or official traffic control device. 
B.  The provisions of this chapter imposing a time limit on standing or parking shall not relieve any person from the duty to observe other and more restrictive provisions of the vehicle code or an ordinance of this city prohibiting or limiting the standing or parking of vehicles in specified places or at specified times. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 52.0112) 
10.08.020 - Standing prohibited between roadways. 
    No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle within any median strip between roadways or within any traffic island or other area designed to separate or guide the movement of traffic. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 52.0113) 
10.08.030 - Parking parallel with curb. 
A.  Parking on One-way Street. Subject to other and more restrictive limitations, a vehicle may be stopped or parked within eighteen (18) inches of the left-hand curb facing in the direction of traffic movement upon any one-way street unless signs or curb markings as described in Section 10.08.100(F) are in place prohibiting such stopping or standing. 
B.  Parking on Highways Comprised of Two or More Separate Roadways. In the event a highway includes two or more separate roadways and traffic is restricted to one direction upon any such roadway, no person shall stand or park a vehicle upon or adjacent to the left-hand side of such one-way roadway unless signs are in place permitting such standing or parking. 
C.  Prohibition of Parking on One-way Street. Whenever the city council determines, upon the basis of a traffic engineering investigation, that standing or parking of vehicles shall be prohibited upon the left-hand side of any one-way street or when standing or parking may be permitted upon or adjacent to the left-hand side of any one-way roadway of a highway having two or more separate roadways, the city council shall by resolution direct the city engineer to place signs, pavement markings or curb markings as described in Section 10.08.100(F) on such street or highway giving notice thereof. 
1.  Removal of Prohibition. Whenever the city council, upon the basis of a traffic engineering investigation, finds that the conditions because of which parking was either prohibited or permitted as provided in subsection (C) of this section no longer exist, it shall by resolution direct the city engineer to remove such signs, pavement markings and curb markings from such portion of street or highway. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 52.0114) 
10.08.040 - Parking on narrow streets prohibited. 
    The city engineer is authorized, upon the basis of a traffic engineering investigation, to place signs or curb markings as described in Section 10.08.100, indicating no parking upon any highway when the width of the roadway and shoulders of such highway do not exceed twenty (20) feet or upon one side of a highway when the width of the roadway and shoulders of such highway do not exceed thirty (30) feet. 
A.  Removal of Signs. Whenever the city engineer finds that, due to widening, the conditions as set forth in Section 10.08.040 no longer exist, he shall remove such signs and curb markings from such portion of such highway. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 52.0115) 
10.08.050 - Parking adjacent to schools. 
A.  Prohibited. The city engineer is authorized, upon the basis of a traffic engineering investigation to place signs or curb markings described in Section 10.08.100 indicating no parking upon either side of any street adjacent to any school property when such parking would interfere with traffic or create a hazardous situation. 
B.  Removal of Prohibiting Sign. Whenever the city engineer, upon the basis of a traffic engineering investigation, finds that the conditions because of which parking was prohibited as provided in Section 10.08.050 no longer exist, he shall remove such signs and curb markings. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 52.0116) 
10.08.060 - Stopping or standing prohibited in specified places. 
A.  The city engineer is authorized to prohibit stopping, standing or parking and to place signs or curb markings as described in Section 10.08.100, at any of the following places when such prohibition as indicated by a traffic engineering investigation will alleviate dangerous hazardous traffic conditions, facilitate the full use of the roadway, or serve the convenience of the public: 
1.  At any place within on hundred (100) feet of the intersection of two or more highways; 
2.  At any place within twenty-five (25) feet of a railroad grade crossing; 
3.  Adjacent to either side of a crosswalk or driveway entrance for a distance not to exceed twenty (20) feet from either side of such crosswalk or driveway; 
4.  Adjacent to any fire hydrant when it has been determined that stopping, standing or parking of any vehicle, whether attended or unattended, would present some special hazard or would prevent ready access to the fire hydrant; 
5.  At any place in connection with a street or highway vehicular parking layout or plan; 
6.  On either side of a highway in those areas where any highway has been cleared of snow by snowplows, and the width of the highway is restricted by reason of snow conditions. 
B.  When the city engineer, upon the basis of a traffic engineering investigation, finds that the conditions because of which stopping, standing or parking was prohibited as authorized in subsection (A) of this section no longer exist, he shall remove such signs and such curb markings from such portion of such street or highway. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 52.0117) 
10.08.070 - Restriction or prohibition of parking. 
A.  Basis for Regulation. Whenever the city council determines, upon the basis of a traffic engineering investigation, that it is necessary to prohibit stopping, standing or parking of vehicles on certain highways or portion thereof at all or certain hours of the day in order to facilitate the movement of traffic or to eliminate hazardous conditions, the city council shall by resolution direct the city engineer to place appropriate signs or curb markings as designated in Section 10.08.100 on such highways or portions thereof. 
B.  Basis for Lifting Parking Regulations. Whenever the city council, upon the basis of a traffic engineering investigation, finds that the conditions because of which it was necessary to prohibit the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles at all or certain hours of the day as provided in subsection (A) of this section no longer exist, the city council shall by resolution direct the city engineer to remove such signs and curb markings from such highways or portion thereof. 
C.  Temporary No Parking. Whenever the city engineer determines that traffic congestion or traffic hazard of an emergency nature is likely to result from the operation, stopping, standing or parking of vehicles during the holding of public or private assemblages, gatherings, or functions, or during the construction, alteration, repair or improvement of any highway, or for any other reason, he may place or cause to be placed, temporary signs prohibiting the operation, stopping, standing or parking of vehicles during the existence of such emergency. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 52.0118) 
10.08.080 - Use of streets for storage of vehicles prohibited. 
A.  No person who owns or has possession, custody or control of any vehicles shall park such vehicle upon any street or alley for more than a consecutive period of seventy-two (72) hours. 
B.  In the event a vehicle is parked or left standing upon a street in excess of a consecutive period of seventy-two (72) hours, the police or any member of the Highway Patrol of the state of California may remove said vehicle from the street in the manner and subject to the requirements of the vehicle code. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 52.0119) 
10.08.090 - Parking for certain purposes prohibited. 
    No person shall park a vehicle upon any highway or right-of-way for the principal purpose of: 
A.  Displaying such vehicle for sale; 
B.  Washing, greasing, repairing such vehicle except repairs necessitated by an emergency; 
C.  Using such vehicle to support a sign; 
D.  Vending, except adjacent to the premises of the purchaser when taking orders or delivering any commodity. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 52.0120) 
10.08.100 - Stopping for loading or unloading only. 
A.  Establishment of Loading Zones. Whenever the city council determines, upon the basis of a traffic engineering investigation, that loading zones, passenger loading zones or bus loading zones are necessary on any highway or portion thereof, the city council shall by resolution direct the city engineer to place signs or curb markings as provided in subsection (F) of this section on such highway or portion thereof. 
1.  Removal of Signs. Whenever the city council, upon the basis of a traffic engineering investigation, finds that the conditions, because of which loading zones, passenger loading zones and bus loading zones were established along such highway or portion thereof as provided in subsection (A) of this section no longer exist, the city council shall by resolution direct the city engineer to remove such signs or such curb markings designating such zones. 
B.  Marking of Loading Zones. Loading zones shall be indicated by appropriate signs indicating such zone or by a yellow line stenciled with black letters "loading only" upon the top or side of all curbs within such zones. 
C.  Marking of Passenger Loading Zones. Passenger loading zones shall be indicated by appropriate signs or by a white line stenciled with black letters "passenger loading only" upon the top or side of all curbs within such zones. 
D.  Marking of Bus Loading Zones. Bus loading zones shall be indicated by appropriate signs or by a red line stenciled with white letters "no standing" together with the words "bus zone" on the top or side of all curbs within such zones. 
E.  Use of Bus Loading Zone Restricted. No person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle except a bus in a bus loading zone. 
F.  Curb Markings to Indicate No Stopping and Parking Regulations. The city engineer is authorized, subject to the provisions and limitations of this chapter, to place, and where required herein shall place the following curb markings to indicate parking or standing regulations, and said curb markings shall have the meaning herein set forth. 
1.  Red. Red shall mean no stopping, standing or parking except as permitted by the vehicle code, and except that a bus may stop in a red zone marked or signed as a bus zone. 
2.  Yellow. Yellow shall mean no stopping, standing or parking for any purpose other than the loading or unloading of passengers or materials, provided that the loading or unloading of passengers shall not consume more than three minutes nor the loading or unloading of materials more than twenty (20) minutes. 
3.  White. White shall mean no stopping, standing or parking for any purpose other than loading or unloading of passengers which shall not exceed three minutes. 
4.  Green. Green shall mean no standing or parking for longer than twenty (20) minutes. 
G.  Markings in Lieu of Curb Markings. When there are no curbs, the road commissioner shall indicate the parking or standing regulations by installing in lieu of curb markings, appropriate signs giving notice of such regulations. 
H.  Effect of Permission to Load or Unload. 
1.  Applies Only to Commercial Vehicles and Time Limit. Permission herein granted to stop or stand a vehicle for purposes of loading or unloading materials shall apply only to commercial vehicles and shall not extend beyond the time necessary therefor, and in no event for more than twenty (20) minutes. 
2.  Deliveries. The loading or unloading of materials shall apply only to commercial deliveries, the delivery or pickup of express and parcel post packages and United States mail. 
3.  Passenger. Permission herein granted to stop or park for purposes of loading or unloading passengers shall include the loading or unloading of personal baggage but shall not extend beyond the time necessary therefor and in no event for more than three minutes. 
4.  Abuse of Privilege. Within the total time limits above specified, the provisions of this section shall be enforced so as to accommodate necessary and reasonable loading or unloading but without permitting abuse of the privileges hereby granted. 
I.  Standing in Alleys. No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose other than the loading or unloading of passengers or materials in any alley. 
J.  Bus Loading Zone Adjacent to School. The city engineer is authorized, upon the basis of a traffic engineering investigation, to place signs or curb markings described in subsection (F) of this section indicating bus loading zone upon either side of any street adjacent to any school property when such loading zone would facilitate the orderly movement of traffic. 
1.  Removal. Whenever the city engineer, upon the basis of a traffic engineering investigation, finds that the conditions because of which a bus loading zone was established as provided in subsection (J) of this section no longer exist, he shall remove such signs and such curb markings. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 52.0121) 
10.08.110 - Angle parking. 
A.  Permitted. Whenever the city council determines upon the basis of a traffic engineering investigation that the width of a highway or portion thereof, and traffic conditions are such that the parking of vehicles at an angle to the curb or edge of the highway will not be unduly hazardous to the flow of traffic, and that there is need for additional parking space which angle parking will provide, the city council shall by resolution direct the city engineer to, and the city engineer shall indicate at what angle traffic conditions make it desirable that vehicles should be parked by placing parallel white lines upon the surface of such highway or portion thereof. On such portions of such highways a person shall not stop, stand or park any vehicle except between, at the angle indicated by, and parallel to both adjacent white lines, with the nearest front wheel not more than one foot from the curb or bumper, which may be placed in lieu of curbs or the edge of the highway. The city engineer may prohibit stopping, standing, or parking in connection with any angle parking layout or plan as provided in Section 10.08.060(A)(5). 
B.  Prohibited. Whenever the city council, upon the basis of a traffic engineering investigation, finds that the conditions, because of which angle parking has been permitted upon a highway or portion thereof as provided in subsection (A) of this section no longer exist, the city council shall by resolution direct the city engineer to obliterate such angle parking lines and other markings from such highways or portions thereof. Thereafter on such portion or the highway, no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle, other than according to the vehicle code or as provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 52.0122(a)) 
10.08.120 - Parallel parking lines. 
A.  Placement. Whenever parallel parking is required on any highway or portion thereof as provided in the vehicle code, the city council authorizes the city engineer to place white lines consistent with the provisions of the vehicle code parallel to and/or at right angles to the curb or edge of the highway when a traffic engineering investigation indicates that such white lines would facilitate the parking of vehicles or alleviate a hazardous condition. When such white lines have been placed, no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle outside of the rectangular space indicated by such lines and the curb or the edge of the highway. The city engineer may prohibit stopping, standing or parking in connection with any parallel parking plan or layout as provided in Section 10.08.060(A)(5). 
B.  Prohibited. Whenever the city engineer, upon the basis of a traffic engineering investigation, finds that the conditions, because of which parallel white lines were placed as provided in subsection (A) of this section no longer exist, the city engineer shall obliterate such white lines from such highway or portion thereof. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 52.0122(b)) 
10.08.130 - Restriction or prohibition of parking of commercial vehicles. 
A.  Whenever the city council determines that it is necessary to prohibit stopping, standing or parking of commercial vehicles having a manufacturer's gross vehicle weight rating exceeding ten thousand (10,000) pounds on certain residential district streets or portions thereof at all or certain hours of the day, the city council shall, by resolution, direct the city engineer to place appropriate signs specifying applicable prohibitions on such streets or portions thereof. 
B.  Whenever the city council finds that conditions because of which it was necessary to prohibit stopping, standing or parking of commercial vehicles having a manufacturer's gross vehicle weight rating exceeding ten thousand (10,000) pounds at all or certain hours of the day as provided in this section no longer exist, the city council shall, by resolution, direct the city engineer to remove such signs from such streets or portions thereof. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 52.0128) 
Chapter 10.12 - BICYCLES, MOTORCYCLES AND OFF-ROAD VEHICLES 
Sections: 

10.12.010 - Incorporation of Sections 23130 and 27150 of vehicle code. 
    Sections 23130 and 27150 of the vehicle code of the state of California are incorporated by reference. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 28.042) 
10.12.020 - Noise level. 
    No person shall operate a motor vehicle whose noise level is in excess of that provided in Section 23130 of the vehicle code of the state of California. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 28.043) 
10.12.030 - Spark arrester and muffler. 
    Any motor vehicle operated within the city shall be equipped with a spark arrester and also with a muffler as defined in Section 27150 of the California Vehicle Code. No person shall operate a motor vehicle unless it is so equipped with a spark arrester and muffler. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 28.044) 
10.12.040 - Exemptions. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to operation of vehicles upon property used for raceways or racing facilities in accordance with a license or permit issued by the city. 
(Ord. 2004-21 § 5, 2004; Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 28.045) 
10.12.050 - Riding on motorcycles and bicycles. 
    No person shall ride upon a highway on either a motorcycle or bicycle on a portion of said vehicle which is not specifically designed for the carrying of passengers, nor shall any person operating a motorcycle or bicycle upon a highway permit another to do so. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 52.0127(a)) 
10.12.060 - Clinging to moving vehicles. 
    It is unlawful for any person traveling upon any bicycle, motorcycle, motorscooter or any moving vehicle of any nature whatever, on any public highway, to cling to or attach himself or his vehicle to any other moving vehicle. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 52.0127(b)) 
Chapter 10.16 - PEDESTRIANS 
Sections: 

10.16.010 - Crosswalks-Establishment between intersections. 
A.  Pursuant to the vehicle code, whenever the city council determines, upon the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation, that a crosswalk between intersections would facilitate the orderly movement of pedestrian and vehicular traffic, the city council shall by resolution direct the city engineer to provide and maintain painted markings or other appropriately devised symbols or warning signs at all crosswalks which have been designated as such. 
B.  Removal. Whenever the city council finds, upon the basis of a traffic engineering study, that the conditions because of which a crosswalk has been provided and maintained as provided in subsection (A) of this section no longer exist, the city council shall by resolution direct the city engineer to remove such markings, symbols or signs from such crosswalk. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 52.0124(a)) 
10.16.020 - Crosswalks-Establishment at intersections. 
A.  The city council authorizes the city engineer to provide and maintain painted crosswalk markings or other appropriately devised symbols or warning signs at any intersection whenever a traffic engineering investigation indicates that such markings, symbols or signs would facilitate the orderly movement of pedestrian and vehicular traffic. 
B.  Removal. Whenever the city engineer, upon the basis of a traffic engineering investigation, finds that the conditions because of which painted crosswalk markings or other appropriately devised symbols or warning signs at any intersection have been provided and maintained as provided in subsection (A) of this section no longer exist, the city engineer shall remove such markings, symbols or signs at such crosswalk. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 52.0124(b)) 
10.16.030 - Prohibiting the use of crosswalks by pedestrians. 
A.  Pursuant to the vehicle code, whenever the board determines, upon the basis of a traffic engineering investigation, that prohibiting the use of any crosswalk is necessary, the city council shall by resolution direct the city engineer to erect and maintain signs adjacent to such crosswalk directing that pedestrians shall not cross in the crosswalk. 
B.  Removal. Whenever the city council determines, upon the basis of a traffic engineering investigation, that the conditions because of which signs were erected prohibiting the use of a crosswalk as provided in subsection (A) of this section no longer exists, the city council shall by resolution direct the city engineer to remove such signs. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 52.0124(c)) 
10.16.040 - Violation-Penalty. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter or disobeying any signs or markings installed pursuant thereto, shall be guilty of an infraction. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; Ord. 184 § 4 (part), 1993: SBCC § 52.0129 (part)) 
Chapter 10.20 - SPEED LIMITS 
Sections: 

10.20.010 - Authority to increase twenty-five-mile limit. 
A.  Pursuant to the vehicle code, whenever the city council determines, upon the basis of an engineering and traffic survey, that a greater speed would facilitate the orderly movement of vehicular traffic and would be safe upon any street otherwise subject to a prima facie limit of twenty-five (25) miles per hour under the vehicle code, the city council shall determine and declare a higher prima facie speed limit. When such determination has been made, the city council shall by resolution direct the city engineer to erect and maintain signs upon such street as provided in the vehicle code indicating file appropriate prima facie speed limit. Such signs may be supplemented by appropriate pavement markings. 
B.  Removal. Whenever the city council, upon the basis of a traffic engineering investigation, finds that the conditions, because of which a speed limit has been determined as provided in subsection (A) of this section no longer exist, the city council shall by resolution direct the city engineer to remove such signs and markings from such street. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 52.0123(a)) 
10.20.020 - Authority to decrease sixty-five-mile limit. 
A.  Pursuant to the vehicle code, whenever the city council determines, upon the basis of an engineering and traffic survey, that the limit of sixty-five (65) miles per hour is more than is reasonable or safe upon any street or highway where such limit of sixty-five (65) miles per hour is applicable under the vehicle code, the city council shall determine and declare a lower prima facie limit which is appropriate to facilitate the orderly movement of traffic and is reasonable and safe. When such determination has been made, the city council shall by resolution direct the city engineer to erect and maintain signs upon such street or highway as provided in the vehicle code indicating the appropriate speed limit. Such signs may be supplemented by appropriate pavement markings. 
B.  Removal. Whenever the city council, upon the basis of a traffic engineering investigation, finds that the conditions because of which a speed limit has been determined as provided in subsection (A) of this section no longer exists, the city council shall by resolution direct the city engineer to remove such signs and pavement markings from such street or highway. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 52.0123(b)) 
10.20.030 - Authority to link speed limit districts. 
A.  Pursuant to the vehicle code, whenever the city council determines, upon the basis of an engineering and traffic survey, that the limit of sixty-five (65) miles per hour is more than is reasonable or safe upon any portion of a street or highway for a distance of not exceeding two thousand (2,000) feet in length between districts either business or residence, the city council may determine and declare a reasonable and safe prima facie limit thereon lower than sixty-five (65) miles per hour, but not less than twenty-five (25) miles per hour. When such determination has been made, the city council shall by resolution direct the city engineer to erect and maintain signs thereon as provided in the vehicle code. Such signs may be supplemented by appropriate pavement markings. 
B.  Removal. Whenever the city council finds, upon the basis of an engineering and traffic survey, that the conditions because of which a prima facie limit, lower than sixty-five (65) miles per hour has been determined as provided in subsection (A) of this section no longer exist, it shall by resolution direct the city engineer to remove such signs and markings from such portion of street or highway. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 52.0123(c)) 
Chapter 10.24 - TRIP REDUCTION AND TRAVEL DEMAND MANAGEMENT 
Sections: 

10.24.010 - Purpose and intent. 
A.  The San Bernardino Associated Governments, as the Congestion Management Agency for San Bernardino County, adopted the Congestion Management Program ("CMP") on November 4, 1992. The CMP requires each local jurisdiction to adopt and implement a trip reduction and travel demand management ordinance that provides alternative transportation methods. Failure to adopt an ordinance can result in loss of Proposition III gas tax funds by being found in non-compliance with the Congestion Management Program. 
B.  The trip reduction and travel demand management ordinance is intended to satisfy the legal requirements of Chapter 6 of the Congestion Management Program. 
(Ord. 190 § 1, 1994) 
10.24.020 - Requirements-Trip reduction. 
    As an employer of one hundred (100) or more employees, the city has conducted and compiled an employee survey that provides a data base for implementing the city's ride-share program. The employee survey further provided data to the Mojave Desert Air Quality Management District to be used to measure the effectiveness of trip reduction as a means to reduce vehicle emissions in the southeast Desert Air Basin. This data will be used to assist in the District's determination whether or not to implement Rule 1701, Employer Based Trip Reduction. 
(Ord. 190 § 2, 1994) 
10.24.030 - Requirements-Travel demand management. 
A.  Travel demand management involves the implementation of strategies and programs which reduce traffic congestion, vehicle miles traveled ("VMT"), and/or vehicle trips ("VT"), which result in reduction in mobile source emissions. The following are measures being implemented by the city. Control measures implemented by the city prior to being improved by any other regulatory agency, will result in the city achieving credit for trip reductions and corresponding improvements in the roadway and intersection level of service ("LOS") on the city's CMP network. 
B.  Measures Presently Implemented by the City. 
1.  Transit/Multiple Occupancy Vehicle Service. 
a.  The city is a member of the Victor Valley Transit Services Authority ("VVTSA") which provides multiple occupancy vehicle service to the city. Approximately nine hundred fifteen (915) miles of roads are serviced by the current route, with monthly ridership in excess of twenty thousand (20,000). The availability of this service reduces traffic congestion, VMT and VT. The fixed-route network will be periodically evaluated to determine appropriate revisions and expansion based upon new development and levels of ridership. The city, with the VVTSA, has promoted the use of this service through various public information measures. These include: 
i.  Television commercials on local television and radio stations; 
ii.  Appearance by the transit manager on local television and radio talk shows, and at community group meetings; 
iii.  Availability of bus schedules at various city locations, including City Hall and other places of public assembly; and 
iv.  Notification of city residents of the service through the city newsletter and quarterly recreation and park district newsletter. 
    The city will continue to encourage public information programs which promote the use of alternate modes of transportation. 
b.  Bus/Multiple Occupancy Vehicle Turnouts. Bus turnouts are required to be designed and installed as a condition of approval for new developments which are likely to generate significant quantities of arriving/ departing traffic. These turnouts are provided to accommodate existing bus service routes and to encourage the expansion of service to new developments. 
2.  Bicycle Program. The city adopted Ordinance 130 establishing a city-wide bicycle trail system and associated design standards. The purpose of the system is to establish a long range plan for the city that will encourage the development and use of bicycles for commuter-oriented transportation. The city is an active participant in the Bicycle Plan Advisory Committee, a standing committee of SANBAG, that is pursuing the establishment of a regional bicycle transportation network. 
3.  Promotion of Land Use Regulations. 
a.  Amend Zoning Regulations. The city has adopted Ordinance 126 which established a service commercial (C-3) zone district. This district broadens the number and types of retail and service uses that are allowed in areas with proximity to the industrial area with a high concentration of daytime employees. This zoning amendment benefits the reduction of VT and VMT by providing convenient access to vital consumer services and products to industrial employees. 
b.  Encourage Mixed-use Development. The city encourages the implementation of master-planned mixed-use developments as evidenced by the approval of the ten thousand (10,000) acre Rancho Las Flores planned development and by the planned mix-use general plan designation of over two thousand (2,000) acres of land contained within the city's current corporate boundaries. These mixed-use developments facilitate optimum VT and VMT ratios by such measures as residential density clustering, planned proximity to work places and commerce and by encouraging efficient roadway infrastructure as well as alternative transit infrastructure. 
4.  Traffic Flow Improvements. 
a.  Traffic Signals. 
i.  Traffic Signal Coordination. Existing and new traffic signals are being coordinated to increase uninterrupted vehicle travel. 
ii.  Traffic Signal Timing. Existing and new traffic signals are periodically evaluated to ensure cycle times are optimal for traffic movement. 
iii.  Traffic signal improvements are being used to increase roadway efficiency and capacity during peak travel periods, resulting in improved vehicle movement. 
b.  Modification to Vehicle Travel Lanes. The city reviews new developments to determine if additional travel lanes for acceleration/deceleration purposes are needed. This is required at major street intersections and/or major street entrance(s) to development projects. 
5.  Trip Reduction Ordinance. The city participated in the preparation of the Mojave Desert Air Quality Management District's Rule 1701, Employer Based Trip Reduction. This rule encourages participation in home-to-work commute alternatives by employers with one hundred (100) or more employees, when thirty-three (33) or more arrive to work sites during the peak travel period. The district is currently evaluating the effectiveness of the rule in terms of emission reduction. The city will cooperate with the district during this evaluation period, and if the rule is implemented by the district, the city will work to implement a trip reduction ordinance for its employees. 
(Ord. 190 § 3, 1994) 
Chapter 10.25 - TRUCK ROUTES PROGRAM 
Sections: 

10.25.010 - Authority to establish truck routes. 
A.  Pursuant to Vehicle Code Section 35701, the city may, by ordinance, prohibit the use of a street by any commercial vehicle or by any vehicle exceeding a maximum gross weight limit, except with respect to any vehicle which is subject to Sections 1031 to 1036, inclusive, of the Public Utilities Code, and except with respect to vehicles used for the collection and transportation of garbage, rubbish, or refuse. 
(Ord. 2003-1 § 2 (part), 2003) 
10.25.020 - Truck routes program. 
A.  Commercial vehicles exceeding a maximum gross weight of ten thousand (10,000) pounds are prohibited from using local streets, with the following exceptions: 
1.  Commercial vehicles coming from a local street having ingress and egress by direct route to and from a street identified on the plan of truck routes when necessary for the purpose of making pickups or deliveries, or for the purpose of delivering materials to construction sites. 
2.  Passenger buses under the jurisdiction of the public utilities commission. 
3.  Any vehicle owned by a public utility or a licensed contractor while necessarily in use in the construction, installation, maintenance, or repair of any public utility. 
4.  Any vehicle owned and operated by a public agency. 
5.  Where permitted, commercial vehicles traveling to or from residential or agricultural property where they are parked in accordance with Section 16.20.090(H) of this code. 
(Ord. 2003-1 § 2 (part), 2003) 
10.25.030 - Plan for truck routes. 
A.  The plan for truck routes may be established and amended by resolution. 
B.  The resolution shall not be effective until appropriate signs are erected indicating streets included in the plan for truck routes. 
(Ord. 2003-1 § 2 (part), 2003) 
Title 12 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PLACES 
Chapters: 
Chapter 12.04 - STREET NAMING AND NUMBERING 
Sections: 

12.04.010 - General provisions. 
A.  Street names shall be consistent with themes or associations which promote a neighborhood concept. They shall be pleasant sounding, appropriate, and easy to read and pronounce. Homonyms shall be avoided whenever possible. 
B.  Street names shall be continued when the street crosses an intersection. Street names shall not be continued around knuckles. 
C.  Wherever possible, conflicts with like names in adjacent incorporated or unincorporated areas shall be avoided. 
(Ord. 226 § 4 (part), 1996) 
12.04.020 - Street categories. 
A.  Through streets traversing generally north and south shall be "Avenue," those traversing generally east and west shall be "Street." 
B.  Cul-de-sacs shall be given the name "Court." Courts shall not have the same name as the street or avenue they terminate upon. Cul-de-sacs shall be named the same as a street only when the street enters directly into it. 
C.  Looping or circular streets shall be called "Loop" or "Circle" and be named with the same street name as the through street it terminates upon. The street connecting a loop or circle to the street shall be called a "Way." 
D.  Through streets changing direction forty-five (45) degrees or more shall be named "Trail" or "Drive." The off-set portion shall be designated with a prefix of either "North," "South," "East" or "West" depending upon the orientation of the off-site portion. 
E.  Special street names to be assigned by the city: 
1.  Boulevard; 
2.  Highway; 
3.  Parkway; 
4.  Outer Highway; 
5.  Road. 
(Ord. 226 § 4 (part), 1996) 
12.04.030 - Street names. 
A.  Subject to the approval of the building and safety department, it is the responsibility of the applicant for development resulting in new streets to submit names to the city for approval. 
B.  Street names shall be consistent with themes or associations which promote the rural atmosphere of the community. Examples of themes are as follows: 
1.  Western heritage; 
2.  Minerals and gems; 
3.  Trees/shrubs/bushes/and flowers; 
4.  Birds; 
5.  Horse breeds; 
6.  Historic places and events; 
7.  Presidents; 
8.  States and geographical locations. 
C.  Streets shall not be named after local personalities unless approved by the city council. 
(Ord. 226 § 4 (part), 1996) 
12.04.040 - Lot and parcel numbering. 
A.  Grid System. Utilizing the San Bernardino County grid system, the city is divided into grids with each mile separated into eight gridlines. The lines increase in number progressing from south to north and from west to east. With eight lines per mile the address system increases one hundred (100) numbers every six hundred sixty (660) feet. 
B.  Even and Odd Street Numbers. 
1.  Even street numbers shall be assigned to the north and west sides of streets. Odd street numbers shall be assigned to the south and east sides of streets. 
2.  Curving streets shall be numbered consistent with the designation for each portion of the street. 
3.  Loops shall be numbered with either even or odd numbers entirely around the outer lots in the loop with all interior lots using the opposite. Loops and circles opening generally to the south and west shall have even numbers on the outer lots while those opening to the north and east shall have odd numbers around the outer lots. 
C.  Complex Numbering. Complexes or groups of buildings, such as apartments, shopping centers and condominiums shall have one primary number for the site. Each building shall be designated with a letter and each suite, apartment or unit within the building shall bear a unit number. 
(Ord. 226 § 4 (part), 1996) 
12.04.050 - Building numbering. 
A.  Posting or Designating Street Address Numbers. The owner or person responsible for any building to which a number has been assigned shall post and maintain the designated street address numbers subject to the following: 
1.  Building numbers shall be placed on each street frontage on the right hand side of the building being faced or at a location approved by the building official. Whenever a principal building is occupied by more than one business or dwelling unit, each tenant or unit shall display suite or space identification. 
2.  Multiple buildings on a lot shall have numbers assigned and posted in a manner determined by the building and safety department. 
3.  Numbers shall be aligned horizontally and be internally or externally lighted. In all cases, the address shall be positioned to be readily visible from the public way(s). 
B.  Building Address Number Sizes. The following minimum sizes shall be considered to meet the intent of the building numbering requirements. 
1.  Single-family residential uses shall have four inch high letters up to fifty (50) feet from the curb, six inch high letters up to one hundred (100) feet from the curb and eight inch high letters if over one hundred (100) feet from the curb. 
2.  Multiple residential uses shall have six inch numbers up to fifty (50) feet from the curb, and eight inch numbers up to one hundred (100) feet from the curb, and twelve (12) inch numbers over one hundred (100) feet from the curb. Individual numbers on apartment units shall be at least four inches in height. 
3.  Commercial and Industrial buildings shall have eight inch letters up to fifty (50) feet from the curb, twelve (12) inch letters up to one hundred feet from the curb, and twenty-four (24) inch letters if over one-hundred (100) feet from the curb. Unit or space numbers may be installed directly over the doors, and shall not be less than three inches or more than six inches in height. 
4.  Nonbuilding uses such as junk yards, lumber yards, and similar uses surrounded by fences shall have numbers at least six inches high mounted on a contrasting background near each driveway or entrance point and shall be visible from the street. 
5.  Buildings of three or more stories shall have the street address posted on the roof top oriented upward and readable from the frontage street direction. Numbers shall be twelve (12) inches in height with a three inch stroke and numbers at least five inches wide. Roof top numbers shall not be visible from the street. 
6.  Buildings fronting on two or more public ways shall have numbers assigned by the building and safety department and take into consideration street classification (local, collector, etc.) and other traffic concerns. In general, the narrow dimension on the street will be considered the front, but access shall be taken from the lesser classified street whenever possible. 
C.  Rear Door Numbering. 
1.  The rear door of multi-occupancy commercial or industrial building shall be marked with suite designation. 
2.  Multi-building sites shall place building number and suite number indicated on rear door. 
3.  Letters or numbers shall be minimum four inches in height, one-half inch stroke. 
(Ord. 226 § 4 (part), 1996) 
12.04.060 - Complex directories. 
    Apartments, condominiums and commercial or industrial complexes with more than three separate buildings on site shall have a building directory. 
A.  Placement. Directories are to be posted at the main entrance(s) to the complex on the entry driveway side. The main entrance shall be from the street where the address is assigned. Directories shall not be located in the public right-of-way or clear sight triangle areas. 
B.  Size. Directories shall be of sufficient size to be clearly visible from the public roadway serving the entrance driveway, but in no case less than two feet in either dimension or six square feet. Directories shall be identified with six inch or larger address numbers on contrasting background. 
C.  Power Source. The directory shall be lighted from a power source dedicated to the general premises. 
(Ord. 226 § 4 (part), 1996) 
Chapter 12.08 - VEHICULAR AND PEDESTRIAN CIRCULATION STANDARDS 
Sections: 

12.08.010 - General provisions. 
A.  Standards and specifications for transportation facilities and all work done within the public road right-of-way shall conform to the standards and specifications of the engineering department. 
B.  Right-of-way shall be required as shown on the adopted general plan circulation map. 
C.  In instances where roadways are designated on the circulation plan where no road currently exists, the location and design standards, including the grade and alignment, will be determined by the engineering department at the time of submittal of street improvement plans for the individual project. 
D.  Cul-de-sacs shall have a minimum paved radius of forty (40) feet and right-of-way width of fifty (50) feet; length shall not exceed three hundred thirty (330) feet; provided, that adequate fire flow is available, unless approved by the fire department. 
E.  Acceptable legal and physical access shall be provided to each site in accordance with the following: 
1.  Acceptable access shall include a public thoroughfare or right-of-way which is dedicated, deeded or condemned for use as a principal means of access to abutting property, and which is constructed to acceptable standards for the purpose of carrying through traffic; any exceptions to these requirements must be approved by the city engineer; 
2.  Where substandard alleys are located at the rear or sides of property, such alleys shall be used primarily for service functions, including but not limited to trash collection, utility service and fire access; alleys shall not be intended or used for conveyance of through traffic, required parking, or for primary access; 
3.  Alleys which conform to city standards may be allowed for secondary access; 
4.  Any existing alleys must conform to standards contained herein in order to be approved for public use of access; 
5.  Paving for alleyways shall meet specifications of the engineering department; 
6.  Minimum alley right-of-way width shall be twenty (20) feet, and dedication to the city shall be required. 
(Ord. 250 Exh. A (part), 1998; Ord. 135 Exh. A (Art. 1 § 1), 1992) 
12.08.020 - Access control. 
A.  On new development, no direct driveway access from individual residences shall be permitted onto major arterial, arterial and secondary arterial streets as designated on the adopted circulation plan map. 
B.  Access shall be controlled on major arterials, arterials and secondary arterials to minimize curb cuts, median breaks and facilitate the flow of traffic. Any new development or subdivision of land adjacent to these roadways shall be required to dedicate vehicular access rights, except where access points are shown on an approved site plan or subdivision map. Shared access and parking, and use of side streets for access, shall be required wherever possible. 
C.  All development proposals shall be designed so as to provide for a free flow of vehicles in and out of the site without unnecessary backing and turning movements as well as for easy access to the various activity areas within each site. Two-way access driveways shall be used wherever possible. 
D.  Placement of access points into each site shall minimize interference with the off-site circulation system. Access points shall be placed at the maximum feasible distance from an intersection. Where site design allows, the standards specified in Table 1 are recommended. 
E.  Adequate provisions shall be made for emergency vehicle access. Two separate accesses shall be provided to each site from any paved, publicly maintained right-of-way as determined by the city engineer. The primary access shall be paved to city standards; minimum specifications for secondary access shall require a well-graded, all-weather surface as approved by the city engineer and fire department. Secondary access requirements shall be based upon such factors as distance, topography, surrounding development and emergency response time. 
Table 1 

Design Standards for the Spacing of 

Driveway Accesses from Street Intersections Street classifications Minimum distance from a driveway to an adjacent intersection Spacing between driveways Major Arterial 
(120 ft. r.o.w.) Limited access only* 
Minimum 450 ft. 
(No residential access permitted) Limited access only. Minimum 450' spacing; one driveway per parcel. Additional accesses must be justified by a Traffic Study and approved by City Engineer Arterial 
(100 ft. r.o.w.) Limited access only* 
Minimum 350 ft. 
(No residential access) Minimum 250' spacing Secondary and Rural Arterial 
(80 ft. r.o.w.) Limited access 
Minimum 250 ft.; full access min. 350 ft. 
(No residential access) Minimum 150' spacing Collector street 
(66 ft. r.o.w.) Minimum 200 ft. Minimum 100' spacing Local street 
(60 ft. r.o.w.) Minimum 100 ft. 100' or one driveway per parcel * Access restricted by raised medians to right turns only. 
NOTE: All distances shall be measured form the adjacent curb face.  
(Ord. 135 Exh. A (Art. 1 § 2), 1992) 
12.08.030 - Intersection design standards. 
A.  Intersections less than eighty (80) degrees shall not be permitted without approval from the engineering department. The ninety-degree angle is preferable. 
B.  Intersections shall be placed a minimum of five hundred (500) feet centerline to centerline from freeway on and off ramps. 
C.  Offset intersections shall be spaced as follows: 
1.  For intersections involving major arterials, arterials and/or secondary arterials, spacing of intersections shall be a minimum of three hundred (300) feet centerline to centerline; 
2.  For local and/or collector streets, spacing of intersections shall be a minimum of two hundred (200) feet centerline to centerline; 
3.  Opposing centerlines of an intersection shall not be offset by more than five feet. 
D.  If offset streets are to be continuous, they shall be curved to approach the intersection so as to effect a right-angle alignment. 
E.  At intersections where additional traffic lanes are indicated by traffic analysis, provision shall be made for requiring additional right-of-way and curb width as determined by the engineering department. 
F.  No parking, except for emergency parking, shall be allowed on any street which has four or more lanes (major arterials, arterials, and secondary arterial streets). 
G.  A clear sight area shall be established at all intersections of public or private streets. This area shall be defined by a line in a horizontal plane, taken at a forty-five (45) degree angle, connecting two points thirty (30) feet from the intersection of the ultimate right-of-way lines of the intersecting streets or the prolongation of such lines. The maximum height of visual barriers, including but not limited to signs, vegetation, fences and walls, shall not exceed thirty-six (36) inches above the top of the curb or forty-four (44) inches above the surface of the street. 
H.  A clear sight triangle of fifteen (15) feet shall be established where a private driveway intersects a public street. 
(Amended during 12/98 supplement; Ord. 250 Exh. A (part), 1998; Ord. 135 Exh. A (Art. 1 § 3), 1992) 

12.08.040 - Residential street standards. 
A.  Streets shall have a uniform minimum right-of-way width of sixty (60) feet, except as provided herein below. 
B.  Street grades shall not exceed twelve (12) percent unless it can be demonstrated that in order to accomplish the objectives of the general plan, a street grade in excess of twelve (12) percent is necessary. In such circumstances, the engineering department may approve a street grade not to exceed fourteen (14) percent grade for a distance not to exceed five hundred (500) feet if a finding is made that said roadway will not create an unacceptable hazardous risk to the public health, safety or welfare. 
C.  Residential streets may have reduced rights-of-way down to a minimum of fifty (50) feet, subject to approval by the engineering department, if the project site demonstrates at least one of the following conditions: 
1.  The project is a private gated community and provides private streets; 
2.  The project is located in an area designated on the General Plan for very low density residential uses, and features rural character, natural resources, or a need to minimize cut and fill grading, and no through traffic access to abutting properties is required; 
3.  The project is an attached condominium or town house development; A five-foot utility easement shall be required along all fifty (50) foot rights-of-way in accordance with the engineering department. 
D.  Reduced pavement width may be recommended by the development review committee, where innovative site planning techniques such as semi-detached or attached houses, clustering, zero lot line, and skewed house plotting provide streetscape variety and visual interest and increase lot usability, or where necessary to preserve rural character, significant natural features, or to minimize cut and fill grading in hillside areas. 
E.  Curvilinear streets are encouraged wherever possible for residential streets with a total right-of-way width of sixty (60) feet or less. The minimum radius for curvilinear streets shall be three hundred (300) feet, with a minimum tangent length of one hundred (100) feet between curves, unless otherwise approved by the engineering department. 
F.  Curb returns shall be provided as follows: 
1.  A minimum curb return radius of twenty (20) feet shall be provided at intersecting streets designated as collector or local streets. 
2.  A minimum curb return radius of thirty-five (35) feet shall be provided when one or both of the intersecting streets is designated, as a rural arterial or greater. 
3.  In hillside areas, the curb return radius may be modified if required because of the topography. 
4.  Property lines shall be cut diagonally based on the radius. 
G.  Bus turnouts may be required pursuant to Section 12.08.050(E). 
(Ord. 135 Exh. A (Art. 1 § 4), 1992) 
12.08.050 - Pedestrian circulation standards. 
A.  Sidewalks shall be required on public streets as determined by the reviewing authority. Sidewalks shall be constructed of concrete, with a minimum width of five feet, exclusive of the curb. Any sidewalk constructed within two and one-half (2 1/2) feet from face of curb shall join to back of curb. Considerations in design are to be given for handicapped persons so that a clear path of travel of at least four feet is provided, in accordance with state handicap requirements. 
B.  Additional sidewalks on site may be required through the design review process, the sidewalk system shall provide for a safe, continuous pedestrian circulation and access system to all parts of the development. Pedestrian access shall be provided from public streets and parking lots to building entries, and walkways provided on-site shall connect with those off-site. 
C.  The following standards shall apply to meandering sidewalks: 
1.  Radii for curved sidewalk shall be between two hundred (200) and six hundred (600) feet. 
2.  Maximum sidewalk grade shall conform to state standards for handicapped access. 
D.  Curb cuts and inclines for handicapped access shall be required in accordance with state law. 
E.  Bus turnouts and bus shelters may be required during the design review process. These facilities shall be designed to maximize security features and shall be located in proximity to both traffic signals and pedestrian crosswalks, so as to provide for ease of access to both buses and pedestrians, including handicapped persons. Bus stops shall be a minimum of fifty (50) feet in length. 
(Ord. 135 Exh. A (Art. 1 § 5), 1992) 
Chapter 12.12 - ENCROACHMENT PERMITS-GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Sections: 

12.12.010 - Scope of general provisions. 
    These general provisions, rules of construction and definitions shall govern the construction of this chapter, unless the provision or the context provides otherwise. 
(SBCC § 51.011) 
12.12.020 - Delegation of authority. 
    Whenever a power is granted to, or a duty is imposed upon a public officer, the power may be exercised or the duty may be performed by a deputy of the officer or by a person authorized, pursuant to law or ordinance, by the officer, unless this chapter expressly provides otherwise. 
(SBCC § 51.012) 
12.12.030 - Reference to ordinances or statutes. 
    Whenever reference is made to any portion of this chapter or any other ordinance or statute, such reference applies to all amendments and additions now or hereafter made. 
(SBCC § 51.013) 
12.12.040 - Terms and genders. 
    The present tense includes the past and future tenses; and the future, the present. The masculine gender includes the feminine. The singular number includes the plural, and the plural, the singular. 
(SBCC § 51.014) 
12.12.060 - Issuance of permits by city engineer. 
    The city engineer may issue permits, as provided in this chapter, authorizing the permittee to do any of the following acts: 
A.  Make or cause to be made any excavation or opening, fill or obstruction in, over, along, on, across or through any city facility for any purpose, excepting, however, for or in connection with the installation of poles, guys and anchors constructed for use under a franchise for public utility purposes where such poles, guys and anchors are located outside of the paved or traveled portion of the city facility; 
B.  Construct or repair, or cause to be constructed or repaired any curb, sidewalk, gutter, driveway, roadway surface, retaining wall, storm drain or culvert, water line, sewer line, or work of any nature, or place, change or renew an encroachment in, over, along, on, across or through any city facility, excepting, however, for or in connection with the installation of poles, guys and anchors constructed for use under a franchise for public utility purposes where such poles, guys and anchors are located outside of the paved or traveled portion of the city facility; 
C.  Move or cause to be moved over, upon, along or across any city facility, any building or structure; 
D.  Place any banner over, across, on or along any city facility; 
E.  Plant, remove, cut, cut down, injure or destroy any tree, shrub, plant or flower growing within any city facility excepting necessary pruning or trimming to protect persons or property. 
(SBCC § 51.016) 
12.12.070 - Application-Issuance fee. 
    An application for a permit pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be made in writing and filed with the engineering department, accompanied by the appropriate fee/deposit. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 51.018) 
12.12.080 - Requirement of plans. 
    If, in the opinion of the city engineer, the work proposed to be done requires the making of plans or the setting of stakes, or both, the city engineer may require the application to be accompanied by the necessary plans, which plans shall be prepared by a registered civil engineer. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 51.019) 
12.12.090 - Performance of work to satisfaction of city engineer. 
    The permittee shall perform all work in accordance with plans, if plans are made, and specifications referred to in the permit, to the satisfaction of and under the supervision of the city engineer. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 15.0110) 
12.12.100 - Fees, deposits and bonds. 
A.  Payment. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the city engineer shall not issue any permit until all deposits and issuance fees have been paid. 
B.  Issuance Fees Not Refundable. The issuance fees required by the provisions of this chapter are for the purpose of defraying the cost of issuing the requested permit. No part of any issuance fee may be refunded to any applicant. 
C.  Deposit in Funds. Issuance fees and charges for repairs, inspection, or engineering collected under the provisions of this chapter shall be deposited in the respective funds from which the corresponding disbursements are made. 
D.  Extra Deposits and Bonds. If, in the opinion of the city engineer, any special or general deposit, or any undertaking or any combination thereof is not sufficient for the proper protection of the public interest in the highways, including any trees thereon, the city engineer may require either an additional deposit, or an increase in the amount of the bond in such amount as he determines will be sufficient to protect such public interest. 
E.  Insufficient Deposits. 
1.  Where any deposit is determined to be insufficient to pay all fees and costs provided for in this chapter, the permittee shall, upon demand, pay to the commissioner an amount equal to the deficiency. 
2.  Where the permittee fails or refuses to pay the deficiency upon demand, the city engineer may recover the deficiency by appropriate action in any court of competent jurisdiction. Until such deficiency is paid in full, no permit shall be issued to such permittee. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 51.0111) 
12.12.110 - Permits. 
A.  Issuance of Permit Public Record. If the applicant for a permit complies with every provision of this chapter and with all applicable provisions of all other ordinances and statutes, the city engineer shall issue to the applicant a written permit to perform the work set forth in the application. Upon the issuance of such permit the application shall become a public record. 
B.  Imposition of Conditions or Changes by City Engineer. 
1.  Any permit authorized under any of the provisions of this chapter may be issued subject to such conditions, changes and limitations as are, in the discretion of the city engineer, necessary for the protection of the city facility, or to prevent undue interference with traffic, or to protect both persons and property within, upon or adjacent to said city facility from damage or danger. 
2.  The city engineer may issue a single permit for any number of excavations which are part of a single project. The permit may be exercised by giving not less than forty-eight (48) hours notice to the city engineer on a form to be prescribed by the city engineer before work is commenced. 
C.  Reservation of the Power to Change the Conditions After Permit Issued. Any permit issued by the city engineer under any of the provisions of this chapter, or the conditions to which it has been made subject, may be amended or changed if the city engineer deems such amendment or change to be necessary for the protection of a city facility, or to prevent undue interference, or to protect both persons and property. Notification of the amendment or change shall be made by the city engineer either by mailing written notice to the permittee at the address indicated on his application for the permit, or by making personal service of said written notice upon the permittee. The amendment or change shall be effective either twenty-four (24) hours after said written notice is deposited in the United States mail, or immediately upon completion of personal service. 
D.  Commencement and Completion of Work. Every permittee shall complete the work within the time required by the permit. Permits issued hereunder shall be valid only for the period of time specified in the permits, unless the city engineer grants a time extension. 
E.  Refusal to Issue Permit. The city engineer may refuse to issue permits or may revoke any outstanding permits heretofore or hereafter issued, or any portion thereof, where the work has not been started, when file work authorized by the permits, or such portions thereof is included in the proposed work to be done, by any existing assessment district, or by any proposed assessment district for which formation proceedings have been instituted by the city council. 
F.  Nontransferability of Permits. Permits issued pursuant to this chapter are nontransferable. 
G.  Permits Subject to the Use of the City Facilities by Others. Every permit granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, shall be granted subject to the right of the city or of any other person entitled thereto, to use that part of such city facility for any purpose for which such city facility may lawfully be used. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 51.0112) 
12.12.120 - Holding city harmless. 
    On each application the applicant shall sign a statement that he agrees to preserve and save harmless the city and each officer and employee thereof pursuant to Section 1.04.090 of this code. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 51.0113) 
12.12.130 - Notice of completion of work. 
    Upon completion of any work or act for which a permit has been granted, the permittee shall notify the city engineer in writing on a form prescribed by the city engineer. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 51.0114) 
12.12.140 - Relocation of structures-Removal of encroachment. 
A.  The city engineer may require any person who, pursuant to a duly issued permit under this chapter, has performed construction work or placed and maintained any encroachment, to move the same at his own cost and expense to such different location as is specified in a written demand of the city engineer, whenever such move is necessary to insure the safety of the public or to permit the improvement of the facilities and may require the application to contain a signed statement by the applicant to this effect. 
B.  In the event the permittee fails to comply with any such demand, the construction work or encroachment specified in the demand may be removed by the city engineer, and the cost thereof will be recovered from the permittee. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 51.0115) 
12.12.150 - Placement of material or obstruction on city facility. 
    No person shall place or pile any material in or upon any city facility or leave any obstruction or impediment to travel in or upon any city facility without a permit to do so. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 51.0116) 
12.12.160 - Interference with city engineer. 
    A person shall not prevent or obstruct the city engineer, or his duly authorized representative, in making any inspection authorized by this chapter or in taking any sample or in making any test. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 51.0117) 
12.12.170 - Compliance with house moving rules and regulations. 
    The permittee shall comply with the House moving Rules and Regulations, as amended, except to the extent that such rules and regulations are expressly modified or deleted in the permit. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 51.0120) 
Chapter 12.16 - CONSTRUCTION PERMITS 
Sections: 

12.16.010 - Scope of chapter. 
    The provisions of this chapter apply to applications for the granting and control of permits for the laying, constructing, reconstructing, or repairing of curbs, sidewalks, gutters, driveways, street surfaces, retaining walls, water and sewer facilities, storm drains, culverts, or other appurtenant street structures in any highway. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 51.031) 
12.16.020 - Application. 
    An applicant for a construction permit shall complete and file with the city engineer an application in duplicate, conforming with the provisions of Section 12.12.070 which shall contain, in addition thereto, the following: 
A.  The location, nature, and extent of the work to be performed; 
B.  The materials to be used; 
C.  The proposed date and time of day when said work will be commenced; 
D.  The proposed date and time of day when said work will be completed; 
E.  Such other information as the commissioner may require. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 51.032) 
12.16.030 - Permit deposits and refunds. 
A.  An applicant for a permit to construct any work, shall pay the appropriate fee or deposit in an amount estimated by the city engineer to be equal to twice the actual cost of all necessary engineering and inspection costs. 
B.  If the cost of the engineering inspection exceeds the amount of the deposit, the permittee shall pay the deficiency to the city engineer. If the applicant fails to pay said deficiency within fifteen (15) days, the city engineer may recover such sum in any court of competent jurisdiction. Until such amount is paid, further permits shall not be issued. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 51.033) 
12.16.040 - Warning signs and precautionary measures. 
    The permittee shall install barriers, barricades and warning devices in conformance with the standards set forth in the state of California Traffic Manual for any excavation or construction that may affect the public or city's rights-of-way or easements. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 51.037) 
12.16.050 - Certification of acceptance. 
    If the city engineer, by survey or by inspection or by both, ascertains that the work contemplated by this chapter has been completed according to the requirements of the permit issued therefor, and of all of the provisions of this chapter, he shall issue, if requested so to do by the permittee, a certificate of acceptance which shall contain a statement of the location, nature, and extent of the work performed under the permit. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 51.038) 
12.16.060 - Removal of material and debris. 
    A permittee, upon completion of any work for which a permit under this chapter has been issued, shall remove all material and debris: 
A.  Where new work is covered with earth, in accordance with the terms of the specifications attached to the permit; 
B.  In all other cases within three days. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 51.039) 
12.16.070 - Failure of permittee to protect the road or the traveling public or complete the work. 
    If a permittee unnecessarily damages the road, creates a hazard or otherwise endangers the traveling public, or the road, or fails to complete the work within the prescribed time, or authorized extension thereof, the city engineer may take corrective action. The cost of such correction work shall be charged against the permittee. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 51.0310) 
Chapter 12.20 - EQUIPMENT MOVING PERMITS 
Sections: 

12.20.010 - Issuance of moving permit-Specific types of equipment. 
    The city engineer or his designee may, in his discretion, upon application in writing and if good cause appear, issue a permit authorizing the applicant to operate or move over and along highways or routes under the jurisdiction of the city, specific pieces of mobile mechanical equipment on specific vehicles, or emergency public utility equipment on specific vehicles. Any such permit shall be subject to the following conditions. 
(Ord. 55 (part), 1989) 
12.20.020 - General. 
A.  Limit of Authorization. 
1.  The permit is valid only on routes under the jurisdiction of the city. 
2.  The permit is not valid on state highways (includes the roadway crossing under or over a state freeway). A separate moving permit will be required on state highways. 
3.  The permit is not valid on streets or bridges which have posted weight limits. 
4.  The permit shall be limited to specified routes or a specified area of the city and shall specifically describe the routes or the area of the city to which it is limited. This limitation shall be fixed by the city engineer or his designee so as to afford protection to routes under the jurisdiction of the city and the traveling public. 
5.  The granting of the permit shall in no way relieve the permittee from liability for damage to the routes under the jurisdiction of the city, or to persons or property. 
6.  The permit shall be issued for a specific period of time designated by the city engineer or his designee and set forth in the permit, which period shall not exceed one year. 
7.  The permit may be issued subject to such other conditions as the city engineer or his designee deems necessary for the protection of the routes under the jurisdiction of the city. 
8.  The application for a permit pursuant to this section shall be made on a form furnished by the city engineer or his designee and shall contain the information required by Section 710 of the California Vehicle Code and such other information as may be required by the city engineer or his designee. 
B.  Night Moves. Any load moved during night-time hours shall meet all requirements of state and county and city regulations and shall be properly lighted with warning lights and signs as may be required by law and ordinance. A pilot car is required for loads over ten feet wide. 
C.  Parking of Vehicle. A permittee shall not, during restricted hours or any other time, stand or park the permitted vehicle where it creates a definite hazard or traffic obstruction. If the vehicle is in one of the abovementioned areas at the beginning of a restricted movement period it shall continue to move, using reasonable care and precaution to prevent traffic disruption, to the nearest suitable spot enrooted where the load may be parked for the duration of the restricted period. 
D.  Operating Hours. This permit is effective within the period stated on the face of the permit. Unless specifically stated otherwise, (See Section 12.20.030) moving is prohibited from seven a.m. to nine a.m. and four p.m. to six p.m., and from five a.m. Saturday until sunrise Monday. No moving during fog, rain or snow and the following holidays: Fourth of July, Labor Day, Thanksgiving, Christmas, New Years, Memorial Day. 
E.  Permit to be Carried on Vehicle. A permit is valid only when it is carried on the permitted vehicle. 
F.  Permit Subject to Inspection. A permit is the property of the engineering department and must be surrendered upon demand to any law enforcement officer or employee of the engineering department charged with the care and protection of highways. 
G.  Comply With Applicable Laws. Except as specifically provided in the permit, the requirements of the vehicle code and any other applicable laws must be complied with in all particulars. 
(Ord. 55 (part), 1989) 
12.20.030 - Over length. 
A.  Pilot Cars. Pilot cars are required fore and aft when the overall length is one hundred (100) feet long or over, unless otherwise specified on the face of the permit. The pilot cars shall display additional signs as set forth in Section 12.20.070. 
B.  Restricted Hours. Any overall length of one hundred (100) feet long or over will be restricted to the hours of Midnight to five a.m. and may not move from five a.m. Saturday until sunrise Sunday. 
C.  Inspection. Any overall length of one hundred (100) feet long or over is subject to inspection by the city engineering department forces and must be arranged for twenty-four (24) hours before the scheduled move. 
D.  Keep to Right of Center Line. The load must be kept to the right of the highway center line at all times and must stay off shoulders except when entering or leaving the highway or when necessary to allow trailing traffic to pass on narrow or winding roads. 
(Ord. 55 (part), 1989) 
12.20.040 - Over width. 
A.  Pilot Cars. Pilot cars displaying signs the same as specified in Section 12.20.070 shall be provided by the permittee both fore and aft when the load is fourteen (14) feet wide or more and shall provide for either fore or aft for loads over twelve (12) feet wide (two or three lanes fore, four or more lanes aft). 
B.  Restricted Hours. Any load or vehicle fourteen (14) feet wide or wider shall be restricted to moving during the hours of eleven p.m. to five a.m. and may not move from five a.m. Saturday until Monday. Any load or vehicle over ten feet wide, but less than fourteen (14) feet wide, shall not move between the hours of six to nine a.m. and three to six p.m. Monday through Friday and from three a.m. Saturday until sunrise Monday. 
C.  Inspection. Any load fourteen (14) feet or over is subject to inspection by the engineering department forces and must be arranged for twenty-four (24) hours before scheduled move. 
(Ord. 55 (part), 1989) 
12.20.050 - Over weight. 
A.  Impaired Vertical Clearance. It shall be the responsibility of the permittee to check all underpasses, bridges, overhead wires or other structures for impaired vertical clearance and to bypass or arrange clearance at such locations. 
B.  Overhead Lines. Permittee must notify the owner of all overhead lines subject to disturbance or damage by his operation at least twenty-four (24) hours in advance of work and mutually agreeable arrangements must be made between the parties involved. 
C.  Snooter and Roof Boards. Snooter and roof boards are required from eighteen (18) feet high to above the highest point of load. Any load in excess of twenty (20) feet shall be provided with a means of access to the highest point. 
D.  Restricted Hours. All loads eighteen (18) feet high or higher shall be moved during the hours of eleven p.m. to five a.m. and may not move from six a.m. on Saturday until 12:01 a.m. Monday. 
E.  Pilot Cars. A pilot car displaying signs the same as specified in Section 12.20.070 shall be provided for all loads eighteen (18) feet high or higher. 
F.  Inspection. Any load eighteen (18) feet or over is subject to inspection by the engineering department forces and must be arranged for twenty-four (24) hours before the scheduled move. 
(Ord. 55 (part), 1989) 
12.20.060 - Over weight. 
A.  Allowable Over weight. Axle weights shall not exceed those shown on the face of the permit. 
B.  All gross loads in excess of seventy-five (75) tons shall not exceed five m.p.h. when approaching any crossing or structure. 
(Ord. 55 (part), 1989) 
12.20.070 - Signs. 
A.  Unless specifically stated otherwise on the face of the permit, all loads or vehicles being moved in the city under the provisions of Section 35780 California Vehicle Code, exceeding one hundred (100) inches in width, exceeding legal length, or fourteen (14) feet in height when loaded, or with more than ten feet of overhang must display appropriate warning signs. All signs shall be removed immediately upon completion of the move. 
B.  Signs shall be posted on front and rear and shall read "OVERSIZE LOAD," "WIDE LOAD," or "LONG LOAD," or as appropriate for front or rear overhang. The "OVERSIZE LOAD" sign shall have preference when a combination of features exist. The lettering shall be a ten inch minimum height with a two inch minimum brush stroke and a minimum of one inch border all around. All signs shall be black letters on a yellow background mounted at least eighteen (18) inches above the road surface front and rear. Signs must be neat, clean, legible, mounted securely and visible from straight ahead or behind and to forty-five (45) degrees each side thereof. All signs must be illuminated for night moves, or be constructed of suitable reflectorized material to be clearly visible to approaching traffic. 
(Ord. 55 (part), 1989) 
12.20.080 - Fees. 
    All fees for single-trip or annual transportation permits shall be established by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. 55 (part), 1989) 
Chapter 12.24 - EXCAVATION PERMITS 
Sections: 

12.24.010 - Purpose of chapter. 
    The provisions of this chapter apply to the making of applications for and the granting and control of permits for the making of excavations, openings, fills or obstructions in any street(s). 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 51.021) 
12.24.020 - Application. 
    An applicant for an excavation permit shall complete and file with the city engineer an application in duplicate conforming with the provisions of Section 12.12.070 which shall contain, in addition thereto, the following: 
A.  The location, dimensions, purpose, extent and nature of the work to be performed; 
B.  The proposed date and time of day when said work will be commenced; 
C.  The proposed date and time of day when said work will be completed; 
D.  Such other information as the city engineer may require; and shall file with the application a plat in quadruplicate clearly showing the street(s) affected and the exact locations and dimensions of the proposed excavations, as well as any other details that the city engineer prescribes. Provided, however, that when excavations are made for service connections or for the location of trouble in conduits or pipes, or for making repairs thereto, the city engineer may waive the filing of a plat. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 51.022) 
12.24.030 - Proof of right to use street(s). 
    Each applicant for a permit shall file with the city engineer, if required by the city engineer, proof of the applicant's right to use the street(s) for the purposes set forth in the application. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 51.023) 
12.24.040 - Special deposit for surface repairs. 
    Each applicant for a permit, in addition to the payment of the issuance fee, shall deposit with the city engineer a sum of money in no event less than ten dollars ($10.00), which is twice the estimated cost to the nearest five dollars ($5.00) for repairing the surface of the street(s) which may be damaged or destroyed by the proposed excavation or obstruction. Provided, however, that where a faithful performance bond is posted which guarantees to the city the repair of the street(s), including construction financed in whole or in part by special assessments, no deposits for repairs shall be required of applicant. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 51.024) 
12.24.050 - Specification in permit for warning signs. 
    In any permit issued by him, the city engineer may specify what lights, barriers, barricades, warning signs or other measures designed to protect the traveling public must be erected by the permittee, which measures shall be in accordance with state street(s) regulations. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 51.025) 
12.24.060 - Precautionary warning measures. 
A.  If the permit does not specify the precautionary measures to be taken by the permittee, such as the erection of barriers, barricades or warning signs, the permittee shall place and maintain warning lights at each end of such excavation or obstruction and at distances of not more than fifty (50) feet along such excavation or obstruction from sunset of each day to sunrise of the next day, until such excavation is entirely refilled and resurfaced or such obstruction is removed and every said person shall place and maintain barriers, or barricades, at each end of any said excavation or obstruction at all times until such excavation is entirely refilled or such obstruction is removed. 
B.  Barriers, barricades and warning devices shall conform to the same configuration and standards provided for in the current engineering department standards as compiled in accordance with Section 465.7 of the Vehicle Code of the state of California. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 51.026) 
12.24.070 - Refilling excavation or removal of obstruction. 
A.  Immediately upon completion of the work necessitating the excavation or obstruction permitted by any permit issued pursuant to this chapter, the permittee shall promptly and in a workmanlike manner refill the excavation or remove the obstruction in a manner which the city engineer determines is most effective to accomplish thorough consolidation and enable the street(s) to be restored to a condition equivalent to that in which it was prior to the excavation or obstruction. 
B.  After refilling has been completed, the top surface of excavations made in improved streets shall be covered with not less than one inch nor more than two inches of pre-mixed bituminous material satisfactory to the city engineer and shall conform closely enough to the level of the adjoining surface and shall be compacted so that it is hard enough and smooth enough to be safe for pedestrian travel over it as well as for vehicular traffic to pass safely over it at a legal rate of speed. The permittee shall maintain the surface of the refill safe for pedestrian and vehicular traffic until the excavation has been resurfaced in accordance with Section 12.24.080. 
C.  Failure to Refill Excavation. If any permittee fails or refuses to refill any excavation which he has made, or remove any obstruction which he has placed in any street(s), the city engineer may so do and charge the cost thereof to the permittee. 
D.  Notice of Refilling Excavation. Upon completion of the refilling of the excavation for which a permit has been issued, the permittee shall notify the city engineer in writing on a form prescribed by the city engineer. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 51.027) 
12.24.080 - Resurfacing of street(s). 
A.  Upon completion of the refilling of the excavation, the city engineer, at his option, may require the permittee to resurface that portion of the street(s) surface damaged by the permittee's excavation or obstruction, or the city engineer may elect to do such resurfacing himself. Where the pavement or surface has been removed, the permittee shall replace it to a thickness of one inch greater than that of the surrounding pavement or surface, and, in no event, to a thickness less than two inches. 
B.  Where a treated or modified subgrade or surface has been removed or destroyed, the permittee shall replace it to a thickness of not less than that of the surrounding or adjacent subgrade or surface, unless the city engineer orders that the repair of such treated or modified subgrade or surface shall be made by an oil and rock mixture, in which case the thickness shall not be less than one-half (1/2) the thickness of the treated or modified surface or subgrade. 
C.  Failure to Resurface Street(s). If, after the refilling of an excavation the permittee fails or refuses to resurface that portion of the surface of the street(s) damaged by him, or if the city engineer elects to do such resurfacing, the commissioner may do such resurfacing. The cost of such resurfacing shall be charged against the permittee except in those instances where the permittee's excavation is within an area of pavement to be immediately reconstructed by the city, and the resurfacing of the excavation is an integral part of the general city improvement. The cost shall be computed as provided in Section 12.24.040. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 51.028) 
12.24.090 - Deductions from deposits and refund of excess deposit. 
A.  The city engineer shall deduct from any deposit made or maintained by the permittee: 
1.  The permit issuance fee if that has not otherwise been paid; 
2.  The cost to the city for refilling any excavation or removing any obstruction; 
3.  The cost to the city for resurfacing the street(s); 
4.  The cost of any inspection by the city engineer. 
B.  After making the proper deductions, the city engineer shall refund any remaining amount to the applicant in the same manner as provided by law for the repayment of trust moneys. Provided, however, that if a person makes and maintains with the city engineer either a general deposit or an undertaking as provided by this division, the deductions provided for herein need not be made. In lieu of such deductions, the city engineer may bill such persons for the amount owed by him to the city, under the provisions of this division. If such amount is not paid within fifteen (15) days of the transmission of such bill, the city engineer may deduct such amount from the general deposit, and the provisions of Section 12.12.100(E) shall apply, or may recover upon such undertaking. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 51.029) 
12.24.100 - Additional street(s) repairs and placing of a bond for that purpose. 
A.  The street(s) surface excavated or damaged shall be replaced by the permittee to as good or better condition as the same was in before such work was begun and shall be maintained for the life of the utility encroaching in the public road after the completion of the work performed under the permit, during which life time period the permittee shall repair and make good any injury or damage to any portion of the street(s) which occurs as a result of work done under the permit, including any and all injury and damage to the street(s) which would not have occurred had such work under said permit not been done. 
B.  The permittee shall maintain a bond with the city engineer in an amount prescribed by the city engineer sufficient to comply with the repairs required in this section, which shall be forfeited and the proceeds used by the city engineer to perform the necessary repair work prescribed by this section in the event the permittee fails to make said repairs. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 51.0210) 
12.24.110 - Necessity as permissive delay in obtaining permit. 
    Nothing in this chapter prohibits any person from maintaining by virtue of any law, ordinance, or permit, any pipe or conduit in any street(s), or from making such excavation as may be necessary for the preservation of life or property, if the person making such excavation obtains a permit therefor within one day after the offices of the city engineer are first opened subsequent to the making of such excavation. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 51.0211) 
12.24.120 - Certificate of acceptance. 
    If the city engineer, by survey or by inspection or by both, ascertains that the work contemplated by this chapter has been completed according to the requirements of the permit issued therefor, and of all of the provisions of this division, he shall issue, if requested so to do by the permittee, a certificate of acceptance which shall contain a statement of the location, nature, and extent of the work performed under the permit. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 51.0212) 
12.24.130 - Removal of material and debris. 
    A permittee, upon completion of any work for which a permit under this chapter has been issued, shall remove all material and debris: 
A.  Where new work is covered with earth, in accordance with the terms of the specifications attached to the permit; 
B.  In all other cases within three days. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 51.0213) 
Chapter 12.28 - FILMING AND VIDEO TAPING PERMITS 
Sections: 

12.28.010 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to provide rules and regulations governing the issuance of permits for filming, video taping or any related activity on location within the city, to assure that such activity is consistent with considerations of the public health, safety and general welfare, and the protection of property. The requirements provided in this chapter shall be separate and in addition to those provisions of ordinances of the city, and/or other codes adopted by reference, regarding business regulation and licensing. Any and all fees provided in this chapter are intended to cover the cost of investigation and processing permits for filming, as specified herein, and shall be in addition to all other applicable licenses and/or permits. 
(Ord. 88 § 1, 1990) 
12.28.030 - Permit required. 
    Except as otherwise provided, it is unlawful for any person to engage in the business or activity of filming, video taping or producing motion pictures on motion picture film or electronic video tape for public exhibition as motion pictures or for television, at any place within the city, other than at or in an established motion picture or television studio or entirely within an enclosed structure or building, with no outside storage of filming equipment, without a film permit from the city. Any person interested in filming within the city shall complete in full a film permit application as stated in this chapter and provide to city all the information requested in Section 12.28.050. 
(Ord. 88 § 3, 1990) 
12.28.040 - Exemptions. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to: 
A.  The filming or video taping of motion pictures solely for private or family use; 
B.  The filming or videotaping of motion pictures for use in a criminal investigation, civil proceeding or emergencies such as fires, floods or police actions; 
C.  The filming or video taping of motion pictures for news purposes (but not magazine or documentary programs); 
D.  Education, government and public access and local origination programs for cable television systems franchised within the city; 
E.  The filming or video taping of motion pictures by the city itself (e.g., video taping of sewer lines and promotional filming); and 
F.  Any other activity deemed to be in the public interest by the city manager. 
(Ord. 88 § 4, 1990) 
12.28.050 - Application form. 
    The finance department shall furnish an application for film permits which, following processing by the finance department, shall be forwarded to the city manager. Such application form shall require the following information: 
A.  Name, permanent street address and telephone number of the applicant; 
B.  If the applicant is a corporation, the name, principal address and telephone number of the applicant shall be as shown in the most recent statement of corporation on file with the applicable Secretary of State; 
C.  If the filming or video taping for motion picture or television production is conducted by a nonprofit organization which qualifies under Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code or Section 23701 of the California Revenue and Taxation Code as a charitable organization, and no person, directly or indirectly, receives a profit from the marketing or production of the film or tape or from showing the film, tapes or photos, the applicant must state this on the application form; 
D.  Name, address and telephone number of the person in charge of the location and responsible for applicant's and applicant's employees' conduct; 
E.  The name, address and twenty-four (24) hour telephone number of at least two persons to be contacted in the event of emergency situations which might alter the conditions of the film permit; 
F.  Name of film/project; 
G.  Location(s), date(s), time(s) and activities of the proposed filming or taping. If the proposed filming or taping involves the use of private property, the full name and address of the property owner where the filming/taping is to take place and a signed affidavit from the property owner granting permission for the proposed use of the property in question shall be provided; 
H.  Approximate number of individuals in cast and crew; 
I.  List of types and number of vehicles and other equipment; 
J.  As applicable, a statement that overnight parking and locations are needed; 
K.  Requests for special assistance at the location, including but not limited to street closure, traffic control, and emergency services; 
L.  Special conditions or requests by the applicant; 
M.  Dated signature of applicant; 
N.  If the applicant is a corporation, the application shall be signed by two principal officers of the corporation; and 
O.  In addition to the provisions of this chapter, any applicant who or which will engage in any activity which requires compliance with any federal, state or local regulations, including additional licenses or permits, shall present evidence of satisfactory compliance with such regulations. 
(Ord. 88 § 5, 1990) 
12.28.060 - Time for filing applications. 
A.  Applications shall be presented to the finance department at least ten business days in advance of the time that the proposed filming, taping or production is to commence when road closures are required, four business days when traffic control will exceed three minutes or when streets or specified special effects are to be performed, and at least two business days in all other cases. 
B.  The time for application processing shall be extended during those periods when the city is required to wait for the issuance of permits from other agencies and or public entities, for which it has applied. 
(Ord. 88 § 6, 1990) 
12.28.070 - Fees. 
A.  Each application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable application and investigation fee payable to the city which amount shall be set by resolution of the city council; provided, however, that no fee shall be required of applicants filming or video taping for motion picture or television production for charitable purposes, as defined in this chapter. 
B.  In the event that weather conditions or other circumstances beyond the control of the permittee require that the date(s) or time(s) of the proposed filming or taping need to be altered, no additional application and investigation fee shall be required because of such alteration of the date(s) or time(s) so long as the city clerk is given at least one business day notice of the alternation, but an additional fee will be charged if minor changes, additions, deletions and extensions to the original filming permit are requested which are not beyond the control of the permittee. The additional fee shall be set by resolution of the city council. A minor change, addition, deletion or extension to the original filming permit request must be filed with the finance department. Only one such request per permit will be allowed. 
C.  If the city manager determines that any potential danger to the public's health, safety or general welfare, or property would be eliminated by the presence of police or fire protection at the site of the filming or video taping for motion picture or television production, the city manager may grant the film permit upon condition that the permittee pay in advance to the city the costs of such police or fire protection as may be required. 
D.  For filming permits which necessitate the city to provide services to the permittee in addition to police or fire protection, service charges shall be-imposed. Such charges will be determined by the applicable servicing city department(s) and shall be based on the actual cost incurred by the city in providing such services. Such service charges shall include, but shall not be limited to, charges for labor, supervision, overhead, administration and the use of any and all city equipment, supplies, etc. Additional charges may be imposed to cover the cost of extraordinary film permit investigation and/or staff costs, if the city manager feels this is necessary. 
(Ord. 88 § 7, 1990) 
12.28.080 - Determination by city manager. 
A.  The city manager is designated to be the city's "film permit coordinator" for purposes of coordinating the processing of the film permit, as well as the actual filming when the use of public property is required. 
B.  Before granting any film permit pursuant to this chapter, the city manager shall determine that such filming or video taping for motion picture or television production will not unreasonably interfere with the public health, safety and general welfare, or unreasonably endanger any property. In making this determination, the city manager shall take into consideration the noise, traffic hazards, fire hazards and other environmental problems, including health and safety problems, which are likely to be caused by such activities. In granting the permit, the city manager may further impose any reasonable conditions as are necessary to protect the public health, safety and general welfare or property. 
(Ord. 88 § 8, 1990) 
12.28.090 - Appeal to the city council. 
A.  Any applicant aggrieved by any decision of the city manager with respect to a film permit may appeal such decision to the city council by filing a written request within ten days following notice of such decision. 
B.  A written request for such appeal shall be filed with the finance department and all such requests shall contain the following information: 
1.  The name and address of the applicant; 
2.  The date of the decision in question; 
3.  The reasons for the appeal; and, 
4.  The grounds relied upon for relief; 
    The appeal request shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable appeal fee in an amount to be set by resolution by the city council. Upon receipt of the appeal request, the finance department will request the city clerk to, and the city clerk shall, set the matter for hearing at a regular meeting of the city council no later than thirty (30) days following the date the appeal was filed. Notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be mailed to the applicant, by certified mail, no later than ten days prior to the date set for hearing. The notice may also designate certain records that the applicant is required to produce at the time of the hearing. 
C.  At the hearing as prescribed by this section, the applicant and the city may submit any and all evidence as they believe to be relevant. The city council may require the presentation of additional evidence from either the applicant or the City, or from both, and may continue the hearing from time to time for the purpose of allowing the presentation of additional evidence. Upon conclusion of the hearing, the city council may, by resolution with findings, approve, reverse or modify the decision of the city manager and any such decision of the city council shall be final. 
(Ord. 88 § 9, 1990) 
12.28.100 - Public facilities. 
    Use of any public facility within the city may require an additional rental or use agreement. 
(Ord. 88 § 10, 1990) 
12.28.110 - Clean up. 
    A permittee shall conduct operations in an orderly fashion. The area used shall be cleaned of trash and debris upon completion and before leaving the site(s). A deposit to assure that a permittee removes all trash and debris from filming site(s) may be required. This requirement and the amount thereof shall be determined by the city manager. 
(Ord. 88 § 11, 1990) 
12.28.120 - Traffic control. 
    For filming that would impair traffic flow, an applicant shall use city law enforcement personnel. 
A.  If required for traffic safety or as a condition of the film permit, an applicant shall furnish and install advance warning signs and any other traffic control devices in conformance with the Manual of Traffic Controls, State of California, Department of Transportation. All appropriate safety precautions shall be taken. 
B.  All interruptions of normal pedestrian or vehicular traffic must be authorized on the permit. Police officers assigned to on-site supervision may further restrict operations based on safety concerns. 
C.  Traffic shall not be detoured without prior approval by the city. 
D.  Unless authorized by the city, camera cars shall be driven in the direction of traffic and shall observe all traffic laws. 
E.  Any emergency roadwork or construction by state or local government agencies and/or private contractors under permit or contract to the city shall have priority over filming activities. 
(Ord. 88 § 12, 1990) 
12.28.130 - Special restrictions. 
    For the convenience of the general public, all activity by a permittee between the hours of ten p.m. and six a.m. may be restricted. As a condition of film permit approval, all surrounding residents and/or businesses within a three hundred (300) foot radius of the filming activity may be required to be notified of date(s) and time(s) in which late evening and early morning filming is to take place. 
(Ord. 88 § 13, 1990) 
12.28.140 - Insurance and indemnity. 
A.  It shall be a condition of the issuance and continued validity of any film permit granted pursuant to this chapter that the permittee first obtain, pay for, and maintain a policy of general liability insurance approved as to form by the city attorney which shall insure the city, its officers and employees against any liability, or claims of liability, brought or made by or on behalf of any person for personal injury or property damage caused by or arising out of any act or omission of the permittee, his agents or employees, including any officers or employees of the city, or caused by or arising out of the condition of any city-owned or controlled property, whether real or personal, and occurring during the film permit period and as a result of the activities for which such film permit was issued. The amount of coverage to be provided by such policy shall be determined by the city manager. The permittee may satisfy the requirement imposed by this section through the presentation of a certificate of insurance, for at least the required amount of coverage, which indicates that, by endorsement thereto, the city, its officers, and employees have been added as additional insureds. Such certificates shall additionally provide that the required insurance will not be modified, changed, or terminated unless prior written notice thereof has been transmitted to the city clerk. 
B.  A bond/cash deposit may also be required for purposes of repairing any damage and restoring the city's facilities to their original condition. The amount shall be determined by the city manager. In the event of such damage, the city shall provide written notice to the permittee specifying the damage to be repaired and/or city facilities to be restored within seven days of receipt of the notice. If, after providing permittee with such written notice, the requested repairs and/or restoration of city facilities have not been commenced or completed, the city may draw upon the bond/cash deposit to effect the repairs and/or restoration of city facilities. In the event of damage requiring emergency repairs and/or restoration of city facilities by the city, the permittee shall be required to reimburse the city in full for all costs incurred within thirty (30) days receipt of an invoice from city. 
C.  It shall be a condition of the issuance of any film permit granted pursuant to this chapter that the permittee shall agree to defend and to hold the city, and its officers and employees, free and harmless from and against any and all claims and liability of any kind whatsoever resulting from or arising out of the issuance of such film permit. 
(Ord. 88 § 14, 1990) 
12.28.150 - Suspension. 
    Any film permit issued pursuant to the terms of this chapter may be subject to immediate suspension if it is found necessary for the protection of public health, safety or general welfare. Such suspension shall only be instituted upon the determination of the city that immediate protective action is necessary. In the event of such a suspension, the city manager shall within twenty-four (24) hours after the suspension: (1) cause to be served upon the film permit holder a written statement containing the grounds for suspension and a notice of hearing to show cause before the city manager as to why the film permit should not be suspended pending revocation hearings; and (2) cause to be served upon the film permit holder a notice of revocation hearing before the city council as provided in Section 12.28.160. The hearing before the city manager shall be held not later than five days following the service of the notice to the film permit holder. 
(Ord. 88 § 15, 1990) 
12.28.160 - Revocation. 
A.  Any film permit granted or issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter may be revoked after a public hearing before the city council. A film permit may be revoked under the following circumstances: 
1.  Where it has been determined that the permittee has violated or has failed to comply with any of the terms or conditions of the film permit; 
2.  Where it has been determined that the permittee has violated or has failed to comply with any of the ordinances, resolutions, or applicable regulations of the city; 
3.  Where it has been determined that the film permit has been granted pursuant to false or fraudulent information contained in the film permit application; 
4.  Where it has subsequently been determined that the filming activity will fail to meet the criteria enumerated in this chapter for granting a film permit; or 
5.  Where it has been determined that the preservation of the public health, safety, and general welfare demand revocation of the film permit. 
B.  A notice of the revocation shall be mailed to the permittee, by certified mail, stating the grounds for the revocation and providing a date within thirty days of the mailing of such notice for a public hearing before the city council. Upon the conclusion of the public hearing, the city council may, by resolution with findings, revoke or modify the film permit and the decision of the city council shall be final and conclusive as to all matters in controversy. 
(Ord. 88 § 16, 1990) 
12.28.170 - Violation as a nuisance. 
    Any filming, video taping, or related activities conducted contrary to the provisions of this chapter shall be and is declared to be an unlawful action and a public nuisance. The city may commence an action at law or in equity in the name of the city in any court of competent jurisdiction against the permit holder to ensure compliance with the terms and provisions of this chapter. All remedies prescribed herein will be cumulative and the use of any one or more remedies by the city shall not bar the use of any other remedy for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 88 § 17, 1990) 
Chapter 12.32 - MOVING PERMIT REGULATIONS 
Sections: 

12.32.010 - Scope of chapter. 
    The provisions of this chapter apply to the making of applications for and granting and control of permits for the moving of buildings and structures. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 51.041) 
12.32.020 - Application. 
    An applicant for a moving permit shall complete and file with the city engineer an application in duplicate conforming with the provisions of Section 12.12.070, which shall contain, in addition thereto, the following: 
A.  The kind of building or structure to be moved; 
B.  The approximate weight thereof, as nearly as may be ascertained; 
C.  The present location of the building or structure; 
D.  The location to which said building or structure is to be moved; 
E.  The proposed route over or along which such building or structure is to be moved; 
F.  The number of sections in which the building or structure will be moved; 
G.  The type and number of conveyances upon which the building or structure is to be moved; 
H.  The proposed date and time of day when the removal of said building, structure, or portion thereof, is to be commenced; 
I.  The proposed date and time of day when said removal will be completed. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 51.042) 
12.32.030 - Approval by building and safety department. 
    If the building or structure to be moved is subject to regulation by the building and safety department, the applicant shall obtain and file with his application a building and safety department approval for the moving of the building or structure. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 51.043) 
12.32.040 - Time limit city engineer to act on permit application. 
    Within fifteen (15) working days after receipt of the application for a moving permit, the city engineer shall: 
A.  Determine whether or not the moving of any building or structure as proposed in the application can be accomplished without excessive or damaging tree trimming; 
B.  Alter or prescribe the route over or along which the building or structure or portion thereof is to be moved; 
C.  Determine the number of sections in which such building or structure shall be moved; 
D.  Elect to do or not to do any or all of the tree trimming rendered necessary by the moving of the building or structure; 
E.  Determine the total estimated cost of such trimming. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 51.044) 
12.32.050 - Trees. 
A.  City Engineer's Authority. A permit granted under this chapter does not permit, license, or allow any person, firm or corporation whatever except the city engineer to trim, prune, cut or deface in any manner any tree upon any grounds or property belonging to the city or upon any road or street. 
B.  Supervision of Cutting Trees. At the written request of a roving contractor holding an unrevoked permit granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, the city engineer, subject to his election to so do, as provided in Section 12.32.040, within a reasonable time after such request, shall, where it will not harm the trees, trim such trees under his supervision, only to the extent necessary to move the building or structure to the location specified in the permit. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 51.045) 
12.32.060 - Classification of buildings and structures. 
    All buildings and structures are classified as follows: 
A.  Class "A" is any building or structure or any portion thereof which is moved on a motor truck or other vehicle propelled by its own power; 
B.  Class "B" is any building or structure or any portion thereof, not of Class "A" which is not more than sixteen (16) feet in width; 
C.  Class "C" is any building or structure or any portion thereof, not of Class "A" which is more than sixteen (16) feet and not more than twenty-two (22) feet in width; 
D.  Class "D" is any building or structure or any portion thereof, not of Class "A" which is more than twenty-two (22) feet and not more than twenty-eight (28) feet in width; 
E.  Class "E" is any building or structure or any portion thereof, not of Class "A" which is more than twenty-eight (28) feet and not more than forty (40) feet in width; 
F.  Class "F" is any building or structure or any portion thereof, not of Class "A" which is more than forty (40) feet in width. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 51.046) 
12.32.070 - Compliance of permit with the state weight limits. 
    The city engineer shall not issue a permit to move any building or structure when the weight of such building or structure, plus the weight of the vehicle or other equipment, exceeds the weight permitted by the California Vehicle Code; except, that if it appears to the city engineer that the size, shape or physical characteristics of the building or structure or portion thereof, to be moved, or of the street over which such building or structure is to be moved, makes it impossible or impracticable to keep within such weight limits, the city engineer may issue a permit to move a building or structure on a vehicle every wheel of which is equipped with pneumatic tires. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 51.048) 
12.32.080 - Amount of deposit. 
    Before any permittee moves any building, structure or portion thereof, of a class higher than the class for which he has made any general or special deposit, he shall increase such deposit in an amount sufficient to cover the class sought to be moved. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 51.049) 
12.32.090 - Display of permit. 
A.  The moving contractor shall affix and maintain at all times while it is on the street, in a conspicuous place on the building or structure to be moved, the permit for such moving. 
B.  Where a building or structure is moved in more than one section, and more than one of such sections is moved at the same time, the moving contractor shall affix and maintain at all times while they are on the street, in conspicuous places on each section on which the original permit is not affixed, true copies of such permit. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 51.0410) 
12.32.100 - Appointment of a supervising moving inspector. 
    The city engineer may require that the moving of any building or structure be under the supervision of an inspector to be appointed by the city engineer. The permittee shall pay to the city engineer an amount equal to the compensation and cost of transportation of such inspector during the time he is assigned to such inspection. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 51.0411) 
12.32.110 - Construction of runways. 
    When so required by the city engineer, a moving contractor shall place under each dolly or wheel used in moving the building or structure, boards or planks of adequate width and strength to carry the load without being broken, to serve as a runway for such dolly or wheel during such moving along any portion of any street which has a surface other than natural soil. The moving contractor shall prevent such dolly or wheel from ever revolving on or resting on such surface except upon such board, plank or runway. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 51.0412) 
12.32.120 - Restoration of street. 
    The city engineer may restore, or cause to be restored, every street damaged by the moving of any building or structure thereon, to a condition equivalent to that prior to such damage, and may require the posting of a bond to secure the restoration. The moving contractor who caused such damage shall pay the cost of the repair thereof to the city engineer. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 51.0413) 
12.32.130 - Warning lights for moving of buildings or structures. 
    When a building or structure while being moved is located on any street, at all times between sunset and sunrise, the moving contractor shall keep and maintain burning a red warning light not over six feet above the surface of such street at each corner of such building or structure, and unless the city engineer otherwise directs, on all sides and projections thereof at intervals of not more than five feet. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 51.0414) 
12.32.140 - Deductions from deposits and refund of deposits. 
A.  The city engineer shall deduct from the deposit made or maintained by each permittee: 
1.  The permit issuance fee if that has not otherwise been paid; 
2.  The cost of the services and transportation of any inspector appointed pursuant to Section 12.32.100; 
3.  The cost of any repairs made necessary because of the moving of the building or structure; 
4.  The total cost of all tree trimming done by the city engineer made necessary in order to move the building or structure as specified in the permit, including all such trimming after the moving of the building or structure to correct trimming done when the structure was moved. 
B.  The remainder of any such special deposit, if there is any remainder, shall be refunded to the person, firm or corporation making such deposit, or to his or its assigns. In the event the deposit made pursuant hereto is insufficient to pay all fees and deductions provided for herein, the person, firm or corporation to whom such permit is issued, shall, upon demand pay to the city engineer a sufficient sum to fully cover the same. Such unpaid sums may be recovered by the city engineer in any court of competent jurisdiction, and until paid, no further permit under the provisions of this division shall be issued to such moving contractor. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 51.0415) 
12.32.150 - Maintenance of general deposit or undertaking in lieu of deductions. 
    If a moving contractor makes and maintains either a general deposit with the city engineer or an undertaking as provided in this chapter, the deductions provided for in Section 12.32.140 need not be made. In lieu of such deductions, the city engineer may bill the moving contractor for the amount due from him to the city under the provisions of this chapter. If, fifteen (15) days after such bill has been sent, the moving contractor does not pay the same in full, then such amount may be deducted from his general deposit and the provisions of Section 12.32.140 shall apply, or the city engineer shall recover upon such undertaking. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 51.0416) 
12.32.160 - Issuance of moving permit-Specific types of equipment. 
A.  The city engineer may, in his discretion, upon application in writing and if good cause appear, issue a permit authorizing the applicant to operate or move over and along streets, specific pieces of mobile mechanical equipment or specific vehicles or specific pieces of mechanical equipment on specific vehicles, or emergency public utility equipment on specific vehicles. Any such permit shall be subject to the following conditions: 
1.  The permit shall be limited to specified streets or a specified area of the city and shall specifically describe the streets or the area of the city to which it is limited. This limitation shall be fixed by the city engineer so as to afford protection to streets and the traveling public. 
2.  The granting of the permit shall in no way relieve the permittee from liability for damage to the streets or to persons or property. 
3.  The permit shall be issued for a specific period of time designated by the city engineer and set forth in the permit, which period shall not exceed one year. 
4.  The permit may be issued subject to such other conditions as the city engineer deems necessary for the protection of the streets and the traveling public. 
B.  The application for a permit pursuant to this section shall be made on a form furnished by the city engineer and shall contain the information required by Section 710 of the California Vehicle Code and such other information as may be required by the city engineer. The application shall be accompanied by payment of a fee pursuant to the city fee schedule. Prior to the issuance of any permit, the applicant shall file with the city engineer, a surety bond satisfactory to the city engineer, for the protection of streets from injury and to provide indemnity for any damage resulting from the operation or movement under the permit. The filing of such bond shall, for the purpose of this section, constitute compliance with the requirements contained in this chapter relating to the deposit of money with the city engineer. A single bond may, in the discretion of the city engineer, be deemed sufficient security for the issuance of one or more permits to the same applicant pursuant to this section. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 51.0417) 
Chapter 12.36 - BLINKER LIGHTS REGULATIONS 
Sections: 

12.36.010 - Definitions. 
    The following words and phrases used in this chapter shall have the meanings herein ascribed to them: 
    "Blinker light" means a light whether colored or uncolored which emits an intermittent light. 
    "Person" means every natural person, firm, copartnership, association or corporation. 
    "Street" means every public street, alley, lane, court, place, drive, bridge, viaduct, or trestle intended for use or used by the general public. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 53.041) 
12.36.020 - Permit for the use of blinker lights. 
A.  No person shall erect or maintain or cause or permit to be erected or maintained, any blinker light upon or adjacent to any street within the city whether on public or private property, which emits a light the same as or similar to highway warning, danger or signal lights, and which blinker light is so located as to be visible from any public street unless under and in accordance with the terms of a permit in writing first obtained from the city engineer. 
B.  The provisions of this chapter shall not be deemed to apply to advertising signs upon private property consisting of continuous or intermittent lights in the form of illuminated words, letters or figures or portraying any advertising scene, figure or emblem and so constructed, arranged and located as to be clearly distinguishable from a highway warning, danger, or signal light. 
C.  Nor shall this chapter be deemed to apply to any government lighthouse nor to any warning, danger or signal light heretofore or hereafter erected or maintained as required by law or under orders of any board or commission of the state of California. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 53.042) 
12.36.030 - Application for permit. 
    Any person desiring to erect or maintain any blinker light or lights upon or adjacent to any street so located as to be visible from any street shall first make application in writing so to do to the city engineer, which application shall state the proposed location of such light or lights, and a brief description of the proposed light or lights. The city engineer shall consider every such application, and if it finds that the blinker light or lights proposed to be erected will serve as a warning to persons using the street and will tend to increase the safety of the traveling public, shall issue a permit in writing authorizing the erection and maintenance of such blinker lights. Such permit shall be valid until revoked and no charge shall be made for any such permit. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 53.043) 
Title 13 - PUBLIC SERVICES 
Chapters: 
Chapter 13.04 - UNDERGROUND UTILITY DISTRICTS 
Sections: 

13.04.020 - Public hearing. 
A.  The city council may from time to time call public hearings to ascertain whether the public necessity, health, safety or welfare requires the removal of poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures within designated areas of the city and the underground installation of wires and facilities for supplying electric, communication or similar or associated service. The city clerk shall notify all affected property owners as shown on the last equalized assessment roll and utilities concerned by mail of the time and place of such hearings at least ten days prior to the date thereof. Each such hearing shall be open to the public and may be continued from time to time. At each such hearing all persons interested shall be given an opportunity to be heard. The decision of the city council shall be final and conclusive. 
B.  Prior to holding such public hearings, the city engineer shall consult with all affected utilities and prepare a report for submission at such hearing containing, among other information, the extent of such utilities participation and estimates of the total costs to the city and affected property owners. Such report shall also contain an estimate of the time required to complete such underground installation and removal of overhead facilities. 
(Ord. 203 § 2, 1993) 
13.04.030 - Designation of districts by resolution. 
    If, after any such public hearing the city council finds that the public necessity, health, safety or welfare requires such removal and such underground installation within a designated area, the city council shall by resolution declare such designated area an underground utility district and order such removal and underground installation. The resolution shall include a description of the area comprising such district and shall fix the time within which such removal and underground installation shall be accomplished and within which affected property owners must be ready to receive underground service. A reasonable time shall be allowed for such removal and underground installation, having due regard for the availability of labor, materials and equipment necessary for such removal and for the installation of such underground facilities as may be occasioned thereby. 
(Ord. 203 § 3, 1993) 
13.04.040 - Unlawful acts. 
    Whenever the city council creates an underground utility district and orders the removal of poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures therein as provided in Section 13.04.030, it is unlawful for any person or utility to erect, construct, place, keep, maintain, continue, employ or operate poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures in the district after the date when said overhead facilities are required to be removed by such resolution; except an overhead facilities may be required to furnish service to an owner or occupant of property prior to the performance by such owner or occupant of the underground work necessary for such owner or occupant to continue to receive utility service as provided in Section 13.04.090, and for such reasonable time required to remove the facilities after the work has been performed, and except as otherwise provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. 203 § 4, 1993) 
13.04.050 - Emergency or unusual circumstances. 
    Notwithstanding the provision of this chapter, overhead facilities may be installed and maintained for a period, not to exceed ten days, without authority of the city council in order to provide emergency service. The city council may grant special permission, on such terms as the city council may deem appropriate, in cases of unusual circumstances, without discrimination as to any person or utility, to erect, construct, install, maintain, use or operate poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures. 
(Ord. 203 § 5, 1993) 
13.04.060 - Exceptions. 
    In any resolution adopted pursuant to Section 13.04.030, the city may authorize any or all of the following exemptions: 
A.  Any municipal facilities or equipment installed under the supervision and to the satisfaction of the city engineer; 
B.  Poles, or electroliers used exclusively for street lighting; 
C.  Overhead wires (exclusive of supporting structures) crossing any portion of a district within which overhead wires have been prohibited, or connecting to buildings on the perimeter of a district, when such wires originate in an area from which poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures are not prohibited; 
D.  Poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures used for the transmission of electric energy at nominal voltages in excess of thirty-four thousand five hundred (34,500) volts; 
E.  Overhead wires attached to the exterior surface of a building by means of a bracket or other fixture and extending from one location on the building to another location on the same building or to an adjacent building without crossing any public street; 
F.  Antennae, associated equipment and supporting structures, used by a utility for furnishing communication services; 
G.  Equipment appurtenant to underground facilities, such as surface mounted transformers and switches, pedestal mounted terminal boxes and meter cabinets, and concealed ducts; 
H.  Temporary poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures used or to be used in conjunction with construction projects. 
(Ord. 203 § 6, 1993) 
13.04.070 - Notice to property owners and utility companies. 
A.  Within ten days after the effective date of a resolution adopted pursuant to Section 13.04.030, the city clerk shall notify all affected utilities and all persons owning real property within the district created by the resolution of the adoption thereof. The city clerk shall further notify such affected property owners of the necessity that, if they or any person occupying such property desire to continue to receive electric, communication, or similar or associated service, they or such occupant shall provide all necessary facility changes on their premises so as to receive such service from the lines of the supplying utility or utilities at a new location. 
B.  Notification by the city clerk shall be made by mailing a copy of the resolution adopted pursuant to Section 13.04.030, together with a copy of the ordinance codified in this chapter to affected property owners as such are shown on the last equalized assessment roll and to the affected utilities. 
(Ord. 203 § 7, 1993) 
13.04.080 - Responsibility of utility companies. 
    If underground construction is necessary to provide utility service within a district created by any resolution adopted pursuant to Section 13.04.030, the supplying utility shall furnish that portion of the conduits, conductors, and associated equipment required to be furnished by it under its applicable rules, regulations and tariffs on file with the commission. 
(Ord. 203 § 8, 1993) 
13.04.090 - Property owner responsibility. 
    Every person owning, operating, leasing, occupying or renting a building or structure within a district shall construct and provide that portion of the service connection on his property between the facilities referred to in Section 13.04.080 and the termination facility on or within the building or structure being serviced. If the above is not accomplished by any person within the time provided for in the resolution enacted pursuant to Section 13.04.030, the city engineer shall give notice in writing to the owner thereof as shown on the last equalized assessment roll to provide the required underground facilities within ten days after receipt of such notice. 
A.  Service of Notice. The notice to provide the required underground facilities may be given either by personal service or by mail. In case of service by mail on either of such person, the notice must be deposited in the United States mail in a sealed envelope with postage prepaid, addressed to the person in possession of such premises at such premises, and the notice must be addressed to the owner thereof as such owner's name appears, and must be addressed to such owner's last known address as the same appears on the last equalized assessment roll, and when no address appears, to General Delivery, city of Hesperia. If notice is given by mail, such notice shall be deemed to have been received by the person to whom it has been sent within forty-eight (48) hours after the mailing thereof. If notice is given by mail to either the owner or occupant of such premises, the city engineer shall, within forty-eight (48) hours after the mailing thereof, cause a copy of the notice printed on a card not less than eight inches by ten inches in size to be posted in a conspicuous place on said premises. 
B.  Contents of Notice. The notice given by the city engineer to provide the required underground facilities shall particularly specify what work is required to be done and shall state that, if said work is not completed within thirty days after receipt of such notice, the city engineer will provide such required underground facilities, in which case the cost and expense thereof will be assessed against the property benefited and become a lien upon such property. 
C.  Failure to Provide Facilities-Work Completion-Report-Hearing. If upon the expiration of the thirty (30) day period the required underground facilities have not been provided, the city engineer shall forthwith proceed to do the work; provided, however, if such premises are unoccupied and no electric or communications services are being furnished thereto, the city engineer shall, in lieu of providing the required underground facilities, have the authority to order the disconnection and removal of any and all overhead service wires and associated facilities supplying utility service to the property. Upon completion of the work by the city engineer, he shall file a written report with the city council setting forth the fact that the required underground facilities have been provided and the cost thereof, together with a legal description of the property against which such cost is to be assessed. The city council shall thereupon fix a time and place for hearing protests against the assessment of the cost of such work upon such premises, which said time shall not be less than ten days thereafter. 
D.  Hearing-Notice. The city engineer shall forthwith, upon the time for hearing such protests having been fixed, give a notice in writing to the person in possession of such premises and a notice in writing thereof to the owner thereof in the manner hereinabove provided for the giving of the notice to provide the required underground facilities of the time and place that the city council will pass upon such report and will hear protests against such assessment. Such notice shall also set forth the amount of the proposed assessment. 
E.  Hearing-City Council Decision. Upon the date and hour set for the hearing of protests, the city council shall hear and consider the report and all protests, if there be any, and then proceed to affirm, modify or reject the assessment. 
F.  Assessment-Lien. If any assessment is not paid within five days after its confirmation by the city council, the amount of the assessment shall become a lien upon the property against which the assessment is made by the city engineer, and the city engineer is directed to turnover to the assessor and tax collector a notice of lien on each of the properties on which the assessment has not been paid, and the assessor and tax collector shall add the amount of the assessment to the next regular bill for taxes levied against the premises upon which the assessment was not paid. The assessment shall be due and payable at the same time as the property taxes are due and payable and, if not paid when due and payable, shall bear interest at the rate of six percent per annum. 
(Ord. 203 § 9, 1993) 
13.04.100 - Responsibility of city. 
    The city shall remove at its own expense all city-owned equipment from all poles required to be removed hereunder in ample time to enable the owner or user of such poles to remove the same within the time specified in the resolution enacted pursuant to Section 13.04.030. 
(Ord. 203 § 10, 1993) 
13.04.110 - Extension of time. 
    In the event that any act required by this chapter or by a resolution adopted pursuant to Section 13.04.030 cannot be performed within the time provided on account of shortage of materials, war, restraint by public authorities, strikes, labor disturbances, civil disobedience, or any other circumstances beyond the control of the actor, then the time within which such act will be accomplished shall be extended for a period equivalent to the time of such limitation. 
(Ord. 203 § 11, 1993) 
Title 14 - PUBLIC UTILITIES[1] 
Chapters: 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2011-06, § 4(Exh. A), adopted July 19, 2011, amended Title 14 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Title 14 pertained to the Water Code. See the Ordinance List and Disposition Table for full derivation. 

Chapter 14.02 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Sections: 

14.02.010 - Purposes. 
A.  Water System. The district will furnish a system for the purpose of obtaining, conserving and disposing of water for public and private uses consisting of facilities for the distribution, transmission, production and storage of water including appurtenances and appurtenant works; supplies and equipment; lands, easements, rights-of-way and other interests in real property; water rights; interests in personal property; and franchises and contracts. 
B.  Wastewater System. The district is responsible for ensuring wastewater flows are properly disposed of through public and/or private wastewater systems. The district will furnish a system for the collection of wastewater when needed to meet state and federal law, including collection lines and reclaimed facilities for deposition into the regional wastewater operator. 
(Ord. No. 2011-06, § 4(Exh. A), 7-19-11) 
14.02.020 - Definitions. 
    Unless otherwise defined herein, terms related to water quality shall be as adopted in the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater, published by the American Public Health Association, the American Water Works Association (A.W.W.A.) and the Water Pollution Control Federation. The testing procedures for waste constituents shall be performed pursuant to the Victor Valley Wastewater Reclamation Authority (VVWRA) guidelines, and may be amended from time to time. 
    The words and phrases appearing hereinafter are defined and shall be construed as hereinafter set forth, unless it shall be apparent from the context that they have a different meaning. Words not defined in this section shall use definitions found in Section 1.04.050 of the Hesperia Municipal Code. 
    "Applicant" means any person applying for water or wastewater service. 
    "Backflow device" means any backflow device as defined in compliance with Title 17 of the Administrative Code of the state of California. 
    "Biochemical oxygen demand" or "B.O.D." means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biological oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five days at twenty (20) degrees centigrade expressed in terms of mass per volume (mg/L). 
    "Board" means the Board of Directors of the Hesperia Water District. 
    "By-Pass" means any tool, apparatus, or similar device not authorized by the district, used to connect to the curb stop, to obtain water from the district. 
    "Capital facilities charge" means a fee as established by the board payable to the district upon application for and before installation or approval of installation of any new water or wastewater service. 
    "Chair" means the chairperson of the district or other person designated by the board to perform the services or to make the determinations as permitted or required under this code. 
    "City" means the City of Hesperia. 
    "Code" means the Hesperia Municipal Code. 
    "Construction meter" means a temporary meter rendered for grading construction work and other uses of limited duration, as authorized by the district. 
    "Consumption charge" means the charge for water consumed, both actual and estimated. 
    "Contractor" means any person who performs the work of installing or connecting mains, submains, laterals, or building sewers to the public sewer. 
    "Cost" means the cost of labor, material, transportation, supervision, engineering, and all other necessary overhead expenses. 
    "County" means the County of San Bernardino. 
    "Critical wastewater discharger" means a collection system non-residential discharger that generates either a significant amount of flow and/or constituents of the flow require pre-treatment to meet the requirements of the Victor Valley Wastewater Reclamation Authority, and state and federal Clean Water Acts. 
    "Cross connection" means 1) any physical connection between the piping system from the district service and that of any other water supply which is not, or cannot be, approved as safe and potable for human consumption, whereby water from the unapproved source may be forced or drawn into the district's distribution mains, and 2) any connection or arrangement, physical or otherwise, between a potable water supply system (the district) and any plumbing fixture; or any tank, receptor, equipment, or device, through which it may be possible for non-potable, used, unclean, polluted, and/or contaminated water, or other substance to enter any party of such potable water supply system under any condition. 
    "Curb stop" means a shut-off valve located on the district's side of the meter, for the district to control water service to the meter. 
    "Customer" means any person supplied or entitled to be supplied with water or wastewater service by the district. 
    "Customer's shut-off valve" means a shut-off valve independent of the district property and located on the customers' side of the water meter, for the convenience of the customer to control their water supply. 
    "Deposit" means funds held by the district as a guarantee. 
    "Developer" means any person who shall construct or develop any property which may require water or wastewater service from the district. 
    "Development" means a parcel of land on which one or more dwelling units, commercial or industrial buildings, or other improvements are built. 
    "Discharger" means any person who discharges or causes a discharge of wastewater directly or indirectly to a public or private sewer. 
    "Disconnection of service" means discontinuing water supply to the customer by locking meter, pulling meter, crimping and capping district service line, turning off at the curb stop, or any other necessary means. 
    "District" means the Hesperia Water District. 
    "District engineer" means the city engineer. 
    "District property" means any and all water components related to the water system, commencing at the check valve or water meter, if no check valve is present, continuing throughout the entire network of the district, including but not limited to plant sites and related properties. District property also includes any and all components related to the district wastewater system commencing at the lateral cleanout, continuing throughout the entire network of district wastewater system. 
    "District sewerage facility" or "district wastewater facility" means any property belonging to the district used in the treatment, reclamation, reuse, transportation, or disposal of wastewater. 
    "Domestic wastewater" means liquid wastes: (a) from the non-commercial preparation, cooking and handling of food; and/or (b) containing human excrement and similar matter from sanitary conveniences of dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities and institutions. 
    "Effluent" means wastewater discharged from the district. 
    "Equivalent dwelling unit" or "EDU" means the quantity and quality of domestic wastewater discharged from a standard or average single-family dwelling unit, having approximately twenty-two (22) plumbing fixture units capable of contributing two hundred fifty (250) gallons per day of domestic sewage. 
    "Fats, oils, and grease (FOG)" means any vegetable or animal product that is used in or is a by-product of the cooking of food preparation process, and that turns or may turn viscous or solidifies with a change in temperature or other conditions. 
    "Fee schedule" means the schedule of fees, rates, and charges established by the district, city, VVWRA, or other agency related to water and wastewater services, including but not limited to service charges, consumption charges, connection fees, and inspection fees. 
    "Garbage" means solid wastes from the domestic or commercial preparation, cooking and dispensing of food, or from the handling, storage or sale of food. 
    "General manager" or "district manager" means the city manager. 
    "Improvement agreement" means a written agreement entered into by and between the district and an applicant for water service from the district, whereby the applicant agrees to furnish or pay for such improvements and appurtenances to the water system of the district as may be required to enable the district to furnish the requested water service. 
    "Improvement district" means any territory formed into a district pursuant to Section 31575 of the California Water Code. 
    "Ingress and egress" means the right to enter and exit an owner's or customer's premises. 
    "Interruptions in service" means a time period without water available or with a substantial change in water pressure or flow. 
    "Main" means pipelines located in streets, highways, alleys, easements or rights-of-way which are used for water distribution and transmission. 
    "Mass emission rate" means a weight of material discharged to the wastewater system during a given time interval. Unless otherwise specified, the mass emission rate is expressed in pounds per day of a particular constituent or combination of constituents. 
    "May" denotes that the related conduct or procedure is permissive and not mandatory. 
    "Milligrams per liter" or "mg/L" means the number of milligrams of a substance in one liter of water or other liquid. 
    "National Pollution Discharge Elimination System" or "NPDES" means the Federal Pollution Regulation System as detailed in Public Law 92-500 Section 402. 
    "Owner" means the person or persons whose name(s) are recorded on the deed for a given property, and/or the person in legal possession of the property, or an executor, administrator, guardian, or trustee of the owner. 
    "Permit" means any written authorization required pursuant to this chapter, the code, or any other regulation of the district. 
    "Person" means an individual or company, association, co-partnership, or public or private corporation. 
    "Pollutant" means any constituent or characteristic of wastewater on which a discharge limitation may be imposed either by the district or by a regulatory body of competent jurisdiction. 
    "Premises" means a lot or parcel of real property under one ownership, except where there are well defined boundaries or partitions such as fences, hedges or other restrictions preventing the common use of the property by several occupants, in which case, each portion shall be deemed separate premises. Apartment houses, offices, commercial and industrial buildings may be classified as single premises. 
    "Pressure regulator valve" means a valve used to control water pressure. 
    "Pretreatment" means treatment that the district may require prior to permitting discharge of sewerage into any district sewerage facility. 
    "Private fire protection service" means water service and facilities for building sprinkler systems, hydrants, hose reels, and other facilities installed on private property for fire protection, and the water available therefor. 
    "Public agency" means the district or other governmental body duly organized under the laws of the state of California. 
    "Public sewer" means a sewer owned and operated by the district or other local governmental agency, and as to which the district possesses direct or indirect regulatory powers. 
    "Reconnection" means restoring water/sewer service. 
    "Secretary" shall be the city clerk. 
    "Section" means a section of this code unless some other chapter, ordinance, or statute is intended from the content. 
    "Service charge" means the flat rate based upon the size or type of meter. 
    "Sewage" means wastewater. 
    "Sewer charge" means the flat rate charged based on the number of equivalent dwelling units (EDU) assigned to an account. 
    "Shall" denotes that the related conduct or procedure is mandatory and not permissive. 
    "Standard methods" means methods and procedures described in the current edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater, as published by the American Public Health Association, the American Water Works Association and the Water Pollution Control Federation. 
    "Street" means any public highway, road, street, drive, avenue, alleyway, court, easement or right-of-way. 
    "Storm water" means rain water, surface water, ground water, roof run-off, sub-surface drainage, cooling water or unpolluted industrial process water. 
    "Tampering" means any unauthorized bending, cutting, stretching, removing, damaging, or similar actions of locking devices, meter, or other district property. Tampering also includes any unauthorized use of the curb stop, breaking a seal on a meter, or removing the head of a water meter or any other property of the district. 
    "Termination of service" means the period for which the customer's responsibility for the water/sewer service terminates, either by written request of the customer or at the district's discretion. 
    "User" means any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, or political entity, who discharges, causes, or permits a discharge directly or indirectly to a district sewer. 
    "Vice chair" means the mayor pro tem of the city. 
    "VVWRA" means the Victor Valley Wastewater Reclamation Authority. 
    "Water waste" means any unreasonable or non-beneficial use of water, or any unreasonable method of use of water, including, but not limited to the specific uses prohibited and restricted by this chapter as hereinafter set forth. 
    "Wastewater" means sewage and/or waste substances and water, whether treated or untreated, discharged into or permitted to enter a district sewer, or private system. 
    "Wastewater facilities" or "sewage facilities" means any facility or facilities used in the conveyance, pumping, and treatment of wastewater. 
    "Water" means that water supplied by the Hesperia Water District. 
    "Water/sewer service" means water/sewer and facilities rendered for normal domestic, commercial, irrigation, and industrial purposes on a permanent basis, and the water/sewer available therefor. 
    "Water supply shortage" means any water shortage caused by drought or any other threatened or existing water shortage, disaster or facility failure, earthquake, extended loss of electrical power, pipe line failure, or other condition which results in or threatens to result in the district's inability to meet the water demands of its customers. 
    "Water user" means any person, firm, partnership association corporation or political entity using water obtained from the water system of the district. 
    "Within" as applied to the district include all areas under the jurisdiction of the district or to which the district provides wastewater service. 
(Ord. No. 2011-06, § 4(Exh. A), 7-19-11) 
14.02.030 - Organization. 
    The Hesperia Water District was established as a subsidiary district of the City of Hesperia in 1990. City council members serve as the board of directors concurrently with their respective terms of office. The mayor serves as chairman, the mayor pro tem as the vice chair, and the Hesperia City Clerk as the secretary. 
(Ord. No. 2011-06, § 4(Exh. A), 7-19-11) 
14.02.040 - Enforcement. 
A.  General. For purposes of enforcement of this title the provisions of Hesperia Municipal Code (HMC) Title 1, Chapter 1.12 shall apply. For enforcement purposes, the title city council shall also mean board and the city shall also mean district. 
B.  Public Nuisance. All violations of this title shall be declared a public nuisance. 
C.  Discontinuation of Service. In addition to the enforcement provisions of HMC Chapter 1.12, the district may disconnect the customer or user from the district water or sewer service when the customer or user is in violation of any provision of this title (Title 14). 
D.  Notice. Notice shall be given pursuant to HMC Chapter 1.12. 
E.  Appeals. Appeals of enforcement actions of provisions in this title shall be heard by the officer or committee designated by the city council to hear appeals of Municipal Code enforcement cases. 
(Ord. No. 2011-06, § 4(Exh. A), 7-19-11) 
14.02.050 - Access. 
A.  District's Ingress and Egress. Representatives from the district shall have the right of ingress and egress to the owner's or consumer's premises and/or construction site at reasonable hours or at any time during an emergency for any purpose reasonably connected with providing water/sewer service. 
B.  Inspections. The general manager or his designated representatives may inspect, either upon proper consent from a property owner or occupant or an agent thereof, or upon a search or inspection warrant issued by the appropriate local judicial authority, all construction of waterlines, connections, reservoirs, pumping plants, and all other appurtenances. 
C.  Access Requirements. The district shall have the right to remove any structure, wall, fence, or other object located within a waterline or sewerline easement as necessary to maintain, remove, or replace or service district property. The district shall not be responsible for the cost of removing or replacing the object removed. The owner of the property shall bear full responsibility for costs associated with removal and/or replacement of any such objects. 
(Ord. No. 2011-06, § 4(Exh. A), 7-19-11) 
14.02.060 - Tampering with district property. 
A.  Tampering Prohibited. No one, except an employee or representative of the district, shall operate the curb stop, locking devices, valves, main locks, or gates owned by the district; nor shall interfere with meters or connections, street mains, or other parts of the district system. An unauthorized installation of a by-pass is also considered tampering. 
B.  Tampering a Public Nuisance. Tampering with district property is declared a public nuisance in addition to being a violation of this chapter. 
C.  Penalties. The enforcement provisions of Section 14.02.040C and Hesperia Municipal Code Section 1.12 shall apply to cases of tampering. 
D.  Owner's Liability. The owner of the property where the tampering occurred shall be liable for any tampering to district property when the damage is caused by the owner or the tenants, agents, employees, or contractors, of the owner. 
E.  Charges Applied to Tampering. The owner is responsible for timely payment of all charges resulting from tampering. The district shall present an invoice to the owner and may include a security deposit, a service fee, fees for removing and replacing the meter, and a fee for the estimated water use. 
F.  Service Removal and Restoration. Service shall be removed when tampering is verified. Service will not be restored until all charges identified by the district are paid. 
(Ord. No. 2011-06, § 4(Exh. A), 7-19-11) 
14.02.070 - Fees for service. 
    All fees for services under this title shall be found in the city and district fee resolution or in the other resolutions adopted by the city or district. 
(Ord. No. 2011-06, § 4(Exh. A), 7-19-11) 
14.02.080 - Billing and collection procedures. 
A.  Billing Period. The billing period shall be at the option of the district. 
B.  Meter Reading. Meters shall be read as nearly as possible on the same date of each corresponding month by one of the following methods: 
1.  Actual - Consumption of water based upon a meter read. 
2.  Estimated - Consumption may be estimated when the meter is found to be non-registering, damaged, inaccessible, stolen, or when an actual read is unavailable. Such estimates shall be made from previous consumption for a comparable period or by such other method as may be determined by the district, said decision of the district is to be final. 
C.  Opening and Closing Bills. Opening and closing bills for less than the normal billing period shall be prorated as to minimum charges. 
D.  Deposits. 
1.  New Customer. If an applicant does not have a previous minimum one year record of having at all times paid his water/sewer bills or other fees when due to the district, during a period ending within the preceding eighteen (18) months of the date of application for service, then the district shall require said applicant to make a deposit as a condition of rendering water service. Such deposit shall be as determined by policy or other action established by the district. 
2.  Return of Deposit. A guarantee deposit with the water district made by an applicant whose account has not been in arrears or any violations at any time during twelve (12) consecutive months, after which said deposit shall be applied as an offset without interest or upon termination of service. 
3.  Use of Deposit. Subsequent to termination of service, the amount remaining unpaid for water/sewer service or any applicable fees may be retained by the district as an offset from the deposit. 
4.  Disconnected for Non-Payment. District policy requires a guarantee deposit if a customer has been disconnected for non-payment and does not have a guarantee deposit at the time of disconnection. In addition, a customer with a deposit that is insufficient to cover the amount of a delinquent bill shall be charged an additional deposit sufficient to cover the difference for security. These required deposits shall be paid in full, along with all other necessary fees, before the service shall be reconnected. Said guarantee deposit will be not less than the minimum deposit as established by the district. 
E.  Billing Charges. 
1.  Service Charge. There shall be a fixed service charge for water service connections, construction meters, and private fire protection service to cover the district's expense to monitor and maintain the use of said meter. This charge shall be subject to change by action of the board as deemed necessary. 
2.  Sewer Charge. There shall be a fixed sewer charge for all service connections to the sewer system to cover the district's expense. This charge shall be subject to change by action of the board as deemed necessary. 
3.  Consumption Charge. There shall be a charge for actual or estimated water usage; this charge is subject to change by action of the board as deemed necessary. 
4.  Other fees. Other fees may be applicable as set forth in the fee schedule. 
F.  Payment. Water/sewer service bills shall be due and payable upon presentation as stipulated on the water bill itself and shall be delinquent fourteen (14) days after the date of billing. A past due notice will be mailed out to customers a minimum of ten days prior to disconnection, stating the last date to pay the balance in full without incurring fees and/or disconnection of water service. Before service is disconnected, an additional attempt to contact the customer shall be made forty-eight (48) hours or two business days prior to the disconnection date, whichever is greater, by making an automated phone call, text message, email, or other current form of communication. If a valid contact number or address is not available, notice shall be given by placing a tag or other written document on the door handle, gate, or other conspicuous place on or about the property receiving the water/sewer service, said notice shall request contact with the district by date and time indicated, or service will thereupon be disconnected. Unless a prior arrangement for payment is made, service shall be disconnected if payment in full is not received after at minimum twenty-four-day period. 
G.  Termination of Service. 
1.  Customer Request. Customers desiring to terminate service should notify the district at least two business days prior to vacating the premises. Unless termination of service is requested, the customer shall be liable for charges whether or not any water is used. 
2.  Termination of Service Due to Non-Payment. Service may be terminated for non-payment of bills in accordance with Section 14.02.08(F). Any amount due shall be deemed a debt to the district until paid in full. 
H.  Delinquencies. Accounts not paid on or before the date on which they become delinquent will be subject to a fixed fee and a service charge of one percent per month on the unpaid balance. 
1.  Disconnected for non-payment. A meter disconnected for non-payment of bills shall not be reconnected, unlocked or turned on until all unpaid bills, applicable fees, and deposits have been paid to the district. 
I.  Responsibility. Failure to receive a bill, phone call, door tag, or any other attempt of contact by the district does not relieve a customer of liability. Any amount due shall be deemed a debt to the district, and any person, firm or corporation failing, neglecting or refusing to pay said indebtedness shall be liable to an action in the name of the district in any court of competent jurisdiction for the amount thereof. 
J.  Water Used without Application. A person using water from a service connection without having made prior application to the district for water/sewer service shall be held liable for the service charges, consumption charges, and all other fees for water delivered from the date of the last recorded meter reading, and if the meter is found inoperative, the district will estimate the quantity consumed. Until proper application for water service is made and any accumulated bills for service are paid, the service shall be disconnected by the district without notice. 
K.  Non-Compliance. The district may, unless otherwise provided, disconnect water/sewer service to a customer for non-compliance with this chapter or any other resolution, ordinance, or regulation related to water/sewer service if the customer fails to comply with them within ten days from written notice from the district informing of the intention to disconnect service. If such non-compliance affects emergency matters of health and safety, and conditions warrant, the district may disconnect water/sewer service immediately, with or without prior notice. 
L.  Service Refused or Disconnected. Service may be refused or disconnected without prior notice for the following reasons: 
1.  Where apparatus or appliances are in use which might endanger or disturb the service to other customers; 
2.  Where there exists a cross connection in violation of state or federal laws; 
3.  For non-compliance with this chapter or any other resolution, ordinance or regulation relating to the water/sewer service; 
4.  To protect the district against fraud or abuse. 
M.  Turn On/Turn Off. No charge shall be made for a turn-on or turn-off of water/sewer service at the meter, either for emergency purposes, or at the request of the current customer. The district shall, upon request day or night, without charge, shut off the supply of water for emergency purposes at the curb stop. If a customer makes multiple requests to turn-on water when having previously been attempted but water was found to be flowing, the district shall require payment of all costs reasonably borne. 
N.  Liability/Inspection of Premises. The district does not assume liability for inspecting any apparatus on the premises of the customer. However, the district does reserve the right of inspection if there is reason to believe that unsafe apparatus is being used. 
O.  Delinquencies; Collection from Customer and Property Owner. The customer and property owner shall be jointly and severally liable for all charges that may be imposed under this chapter, including but not limited to charges for tampering as described in Section 14.02.060, and all charges for water service, sewer service and water usage as described in Sections 14.02.070 and 080, including any delinquent charges. 
1.  Authority and Effect. The district may secure the payment of delinquent charges for water services by establishing a lien against all property located within the state of California which is owned by the person who is liable for the payment of such charges. 
2.  Delinquency Defined. Delinquent charges for water/sewer services are those which remain unpaid for twenty-four (24) days after the billing date. 
3.  Notice to Lienee. Prior to establishing any lien pursuant to this section, the general manager shall notify the person who is liable for the payment of the delinquent charges that the delinquency exists and that the district may establish a lien against all real property in San Bernardino County and/or in any other county in the state of California, which such person currently owns or which such person might afterwards acquire during the effective period of the lien. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be served upon the prospective lienee by deposit in the United States Mail. 
4.  Procedure. In all cases where charges for water services remain unpaid for ten days or more after the notice specified in subsection 3 of this section has been deposited in the mail, the general manager, or such other person who may be directed to do so by the board, shall prepare a certificate of charges due for presentation to the board and shall inform the board, before the recordation of a lien pursuant to subsection 5 of this section, of the lien based upon said certificate of charges due, stating the amount thereof, the name and address of the licensee, and the location of the real property associated with the delinquency and shall obtain the approval of the board to so record. Thereafter the general manager shall file for record the certificate of charges due in the office of the county recorder of the county of San Bernardino and in the office of the county recorder of any other county in the state of California in which there is reason to believe that there is real property owned by the person who is liable for the payment of the delinquent charges. 
5.  Contents of Certificate. Each certificate filed pursuant to subsection 4 of this section shall be executed under penalty of perjury and shall certify the amount of unpaid charges including any penalty, the name and address of the person who is liable therefor and the fact that the district is entitled to payment thereof. 
6.  Release of Lien. Liens recorded pursuant to subsection 4 of this section shall be released upon full satisfaction thereof. 
7.  Collection on Tax Roll. In addition to establishing a lien pursuant to subsections 1 through 6 of this section, delinquent and unpaid charges for services may be collected on the tax roll pursuant to the procedures set forth herein, or any other applicable procedures under state law. A statement of those delinquent and unpaid charges for water and other services that remain delinquent and unpaid for sixty (60) days or more on July 1st, or on such other date as determined by the district, shall be furnished to the county in accordance with applicable county requirements. The amount of any such delinquent and unpaid charges shall be added to and become a part of the annual taxes next levied upon the property upon which the water or other services for which the charges are unpaid was used and upon the property subject to the charges for any other district services, and shall constitute a lien on that property as of the same time and in the same manner as does the tax lien securing such annual taxes. All laws applicable to the levy, collection and enforcement of municipal ad valorem taxes shall be applicable to such charges, except that if any real property to which such lien would attach has been transferred or conveyed to a bona fide purchaser for value, or if a lien of a bona fide encumbrancer for value has been created and attaches thereon, prior to the date on which the first installment of such taxes would become delinquent, then the lien which would otherwise be imposed by this section shall not attach to such real property and the delinquent and unpaid charges relating to such property shall be transferred to the unsecured roll for collection. 
(Ord. No. 2011-06, § 4(Exh. A), 7-19-11) 
14.02.090 - District connections required. 
    All new buildings intended for any human occupancy shall be connected to district water and sewer facilities, if available. The general manager or designee shall determine whether facilities are available. Sewer facility availability shall be per Section 14.08.020. 
(Ord. No. 2011-06, § 4(Exh. A), 7-19-11) 
Chapter 14.04 - WATER SERVICE 
Sections: 

14.04.010 - Number of services. 
    The applicant may apply for as many services as may be reasonably required for the applicant's premises, provided that the pipeline for each service is independent of the pipeline for other services, that the pipelines are not interconnected, have applicable back-flow devices installed, and that the district has water available to provide the service or services for which application is made. 
(Ord. No. 2011-06, § 4(Exh. A), 7-19-11) 
14.04.020 - Customer shut-off valve. 
    For the owner's convenience or use, a customer shut-off valve may be installed on the owner's side of the service installation, to control the flow of water to the piping on his premises. The owner or customer shall not use the district's curb stop to turn on and off for his convenience. Failure to comply with this regulation may result in disconnection of water service. The responsibility to install, maintain or repair installed customer shut-off valve behind the meter is that of the property owner, at his expense; provided, this provision does not excuse compliance with all other applicable district laws and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2011-06, § 4(Exh. A), 7-19-11) 
14.04.030 - Curb stop. 
    No customer shall use the curb stop, unless specifically authorized by the district. Upon authorization, a curb stop key must be used to operate a valve; any damages incurred are at the customer's expense. 
(Ord. No. 2011-06, § 4(Exh. A), 7-19-11) 
14.04.040 - Interruptions of service. 
A.  The district shall not be liable for damage which may result from an interruption in service for any reason. 
B.  Maintenance of Water Pressure and Shutting Water Off For Emergency or Repairs. The district shall not accept or assume any responsibility for the maintenance of pressure and reserves the right to disconnect service while making emergency or other repairs. Customers are responsible for installing and maintaining a pressure regulator valve. Customers dependent upon a continuous supply shall have sole responsibility for providing emergency storage. 
(Ord. No. 2011-06, § 4(Exh. A), 7-19-11) 
14.04.050 - Liability for damaged waterlines and facilities. 
A.  The district shall determine liability for any damage to an existing waterline or facility resulting from failure to exercise reasonable care to protect said facilities. Once liability is determined the district reserves the right to require those at fault to make the necessary repairs and/or pay reimbursement for associated cost incurred by an individual, contractor, or owner. 
B.  This section shall not be deemed to relieve the district from identifying main lines or other facilities on its plans and specifications. 
1.  Prior to the start of construction, the individual, contractor or owner, shall contact the district by utilizing the current line locating agency to have all underground facilities marked. 
2.  The individual, contractor or owner is responsible to protect all existing facilities from damages during construction and is responsible for the proper compaction of the district's trench-lines that may be intersected. 
3.  The individual, contractor or owner is responsible for the job site safety of all personnel and property during the entire duration of construction until the project is finalized by the proper authority of the district. 
(Ord. No. 2011-06, § 4(Exh. A), 7-19-11) 
14.04.060 - Damages through leaking pipes. 
    When turning on water supply as requested to a house or property, the district will endeavor to ascertain if water is running. If such is found to be the case, the water will be left shut off at the curb stop or customer shut-off valve. The district's jurisdiction and responsibility ends at the meter or check valve and the district shall in no case be liable for resulting damages by water running from open, faulty fixtures or from broken or damaged pipes inside the property line. 
(Ord. No. 2011-06, § 4(Exh. A), 7-19-11) 
14.04.070 - Location of service. 
    Whenever a service connection is not located as shown on district as-built maps, district personnel shall assist to the extent reasonably possible to determine the location of the service connection by use of surface and underground line detectors. However, the district shall bear no expense for equipment, excavation and/or labor expenses incurred by any person in determining the location of district lines and other facilities. 
(Ord. No. 2011-06, § 4(Exh. A), 7-19-11) 
14.04.080 - Non-existent service. 
    Before a service connection, which is shown to exist on district maps, is determined to be non-existent, the person attempting to locate the service connection shall contact the district for a determination relative to the amount of digging and/or research to be required of the person in locating the service connection. The district shall not be liable for any expenses for equipment, excavation, and/or labor incurred by any person in determining the existence of any lines or other facilities. 
(Ord. No. 2011-06, § 4(Exh. A), 7-19-11) 
14.04.090 - Cross connections and backflow devices. 
A.  The owner shall comply with state and federal laws enforcing the installation of backflow prevention assemblies to protect the public potable water supply from the danger of cross connections. Backflow prevention assemblies must be installed directly downstream from the service and shall be open to test and inspection by the district at all times. Plans for installation of backflow prevention assemblies must be approved by the district prior to installation. Whenever backflow protection has been found necessary on a water supply line entering an owner's premises, then any and all water supply lines from the district's mains entering such premises, building, or structures shall be protected by an approved backflow prevention assembly, regardless of the use of the additional water supply lines. 
B.  Backflow Prevention. District will establish and maintain a list of approved backflow prevention assemblies. Only backflow prevention assemblies which have been approved by the district shall be acceptable for installation by a water user. The type of backflow prevention assembly that may be required (listed in decreasing level of protection) includes: Air Gap Separation (A.G.), Reduced Pressure Principle Backflow Prevention Assembly (R.P.), Double Check Valve Assembly (D.C.), for fire services, Reduced Pressure Detector Assembly (R.P.D.A.), and Double Check Detector Assemblies (D.C.D.A.). The water user may choose a higher level of protection then required by the district. The minimum types of backflow protection required to protect the public potable water system at the user's water connection to premises with varying degrees of hazard are listed in Table 1 of Section 7604, Title 17 of the California Code of Regulations. 
    Situations which are not covered in Table 1 shall be evaluated on a case by case basis and the appropriate backflow protection shall be determined by the district. In special circumstances when the owner is engaged in the handling of especially dangerous corrosive liquids, industrial or processed water the owner shall be required to install an air gap separation as an additional precaution as a protection to the district's water supply. 
    A list of approved backflow prevention assemblies will be provided at request to any affected customer. Backflow prevention assemblies shall be installed in a manner prescribed in the district's policy and procedures document. Location of the assemblies shall be as close as practical to the user's connection. The district shall have the final authority in determining the required location of a backflow prevention assembly. 
C.  Testing Backflow Prevention Assemblies. The district may inspect and test backflow prevention assemblies at random. Testing of backflow prevention assemblies shall be conducted only by certified testers. A list of certified testers will be provided to any affected customer. Testing of the assemblies shall be the responsibility of the water user. Backflow prevention assemblies will be tested at least annually and immediately after installation, relocation, or repair. More frequent testing may be required if deemed necessary by the district. Assemblies shall be serviced, overhauled, or replaced whenever they are found to be defective and all costs of repair, maintenance, and testing shall be borne by the water user. Approval must be obtained from the Hesperia Water District prior to removing, relocating, or replacing a backflow prevention assembly. 
D.  Termination of Service. Unprotected cross connections are prohibited. An appropriate backflow prevention assembly shall be installed, tested and maintained by and at the expense of the water user, at each user connection where required to prevent backflow from the water users premises to the public potable water system. It shall be the water user's responsibility to comply with the district's requirements. Failure to comply with the district requirements shall be cause for water service termination to the premises until corrective actions have been taken. The service of water to any premises may be immediately disconnected by the district if any defect is found in the backflow prevention assembly or if it is found that dangerous unprotected cross connections exist. Service will not be restored until such defects are corrected. 
(Ord. No. 2011-06, § 4(Exh. A), 7-19-11) 
14.04.100 - Service connections. 
A.  Application for Service. 
1.  No water service shall be made to a new connection except upon written application. Said application shall be in a form provided by the district and shall contain such information required by the district. 
2.  No water service connection or reconnection shall be made upon the application of, or for service to, any person against whom a delinquent bill for service or other charges owed to the district and/or city remains unpaid. 
3.  When the premises to which water is to be furnished does not have a meter for use on said premises, the applicant shall pay an installation charge based on all costs of installation, including meters and appurtenances. Where a regular charge has been fixed for the type of service installation desired, such regular charge shall be paid by the applicant in advance of water service. Where there is no regular charge the district reserves the right to require the applicant to deposit an amount equal to the estimated cost of such service installation. 
B.  Installation of Services. Service installations will be made only to premises abutting distribution mains located in public streets, alleys or easements, or to extensions thereof as herein provided. Services installed in new subdivisions prior to the construction of streets or in advance of street improvements must be accepted by the applicant in the installed location. If lot or street design or alignment is changed after installation, the cost of any relocation of water or service facilities shall be borne by the owner or applicant. 
C.  Changes in Customer's Equipment. If a customer makes any material change in the size, character or extent of the type of use or service, equipment or operations resulting in a significant increase in the use of water, or if the district discovers any change, written notice shall immediately be given to the district of the nature of the change, and where necessary, any application shall be appropriately amended, and rates and charges shall be adjusted accordingly. 
D.  Service Size and Location. The district reserves the right to determine the size of service connections and their location with respect to the boundaries of the premises to be served. The installation of customer's pipeline to the curb should not be done until the location of the service connection has been approved by the general manager or his authorized representative. 
E.  Curb Stop. Every service connection installed by the district shall be equipped with a curb stop on the inlet side of the meter. 
F.  Service Connection. It shall be unlawful to maintain a connection except in conformity with the following rules: 
1.  Separate Building. Each dwelling unit under separate ownership or control must be provided with a separate service connection. Upon application, the district may permit two or more dwelling units under one ownership or control and on the same lot or parcel of land to be supplied through the same service connection. The district reserves the right to limit the number of dwelling units or the area of land under one ownership or control which may be supplied by one service connection and may require a separate service for each dwelling unit or building. When two or more meters are utilized for service, on one parcel or lot, an approved backflow device will be installed at the owner's expense. 
2.  Different Owners of Adjoining Property. The same service connection shall not be used to supply adjoining property of different owners or to supply property of the same owner located on two sides of a street or alley. 
3.  Divided Property. When property provided with a single service connection is subsequently divided, the original service connection shall be considered as belonging to the lot or parcel of land which it directly enters. Each property newly formed by said division, will require a new separate service connection. 
G.  Service Equipment. The service connections extending from the water main to the property line, including the meter, meter box, check valve and curb stop, shall be the property of the district and shall be maintained by the district. All pipes and fixtures extending or lying beyond the discharge side of the meter or check valve shall be installed and maintained by the owner of the property. 
H.  Service Outside District. Water service to lands located outside of the boundaries of the district shall be subject to approval of the board. The board shall establish additional charges for such service as it may deem appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 2011-06, § 4(Exh. A), 7-19-11) 
14.04.110 - Water services to new developments. 
A.  System Requirements. At the time of designing, developing, subdividing, or re-subdividing any tract or parcel of land within the district, the owners of said tract or parcel of land shall, at their own expense, provide for such water wells, reservoirs, pumps, water mains, main line extensions, valves, service connections, fire hydrants, and appurtenances as the district, in its discretion, deems necessary for the distribution of water to each lot, piece, or parcel of land. The service shall be carried to the lot line and clearly marked on the property. All such system improvements shall be designed and constructed pursuant to district standards and formally dedicated to the district for maintenance and operation. 
B.  Existing Facilities. Whenever land is to receive water service from the district, any existing water wells, mains and deeds or easements needed therefor, together with necessary appurtenances thereto, shall be deeded or conveyed to the district in consideration of the approval by the district of any request for water service to such subdivision or development. Said deed or conveyance to the district shall be properly executed and delivered before the request will be approved by the district. 
(Ord. No. 2011-06, § 4(Exh. A), 7-19-11) 
14.04.120 - Water meters. 
A.  Installation. Meters shall be installed pursuant to district standards within public rights-of-way or easements and as near to the property line as practicable and shall be owned and installed by the district. All meters may be sealed by the district and no seal shall be altered or broken except by an authorized employee or agent of the district. 
B.  Change in Location. Meters moved for the convenience of the customer shall be relocated at the expense of the customer. Meters moved for the convenience of the district and to protect the property of the district shall be relocated at the expense of the district. 
C.  Change in Size. When a customer requests to have a larger meter size replace an existing service, and the difference in size is compatible with existing service lines, the capital facilities charge will be the difference between the two meter sizes. A time limit of thirty (30) days will be given to connect the new service and disconnect the old service. If the old service is not disconnected within thirty (30) days, customer must pay the balance of the new service capital facilities charge and pay the service charge and consumption for both meters. 
    If a down size of meter service is requested by a water customer, the change-out will be made subject to approval by the district. A capital facility refund is not available in reduction of meter sizes. 
D.  Fast Meters. If a meter tested at the request of an owner or customer is found to be more than one and one-half percent fast, the excess charges shall be refunded to the owner or customer requesting the test either for the time service was rendered or for a period of twelve (12) months, whichever shall be the lesser. 
E.  Slow Meters. If a meter tested at the request of an owner or customer is found to be more than five percent slow, the district shall bill the owner or customer for the amount of the undercharges, either for the time service was rendered or for a period of twelve (12) months, whichever shall be the lesser. 
F.  Non-Registering Meters. If a meter is found not to be registering, the consumption charges shall be based upon the estimated consumption as defined in Section 14.02.080(B)(2). 
G.  Locked Meters. All meters which are locked by the district shall not be altered or unlocked except by an authorized employee or agent of the district. 
H.  Emergency Meter Repair. Cost for emergency meter repairs required as a result of damages originating on the premises by acts of the owner, tenants, employees, permittees or others will be assessed to the owner or customer, and will be due and payable upon presentation. 
    These charges will consist of, but not be limited to, material and labor charges, administration and/or legal cost, and will be adjusted periodically as required. 
I.  Meter Box Resets. In the event an owner, tenants, agents, employees, permittees, or others remove a meter box from the meter location for any reason and the district is required to reset said box, a charge determined by the board of the district will be levied and paid by the owner or customer. Should the box be damaged in any way while being removed or after removal the district will also levy an additional charge to cover the replacement cost or cost to repair the damaged box. 
J.  Maintenance. All district property can be maintained or replaced as needed or at the discretion of the district without prior notification. 
(Ord. No. 2011-06, § 4(Exh. A), 7-19-11) 
14.04.130 - Fire hydrants. 
A.  Use of Fire Hydrants. Fire hydrants are for use by the district or by organized fire protection agencies pursuant to contract with the district. Other parties desiring to use fire hydrants for any purpose must first obtain written permission from the district prior to the use and shall operate the hydrants in accordance with instructions issued by the district. Unauthorized use of hydrants is unlawful and shall constitute a public nuisance. 
B.  Hydrant Charges. A charge, determined by contract between the district and organized fire protection agencies, may be imposed for hydrant maintenance. No charge will be made for water used for public fire protection. 
C.  Moving of Fire Hydrants. When a fire hydrant has been installed in the location specified by the proper authority, the district has fulfilled its obligation. If a property owner or other party desires a change in the size, type, or location of the hydrant, he shall bear all costs of such changes, without refund. Any change in the location of a fire hydrant shall first be approved by the proper authority, and the district shall first be notified of the proposed change. 
(Ord. No. 2011-06, § 4(Exh. A), 7-19-11) 
14.04.140 - Private fire protection service. 
A.  Non-Residential and Multiple-Family Residential Systems (NFPA 13 and 13R Systems). 
1.  There shall be no connection between a fire protection system and any other water distribution system on the premises. 
2.  There shall be no water used through the fire protection service except to extinguish fires and testing of the fire protection equipment. Any water used through the fire protection system for other uses shall be charged double the regular consumption rates. 
3.  Water used for fire protection, such as filling a tank used for fire suppression purposes, may be used from the fire protection service only with written permission of the district. 
4.  The district assumes no liability or responsibility for loss or damage to private property or facilities due to lack of water pressure. The fire protection service is subject to variations in pressure and shutdown required by district to operate and maintain the system. 
5.  The district reserves the right to require fire service connections and backflow prevention devices to be types approved by district, and to require a bypass meter installed at the owner's expense. 
B.  Single-family, Duplex, and Townhouse Systems (NFPA 13D Systems). 
1.  Fire protection systems may be connected to other water distribution systems within the same dwelling unit. 
2.  The district assumes no liability or responsibility for loss or damage to private property or facilities due to lack of water pressure. The fire protection service is subject to variations in pressure and shutdown required by district to operate and maintain the system. 
(Ord. No. 2011-06, § 4(Exh. A), 7-19-11) 
14.04.150 - Construction meters. 
A.  Construction Meter Permit. Applicants must make application with the district and shall make the deposit described herein for temporary use of district construction meters and equipment. The customer shall use all possible care to prevent damage to the meter from the time it is provided to the customer until it is returned to the district. Any damages to the meter or other district facilities or property shall be paid to the district by the customer, first by the forfeiture of that portion or the entire amount of deposit, to cover replacement cost of equipment or cost of damage to district property, with any remaining balance owed to be promptly paid to the district. 
B.  The district will approve all permissible fire hydrant locations within the district in advance where temporary service may be obtained. The applicant is responsible for contacting the district when a meter is to be moved from any given location to another. In no case shall a district meter be used outside the district. 
C.  Deposit. The board shall establish the amount of deposit to be made by the applicant for each construction meter to guarantee payment for possible damage, theft or loss of meter. Upon return of construction meter and subsequent termination of service, the actual costs shall be determined, and deducted from said deposit, then either additional payment by the applicant is applicable or reimbursement by district to the applicant for the remaining balance. 
D.  Construction Meter Charges. The applicant for a construction meter shall pay for metered water at rates prescribed by the board in effect at the time of use. All charges will be billed on a monthly basis. The customer is responsible for bringing the meter into the district office on a monthly basis, for reading and inspection. The district reserves the right to inspect and read all construction meters at any time. If a meter is found not to be registering, reported lost, or a police report is filed that the meter is stolen, and not brought into the district on a monthly basis, the consumption charges shall be based upon the estimated consumption for a comparable period or by such other method as may be determined by the district, and said decision of the district is to be final. 
    Upon termination of service, the meter shall be returned and a closing bill will be prepared to reflect all penalties, repair costs and water use charges, which will be deducted from the original deposit. Any balance of deposit remaining will be refunded to the customer, and any balance owing shall be promptly paid to the district. 
E.  Installation and Operation. Use of district construction meters and assigned fire hydrants shall be operated in accordance with all district rules and regulations and any unauthorized use of service shall be subject to a fine, as established by the board. 
(Ord. No. 2011-06, § 4(Exh. A), 7-19-11) 
14.04.160 - Wasting water. 
A.  Wasting Water. No customer shall knowingly permit leaks or waste of water. Where water is wastefully or negligently used on a customer's premises seriously affecting the general service, the district may disconnect the service after giving the customer notice if such conditions are not immediately corrected. In such circumstances, the district shall not be liable to the customer or to any employee, licensee, invitee or permittee of the customer on account of any bodily injury or property damage alleged to have occurred on account of such action taken by the district. 
B.  Excessive Irrigation and Related Unreasonable Uses-Remedial Actions. No customer or other person acting on behalf of or under the direction of a customer shall cause or permit the use of water for irrigation of landscaping or other outdoor vegetation, plantings, lawns or other growth, to exceed the amount required to provide reasonable irrigation of same, and shall not cause or permit any waste of water from said irrigation activities or from watering devices or systems. If the general manager of the district or his designee finds that any customer or other person is in violation of the provisions in this section, in addition to any other remedies available, any one or more of the following actions may be taken by the general manager: 
1.  Request initiation of proceedings for prosecution by the district attorney or any other proper prosecuting officer of any violation of this section; 
2.  Disconnect water service either for said irrigation purposes (if a separate meter and turnoff facilities are available for those purposes) or to the entire premises served, as deemed appropriate under the circumstances by the general manager, after giving prior written notice to disconnect or service will be terminated if said violation is not immediately disconnected. Notice may be by delivery to the customer or person appearing to be in charge or the premises, or by placing said notice on the door handle, gate, or other conspicuous place on or about the property receiving the water service and immediately mailing a copy of said notice to the customer at the last known mailing address in the district's customer records; notice shall be given at least twenty-four (24) hours before turn-off by the general manager or his designee unless the general manager, or his designee, in his discretion, determines that a shorter period of notice is required in view of the nature of the violation and to protect the public health and safety, in which case the notice shall be given as expeditiously as said manager or his designee finds to be reasonable under the circumstances. 
(Ord. No. 2011-06, § 4(Exh. A), 7-19-11) 
14.04.170 - Water conservation emergency plan. 
A.  Purpose. 
1.  The district is authorized by California Water Code Section 350 et seq. to restrict the use of district water during any emergency caused by drought, or other threatened or existing water shortage, and to prohibit the waste of district water or the use of district water during such periods, for any purpose other than household uses or such other restricted uses as may be determined to be necessary by the district and may prohibit use of such water during such periods for specific uses which the district may from time to time find to be nonessential. 
2.  The district is further authorized by California Water Code Section 350 et seq. to prescribe and define by ordinance those restrictions, prohibitions and exclusions it may determine to be necessary pursuant to California Water Code Section 350 et seq. in restricting the use of district water during threatened or existing water shortages. 
3.  It is therefore the intent of the district to establish by this section those procedures required to maximize the beneficial use of its available water resources to the extent to which they are capable, and that the waste or unreasonable uses or unreasonable method of use of water be prevented and the conservation of such water is to be extended with a view to the reasonable and beneficial use thereof in the interests of the people of the community of Hesperia and for the public welfare. 
B.  Implementation and Termination. The general manager shall monitor the supply and demand for water on a daily basis to determine the level of conservation required by the water shortage emergency or to recommend termination of the water conservation plan stages, and shall notify the board of the necessity for the implementation or termination of each stage. Each declaration of the board implementing or terminating a water conservation stage shall be published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation and shall remain in effect until the board otherwise declares, as provided herein. 
C.  Water Supply Plan. 
1.  Stage No. 1. Normal Conditions-Mandatory conservation measures. Normal conditions shall be in effect when the district is able to meet all the water demands of its customers in the immediate future. During normal conditions, all water users must continue to use water wisely, to prevent the waste or unreasonable use of water, and to reduce water consumption to that necessary for ordinary domestic and commercial purposes. 
a.  Exterior Landscape Plans. Exterior landscape plans for all new multi-family; commercial and industrial development shall provide for timed irrigation systems and shall require the use of drought resistant varieties of plants, shrubs, and turf. Such plans shall be presented to and approved prior to issuance of a water service letter. 
b.  Excess Irrigation and Related Waste. No customer of the district or other person acting on behalf of or under the direction of a customer shall cause or permit the use of water for irrigation of landscaping or other outdoor vegetation plantings, lawns or other growth, to exceed the amount required to provide reasonable irrigation of the same, and shall not cause or permit any unreasonable or excessive waste of water from said irrigation activities or from watering devices or systems. The free flow of water away from an irrigated site shall be presumptively considered excessive irrigation and waste. 
c.  Agricultural Irrigation. Persons receiving water from the district who are engaged in agricultural practices, whether for the purpose of crop production or growing of commercial ornamental plants, shall provide, maintain and use irrigation equipment and practices which are the most efficient possible. The general manager may require the owner or operators of these systems to prepare a plan describing their irrigation practices and equipment, including but not limited to, an estimate of the efficiency of the use of water on their properties. 
d.  Commercial Facilities. Commercial and industrial facilities shall, upon request of the general manager, provide the district with their plan to insure conservation of water at their facilities. The district will provide these facilities with information regarding the average monthly water use by the facility for the last two-year period. The facility will be expected to provide the district with a plan to conserve or reduce the amount of water used by that percentage deemed to be necessary under the circumstances. After review and approval by the general manager, the water conservation plan shall be considered subject to inspection and enforcement by the district. 
e.  Swimming Pools. All residential, public and recreational swimming pools shall use evaporation resistant covers and shall recirculate water. Any swimming pool which does not have a cover installed during periods of nonuse shall be considered a waste of water. 
f.  Vehicle Washing. The washing of cars, trucks or other vehicles is not permitted, except with a hose equipped with an automatic shut-off device, or at a commercial facility designed and so designated on the district's billing records. 
2.  Stage No. 2. Threatened water supply shortage. In the event of a threatened water supply shortage which will affect the district's ability to provide water for ordinary domestic and commercial uses, the board shall hold a noticed public hearing after giving at least ten days' notice by publication in a newspaper of general circulation at which consumers of the water supply shall have the opportunity to testify concerning the pending water supply shortage and for the district to determine required conservation measures. Stage No. 2 requirements are in addition to those mandated by Stage No. 1. 
a.  Parks, Golf Courses, and School Grounds. Parks, golf courses (municipal and private) and school grounds which use water provided by the district shall be irrigated between the hours of eleven p.m. and five a.m., or such other times as may be determined appropriate by the district. Additionally, turf areas in excess of one thousand (1,000) square feet will be required to use soil moisture sensors and rain shut-off valves as part of their irrigation system. 
b.  Irrigation. The district may determine that the irrigation of exterior vegetation shall be conducted only during specified hours and/or days, and may impose other restrictions on the use of water for such irrigation. The irrigation of exterior vegetation at other than these times shall be considered to be a waste of water. 
c.  Run-Off and Wash-Down. No water provided by the district shall be used for the purposes of wash-down of hard surfaces such as driveways, sidewalks, and parking lot areas, except as specifically permitted by the district for public health and safety reasons such as wash-down of flammable or otherwise dangerous liquids or substances. Any water used on a premises that is allowed to escape the premises and run-off into gutters or storm drains shall be considered a waste of water. 
d.  Drinking Water Provided by Restaurants. Restaurants are requested not to provide drinking water to patrons except by request. 
e.  Construction Meter. No domestic water provided by the district may be used through construction meters between the hours of six a.m. and ten p.m. 
3.  Stage No. 3. Water Shortage Emergency-Mandatory Conservation Measures. In the event of an unforeseeable disaster or water emergency such as an earthquake or other major disruption in the water supply or any emergency that prevents the district from meeting the water demands of the community, the general manager is authorized to implement the emergency provisions of this chapter as provided herein. Public notice will follow enactment of said provision by publishing notice of said action in a newspaper of general circulation. 
    In the event of a foreseeable emergency such as extended drought conditions, the general manager may be authorized to implement the applicable provisions of this chapter as provided herein, after a public meeting is held before the board, after giving such public notice as the general manager determines is reasonable under the circumstances. After action of the board within seventy-two (72) hours of such declaration, adopting a resolution finding a Stage 3 water shortage emergency, the following rules and regulations shall be in effect immediately following such action: 
a.  Watering of parks, school grounds and golf courses is prohibited. 
b.  Lawn watering and landscape irrigation is prohibited. 
c.  Washing down of driveways, parking lots or other impervious surfaces is prohibited. 
d.  Washing of vehicles is prohibited, except when done by commercial car wash establishments with recycled or reclaimed water systems. 
e.  Filling or adding water to swimming pools, wading pools, spas, ornamental ponds, fountains and artificial lakes is prohibited. 
f.  Restaurants shall not serve drinking water to patrons except by request. 
g.  No new construction meter permits shall be issued by the district. 
h.  All existing construction meters shall be removed and/or locked. 
i.  Commercial nurseries shall discontinue all watering and irrigation. Watering of livestock is permitted as necessary. 
D.  Exceptions. 
1.  Application for Exception Permit. The general manager may grant permits for uses of water otherwise prohibited under the provisions of this chapter if he finds and determines that special circumstances make compliance impossible, or that restrictions herein would cause an emergency condition affecting the health, sanitation, fire protection or safety of the water use or of the public. 
2.  Such exceptions may be granted only upon written application therefor. Upon granting such exception permit, the general manager may impose any conditions he determines to be just and proper. 
(Ord. No. 2011-06, § 4(Exh. A), 7-19-11) 
Chapter 14.08 - WASTEWATER SERVICES 
Sections: 

14.08.010 - Standards for quality and testing. 
A.  Unsanitary Sewage. It is unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be deposited or placed, in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the boundaries of the district any human or animal excrement, garbage, or objectionable waste. 
B.  Discharge. It is unlawful to discharge to any manhole or system outlet within the district except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this division. 
C.  Private Sewage Disposal Facilities. Except as hereinafter provided, it is unlawful to construct any privy, outhouse, septic tank, cesspool, leach line, or other facility intended or used for the disposal of wastewater within any existing district sewered area. 
(Ord. No. 2011-06, § 4(Exh. A), 7-19-11) 
14.08.020 - Connection to public sewer required. 
A.  The following project types are required to connect to the public sewer: 
1.  Projects involving domestic wastewater discharge in excess of five hundred (500) gallons/acre/day as determined by city. 
2.  Projects with industrial or non-domestic waste discharge. 
3.  Projects that exceed two equivalent dwelling units (EDU)/acre density. 
a.  Exception: Projects located within the Hesperia Mobile Estates. 
4.  Projects that do not comply with district/city standards for private sewage disposal systems. 
5.  Projects on property located within two hundred (200) feet of a public sewer, when measured from property line to the existing sewer location. 
B.  Existing buildings and facilities connected to private sewage disposal systems are required to connect to the public sewer when: 
1.  There is a failure, either biological or structural, of the private sewage disposal system and connection to the public sewer system would be required in subsection A above. 
2.  There is a failure, either biological or structural, of the private sewage disposal system and the public sewer is located within two hundred (200) feet of the subject property line. 
3.  Additions, alterations, or modifications adding plumbing fixtures to the building or facilities that would now meet the criteria in subsection A above. 
C.  The city and district may require connection to the public sewer when information is available that private sewage disposal is causing or may cause deterioration of the quality of the groundwater in all or any portion of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2011-06, § 4(Exh. A), 7-19-11) 
14.08.030 - Maintenance of sewer laterals. 
    The owner of any property connecting to the local wastewater collection system shall be required to maintain the wastewater laterals from their building or structure to the wastewater cleanout required at the property line at their own expense. The district's responsibility is to maintain wastewater laterals within street rights-of-way, manholes and district main line sewers. 
(Ord. No. 2011-06, § 4(Exh. A), 7-19-11) 
14.08.040 - Private sewage disposal systems. 
    When connection to the public sewer is not required per Section 14.08.020 a private sewage disposal system may be installed. 
A.  Private sewage disposal systems shall comply with the provisions of the City of Hesperia Local Agency Management Program, as may be amended from time to time. The provisions of the City of Hesperia Local Agency Management Program, as amended are incorporated herein by reference with the same force and effect as if the provisions therein were specifically and fully set out herein. 
B.  Permits for construction and sizing requirements shall be established by the city using requirements from the California Plumbing Code. 
C.  Operation and Maintenance. Private sewage disposal systems shall be operated and maintained in a sanitary manner at all times at no expense to the district. 
D.  Connection to Public Sewer. Prior to connection to the public sewer the following shall be completed: 
1.  The septic tank and seepage pit(s) shall be pumped of all liquids and solids and the pump ticket shall be provided to the city. 
2.  The bottom of the septic tank shall be broken and inspected by city. 
3.  The lids for the septic tank and seepage pit(s) shall be removed. 
4.  The septic tank and seepage pit(s) shall be filled with material approved by the city. 
5.  When a building or structure is proposed to be placed within the required setbacks of a private sewage disposal system as defined in the California Plumbing Code, the septic tank and/or seepage pit shall be removed entirely. 
(Ord. No. 2011-06, § 4(Exh. A), 7-19-11; Ord. of 2018-04, § 2(Exh. A), 4-3-18) 
14.08.050 - Wastewater discharge regulations. 
A.  VVWRA Regulations Adopted by Reference. The wastewater discharged to the wastewater facilities shall meet applicable regulations prescribed and adopted by the VVWRA. Said regulations are adopted by reference and made a part of this division. Copies are on file with the district. 
B.  Discharge Not Allowed When. No person shall discharge wastewater directly or indirectly into sewage facilities owned or operated by the district which cause or are capable of causing either alone or by interaction with other substances, the following: 
1.  A fire or explosion; 
2.  Obstruction of flow in the wastewater system or damage to the sewage facilities; 
3.  Interference with effective maintenance or operation of the sewage system; 
4.  Air pollution by the release of toxic or malodorous gases or gas-producing substances; 
5.  Interference with the wastewater treatment process; 
6.  Unsuitability of the district's effluent or any other product of the treatment process, residues, sludge, grease, or scum for reclamation and reuse; 
7.  Discoloration or any other condition of the quality of the district's treatment works effluent to such an extent that receiving water quality requirements established by regulatory agencies cannot be met; or 
8.  Conditions at or near sewage facilities which violate any statute or any regulation or ordinance of any public agency or state or federal regulatory body of competent jurisdiction. 
C.  Discharging of storm water into the sanitary wastewater system or sewage into any storm water system is unlawful. 
D.  Discharge of Non-Sewage Substances Restricted. Permission to discharge any substance except domestic sewage into the sanitary wastewater system of the district will be considered in accordance with the conditions of each case and shall be subject to district rules, regulations and requirements. Approval or permission may require the owner to provide, at the owner's expense, such preliminary treatment as may be necessary to reduce objectionable characteristics and constituents in wastewater as may be appropriate to satisfy the requirements specified in the regulations of the VVWRA. Plans, specifications, and other information relating to proposed preliminary treatment facilities shall be submitted to the district for approval of the district engineer and general manager, and no construction of such facilities shall commence until said approvals are obtained in writing. Where preliminary treatment facilities are required or provided for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his expense. 
E.  Control Manhole to be Installed by Property Owner. The owner of any property discharging industrial wastes as defined herein shall install a suitable control manhole in the portion of the sewer located on private property to facilitate observation, sampling, and measurements of the wastes. Such manhole shall be accessible and safely located, and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the general manager. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at his expense, and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at all times. All measurements, tests, and analysis of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is hereinabove made shall be determined in accordance with Standard Methods of the Examination of Water and Sewage and shall be determined at the control manhole provided for above, or upon suitable samples taken at said control manhole. The control manhole can be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer. 
F.  Special Agreements or Arrangements. No statement contained in this chapter shall be construed as preventing special agreement or arrangement between the district, VVWRA, and any person whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by VVWRA for treatment, subject to payment therefore by discharger. 
G.  Swimming Pools. Connection of swimming pools and swimming pool equipment to sanitary sewers shall not be permitted and the discharge of swimming pool effluent to a district sewerage facility is prohibited. 
H.  Interceptors Required. Grease, oil and/or sand interceptors or traps shall be required, at the owner's expense, in all facilities which discharge liquid wastes containing grease, flammable wastes, sand and/or other wastes containing harmful ingredients. All interceptors and traps shall be to type and capacity approved by the general manager and shall be installed and located so as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Grease and oil interceptors and traps shall be constructed of impervious materials, capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in temperature. 
    Required interceptors and traps shall be of substantial construction, watertight, and equipped with easily removable covers, and shall be effectively trapped and vented. All grease, oil, and sand interceptors and traps shall be maintained at the owner's expense, in a continuously efficient operation at all times. All construction shall conform to district standards. The facilities required to use the aforementioned interceptors are, but are not limited to, restaurants including fast food, butcher shops, gas stations, car washes, automotive mechanics, and paint shops. Other facilities that generate much smaller quantities of greasy waste may have grease traps installed. Facilities in this category would include convenience stores, coffee shops, sandwich shops, and similar uses where small amounts of greasy wastes are generated. 
I.  Industrial Wastewater Discharge. 
1.  To provide the maximum public benefit from the use of district facilities, written authorization or a permit as provided by VVWRA shall be required to use said facilities for industrial wastewater discharge. The wastewater discharge permit shall be in one of three forms and is dependent upon the volume and characteristics of wastewater discharged. The three industrial wastewater discharge permits are: (a) Class I; (b) Class II; and (c) Critical discharge permits. 
2.  All industrial wastewater permits must be obtained prior to discharging into a public sewer. 
(Ord. No. 2011-06, § 4(Exh. A), 7-19-11) 
14.08.060 - Sewer construction. 
A.  Permit Requirements. Any person proposing to construct and/or install sewers within the district for connection to the district's wastewater system shall be appropriately licensed. This shall include a Class "A" General Engineering Contractor, Class "C34" Pipeline Contractor, or Class "C42" Sanitary Sewer Contractor. Prior to the district's issuance of a permit, the contractor shall provide evidence of all required certificates of insurance and performance bonds as established by the district. 
B.  Encroachment Permits. No excavation for sewers shall be made in any street within the district until an encroachment permit has been obtained from the city. Any and all permits required by local agencies shall be obtained by the owner's contractor and any fees therefor shall be paid by the owner or contractor. 
C.  Responsibility for Defects. 
1.  All persons performing work which is governed by the provisions of this chapter shall be held strictly responsible for any and all acts and omissions of agents, subcontractors, and employees in connection with said work. Said persons, upon being notified in writing by the general manager of any defects arising from construction or of any violation of the provisions of this division, shall take immediate steps to correct such defect or violation. 
2.  In the event any construction, when inspected by the district, is found to be in violation of the provisions of this chapter, the contractor shall take such steps as may be necessary to place the construction in compliance herewith. 
D.  Connection to Regional Interceptor. There shall be no direct connection of collection system sewers to regional interceptor systems except by permission of VVWRA and the district and only at manholes or at existing stub-outs provided for said purpose, with collector sewers or wastewater system extensions being designed and/or approved by the district and VVWRA. All connections and/or wastewater system extensions will be designed by a licensed engineer with plans and specifications submitted to the district for final approval by the district and by VVWRA where applicable before construction of said system is authorized. 
(Ord. No. 2011-06, § 4(Exh. A), 7-19-11) 
14.08.070 - Sewer connection. 
A.  Authorization Required. Authorization to construct or install sewer(s) or connect to the district's wastewater system must first be obtained from the district. Application for such authorization shall be made at the district offices. All authorized construction shall comply with the district's/city's development standards and details, and district's wastewater master plan. 
B.  Wastewater Facility Allowed. Authorization of wastewater facilities and connection to the district's wastewater system shall be allowed when service is required, but no wastewater facilities currently exist or are available and adequate capacity exists to allow such connection. The costs, fees and charges, associated with construction and connection shall be borne solely by the applicant. 
C.  Oversized and Off-Development Facilities. Wastewater facilities may be required to be oversized and/or construction extended beyond that required to serve the applicant but is needed to comply with the district master plan. Per such situation, consideration may be given to reimburse excess costs as determined by the district. 
(Ord. No. 2011-06, § 4(Exh. A), 7-19-11) 
14.08.080 - Lateral sewers. 
A.  Application. Application for lateral sewers and the required clean-out to be constructed shall be made at the office of the district by the property owner or his agent. 
B.  Termination Point. Whenever practicable, lateral sewers and the clean-outs will be terminated at the property line at a location chosen by the owner or his agent. If this cannot be accomplished the district shall establish the termination point of the lateral sewer. 
C.  New Construction of Lateral Sewers. Lateral sewers (minimum four-inch size for single-family residential, minimum six-inches required for all others), must be constructed to serve each building in a development. A clean-out shall be installed on each lateral at the property line to accommodate future cleaning operations. The cost of the entire lateral connection, including clean-out shall be borne by developer or property owner. Building sewer laterals shall not be connected to district sewers until permits for connection have been issued and construction approved by the district. 
(Ord. No. 2011-06, § 4(Exh. A), 7-19-11) 
14.08.090 - Inspections and monitoring. 
A.  Authority to Inspect Premises. 
1.  The general manager and other duly authorized employees of the district bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all properties which are required to maintain industrial pretreatment facilities for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing pertinent to discharge to the district sewerage facilities in accordance with the provisions of this division. 
2.  The general manager and other duly authorized employees are authorized to obtain information from users concerning industrial processes which have a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the wastewater collection system. All information and data on a user shall be available to the public and governmental agencies without restriction unless the user specifically requests and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the district that the release of such information would divulge information, processes, or methods which are validly classifiable as trade secrets. 
3.  While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to in this chapter, district employees and representatives shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the user. 
4.  The general manager and other duly authorized employees or agents of the district bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private properties through which the district holds a duly negotiated easement for the purpose of, but not limited to, inspections, observation, measurement, sampling, repair and maintenance of any portion of the wastewater facilities lying within said easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on said easement, shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the easement. 
B.  Flow Monitoring and Sampling. Flow monitoring and sampling will be conducted as follows: 
1.  For critical wastewater dischargers, as defined in Section 14.02.020, the district may require installation of special flow monitoring components, such as weir plates, and for sampling manholes, which shall become property of the district. Depending on the type of discharger the district may require monitoring and sampling test information/results on a periodic basis, and/or may conduct its own sampling. 
(Ord. No. 2011-06, § 4(Exh. A), 7-19-11) 
14.08.100 - Fats, oils, and grease (FOG). 
A.  Purpose and Intent. 
1.  The purpose of this section is to reduce or eliminate the adverse affects of fats, oils, and grease (FOG) on the wastewater collection system and thereby protect public health and the environment by minimizing public exposure to unsanitary conditions. 
2.  The intent of this section is to use the city's police powers to regulate the direct and indirect discharge of fats, oil, and grease into the city's wastewater collection system in compliance with all applicable laws. 
B.  Permit Required. Any food service establishment (FSE) discharging into the public sewer shall obtain a permit from the city which shall be referred to as a FOG discharge permit (hereafter, permit). The permit may include conditions to pre-treat wastewater prior to discharge, restrict peak flow of discharges, prohibit certain wastewater components, restrict discharges to specific hours of the day, pay additional fees to defray city costs caused by the discharge, or other conditions necessary to meet the purpose and intent of this chapter. No person shall discharge wastewater in excess of the quantity and quality limitations set by the permit. 
C.  Permit Application. Persons seeking a permit shall complete and file with the city an application in the form prescribed by the city and submit the applicable fees as adopted by city council/board resolution. The applicant shall submit the following information: 
Name, address, and phone number of applicant 
Name, address, and phone number of property owner 
Volume of wastewater to be discharged 
Time of daily food preparation operations 
Description of food preparation, type and number of meals served, cleanup procedures, dining room capacity, size of kitchen, and number of employees 
Other information required by the city 
    The city shall review the application within five business days and may require additional information and an on-site inspection of the waste discharge system. Once the city has determined that the application is complete, it shall issue a conditional permit or deny the permit application, stating the reason(s) for the denial. Denial of a permit shall be without prejudice. 
D.  Term of Permit. A permit issued under this chapter shall be valid for one year. The terms and conditions of the permit may be subject to modification by the city should the conditions of the permit change, if any change in city, state, or federal law necessitates a change, or if it is found that the purpose and intent of the permit are not being met. 
E.  Transfer. Permits are issued for a specific use and operation. Any change occurring to the use or operation shall require a new or revised permit. 
F.  Revocation of Permit. The city may revoke the permit for any business found to be in violation of this section or if any of the following occur: 
Failure to comply with the conditions of the permit 
Failure to install required pre-treatment devices 
Failure to comply with reporting or pre-treatment requirements 
Knowingly provides false discharge information, either on the permit, or in required reports 
Refusal by permittee to allow an inspection during regular business hours or after hours if an emergency condition exists 
Interferes with an inspection or the sampling of discharge 
Causes or contributes to a sewer blockage or overflow within the public sewer or fails to address the conditions leading to one or more overflow event(s) from a private system in a twenty-four-month period 
G.  Fees. Fees for permits and other services necessary to enforce this section shall be established by resolution of the city council. 
H.  Maintenance Reports. The permittee shall maintain records on the premises, of all grease interceptor cleaning, maintenance of the grease interceptor, and service manifests for removal of the waste. The permittee shall make all maintenance reports available to the city during inspections during regular business hours. City representatives may enter the premises at any time to respond to an emergency related to sewer spill due to grease collection. 
I.  Enforcement and Penalty for Violation. Any discharge of wastewater in violation of this section or of any permit issued under this section is declared a public nuisance. Any person who knowingly makes a false statement, or who falsifies, tampers, or knowingly renders inaccurate, any monitoring device or record, required by this chapter is guilty of a public nuisance. Enforcement of the provisions of this section shall be pursuant to the procedures in Chapter 1.12 of the Hesperia Municipal Code. The district may revoke any permit or terminate wastewater service to any permittee when they cause or threaten to cause a condition of contamination, pollution, or nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 2011-06, § 4(Exh. A), 7-19-11) 
Title 15 - BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION 
Chapter 15.04 - BUILDING CODES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2016-08 , § 2, adopted November 15, 2016, repealed the former Chapter 15.04, §§ 15.04.010-15.04.070, and § 3(Exh. A) of Ord. No. 2016-08 enacted a new Chapter 15.04 as set out herein. The former Chapter 15.04 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2013-09 , § 2, adopted November 5, 2013. 

15.04.010 - California codes adopted. 
    The 2016 California Building Code, Volumes 1 and 2, the 2016 California Residential Code, the 2016 California Electrical Code, the 2016 California Mechanical Code, the 2016 California Plumbing Code, the 2016 California Fire Code, the 2016 California Green Building Standards Code, and the 2016 California Referenced Standards Code, are hereby adopted as the building regulations for the City of Hesperia, together with the amendments, additions, deletions, and exceptions set forth in this Section. 
( Ord. No. 2016-08 , § 3(Exh. A), 11-15-16) 
15.04.020 - Appendix chapters added. 
    The following appendix chapters are specifically adopted: 
A.  Appendix Chapter I of the 2016 California Building Code titled "Patio Covers," is hereby adopted in its entirety. 
B.  Appendix Chapter A of the 2016 California Plumbing Code titled "Recommended Rules for Sizing the Water Supply System," is hereby adopted in its entirety. 
C.  Appendix Chapter I of the 2016 California Plumbing Code titled "Installation Standards," is hereby adopted in its entirety. 
D.  Appendix Chapter H of the 2016 California Plumbing Code titled "Private Sewage Disposal Systems," is hereby adopted in its entirety. 
E.  Appendix Chapter B of the 2016 California Fire Code titled "Fire Flow Requirements for Buildings" is hereby adopted in its entirety. 
F.  Chapter 1 of the 2016 California Building Code is hereby adopted in its entirety. 
( Ord. No. 2016-08 , § 3(Exh. A), 11-15-16) 
15.04.030 - Automatic fire sprinklers. 
    In addition to the requirements of Section 903 of the 2016 California Building Code, an automatic fire extinguishing system shall be installed in every building of Group A, B, E, F, H, I, L, M, S or U with 5,000 or more square feet of floor area or two or more stories in height. 
    Exceptions: 
A.  Buildings separated into fire areas of less than five thousand (5,000) square feet by one or more four hour separation walls constructed in accordance with Table 721.1(2) of the California Building Code, containing no openings and extending from the foundation to a point at least thirty (30) inches above the roof line. 
B.  Canopies constructed entirely of non-combustible materials with no enclosing walls and spaced at least ten (10) feet from adjacent buildings or structures. 
C.  Mini-storage buildings constructed entirely of non-combustible materials and not containing hazardous materials. 
D.  Buildings with a single, small, low occupancy room on the second floor, when approved by the fire chief and building official. 
E.  Detached garages two stories in height. 
( Ord. No. 2016-08 , § 3(Exh. A), 11-15-16) 
15.04.040 - Automatic fire alarm systems. 
    An approved manual, automatic, or manual and automatic fire alarm system shall be installed in all buildings of Group A, B, E, F, M or S of two thousand four hundred (2,400) square feet or larger, but less than five thousand (5,000) square feet of floor area except where other provisions of the code require a fire alarm system for a lesser floor area. 
    Exception: 
A.  Canopies constructed entirely of non-combustible materials with no enclosing walls and spaced at least ten (10) feet from adjacent buildings or structures. 
( Ord. No. 2016-08 , § 3(Exh. A), 11-15-16) 
15.04.050 - Previously constructed buildings-Sprinkler systems. 
    Previously constructed buildings with a floor area of five thousand (5,000) square feet or more and which are proposing to add floor area, change their occupancy classification to a more hazardous classification, or significantly alter or remodel the building, shall install an automatic fire extinguisher system. 
    Exceptions: 
A.  Minor tenant improvements, maintenance and repair such as interior and exterior painting, carpeting, interior window coverings, drapes, interior non-bearing partitions, surface re-roofing or plumbing, mechanical and electrical repairs. 
( Ord. No. 2016-08 , § 3(Exh. A), 11-15-16) 
15.04.060 - Swimming pool barriers and safety devices. 
A.  General. Swimming pools shall comply with the requirements of this section and other applicable sections of the California Building Code. 
B.  Definitions. The following words and terms shall, for the purposes of this section and as used elsewhere in this chapter, have the meaning shown herein. 
    "Approved safety pool cover" means a manually or power-operated safety pool cover that meets all of the performance standards of the American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM), in compliance with Standard F 1346-91. 
    "Barrier (enclosure)" means a fence, wall, or other barrier that isolates a swimming pool from access to the home or other buildings and grounds. 
    "Exit alarms" means devices that make audible, continuous alarm sounds when any door or window that permits access from the residence to the pool area that is without any intervening enclosure, is opened, or is left ajar. Exit alarms may be battery operated or may be connected to the electrical wiring of the building. 
    "Private swimming pool" means a swimming pool located on the grounds of a single-family home. 
    "Public swimming pool" means a swimming pool for the use of the general public with or without charge, or for the use of the members and guests of a private club. Public swimming pool does not include a swimming pool located on the grounds of a private single-family home. 
    "Swimming pool" means any structure intended for swimming, recreational bathing, or wading that contains water over eighteen (18) inches (457 mm) deep. This includes in-ground, above-ground, and on-ground pools; hot tubs, spas, portable spas, and fixed-in-place wading pools. 
C.  Barriers (Enclosures). 
1.  Barrier Height and Clearances. The top of the barrier shall be at least sixty (60) inches (1,524 mm) above grade measured on the side of the barrier that faces away from the swimming pool. The maximum vertical clearance between grade and the bottom of the barrier shall be two inches (51 mm) measured on the side of the barrier that faces away from the swimming pool. Where the top of the pool structure is above grade, the barrier is authorized to be at ground level or mounted on top of the pool structure, and the maximum vertical clearance between the top of the pool structure and the bottom of the barrier shall be four inches (102 mm). 
2.  Openings. Openings in the barrier shall not allow passage of a four-inch-diameter (102 mm) sphere. 
3.  Solid Barrier Surfaces. Solid barriers which do not have openings shall not contain indentations or protrusions except for normal construction tolerances and tooled masonry joints. 
4.  Closely Spaced Horizontal Members. Where the barrier is composed of vertical and horizontal members and the distance between the tops of the horizontal members is less than forty-five (45) inches (1,143 mm), the horizontal members shall be located on the swimming pool side of the fence. Spacing between vertical members shall not exceed one and three-quarter inches (44 mm) in width. Where there are decorative cutouts within vertical members, spacing within cutouts shall not exceed one and three-quarter inches (44 mm) in width. 
5.  Widely Spaced Horizontal Members. Where a barrier is composed of horizontal and vertical members and the distance between the tops of the horizontal members is forty-five (45) inches (1,143 mm) or more, spacing between vertical members shall not exceed four inches (102 mm). Where there are decorative cutouts within vertical members, spacing within cutouts shall not exceed one and three-quarter inches (44 mm) in width. 
6.  Chain Link Dimensions. Maximum mesh size for chain link fences shall be two and one-quarter inch square (57 mm square) unless the fence is provided with slats fastened at the top or the bottom which reduce the openings to no more than one and three-quarter inches (44 mm) in width. 
7.  Diagonal Members. Where the barrier is composed of diagonal members, the maximum opening formed by diagonal members shall be no more than one and three-quarter inches (44 mm). 
8.  Gates. Access doors or gates shall be equipped to accommodate a locking device. Pedestrian access doors or gates shall open outward away from the pool and shall be self-closing and have a self-latching device. Doors or gates other than pedestrian access doors or gates shall have a self-latching device. Release mechanisms shall be in accordance with Section 1010.1.9, 1132A and 11B-404 of the California Building Code. Where the release mechanism of the self-latching device is located less than fifty-four (54) inches (1,372 mm) from the bottom of the door or gate, the release mechanism shall be located on the pool side of the door or gate at least three inches (76 mm) below the top of the door or gate, and the door or gate and barrier shall have no opening greater than 1/2 inch (12.7 mm) within eighteen (18) inches (457 mm) of the release mechanism. 
9.  Dwelling Wall as a Barrier. Where a wall of a dwelling serves as part of the barrier, one of the following shall apply: 
a.  Doors with direct access to the pool through that wall shall be equipped with an alarm that produces an audible warning when the door and/or its screen, if present, are opened. The alarm shall be listed and labeled in accordance with UL 2017. In dwellings not required to be Accessible Units, Type A units, or Type B units, the deactivation switch shall be located fifty-four (54) inches (1,372 mm) or more above the threshold of the door. In dwellings required to be Accessible units, Type A units, or Type B units, the deactivation switch(es) shall be located at fifty-four (54) inches (1,372 mm) maximum and forty-eight (48) inches (1,219 mm) minimum above the threshold of the door. 
b.  The pool shall be equipped with a power safety cover that complies with ASTM F 1346. 
c.  Other means of protection, such as self-closing doors, with self-latching devices, which are approved, shall be accepted so long as the degree of protection afforded is not less than the protection afforded by Item 1 or 2 above. 
10.  Pool Structure as Barrier. Where an above-ground pool is used as a barrier or where the barrier is mounted on top of the pool structure, and the means of access is a ladder or steps, then the ladder or steps either shall be capable of being secured, locked, or removed to prevent access, or the ladder or steps shall be surrounded by a barrier which meets the requirements of this section. When the ladder or steps are secured, locked or removed, any opening created shall not allow the passage of a four-inch diameter (102 mm) sphere. 
11.  Indoor Swimming Pools. Walls surrounding indoor swimming pools shall not be required to comply with this section. 
12.  Prohibited Locations. Barriers shall be located so as to prohibit permanent structures, equipment, or similar objects from being used to climb the barriers. 
D.  Safety Features Required. Whenever a building permit is issued for remodeling of an existing pool or spa, at a private, single-family home, it shall be equipped with at least one of the following drowning prevention safety features: 
1.  The pool shall incorporate removable mesh pool fencing that meets American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) Specifications F 2286 standards in conjunction with a gate that is self-closing and self-latching and can accommodate a key lockable device. 
2.  The pool shall be equipped with an approved safety pool cover that meets all requirements of the ASTM Specifications F 1346. 
3.  All doors providing direct access from the home to the swimming pool shall be equipped with a self-closing, self-latching device with an exit alarm and a release mechanism placed no lower than fifty-four (54) inches (1,372 mm) above the floor. 
4.  Swimming pool alarms that, when placed in pools, will sound upon detection of accidental or unauthorized entrance into the water. These pool alarms shall meet and be independently certified to the ASTM Standard F 2208 "Standard Specification for Pool Alarms" which includes surface motion, pressure, sonar, laser, and infrared type alarms. For purposes of this article, "swimming pool alarms" shall not include swimming protection alarm devices designed for individual use, such as an alarm attached to a child that sounds when the child exceeds a certain distance or becomes submerged in water. 
5.  Other means of protection, if the degree of protection afforded is equal to or greater than that afforded by any of the devices set forth in items 1-4, and have been independently verified by an approved testing laboratory as meeting standards for those devices established by the ASTM or the American Society of Testing Mechanical Engineers (ASME). 
E.  Construction Requirements. Whenever a building permit is issued for the construction of a new swimming pool or spa: 
1.  It shall have at least two circulation drains per pump that shall be hydraulically balanced and symmetrically plumbed through one or more "T" fittings, and that are separated by a distance of at least three feet in any dimension between the drains. Suction outlets that are less than twelve (12) inches across shall be covered with anti-entrapment grates, as specified in the ASME/ANSI Standard A 112.19.8 that cannot be removed except with the use of tools. Slots or openings in the grates or similar protective devices shall be of a shape, area, and arrangements that would prevent physical entrapment and that would pose a suction hazard to bathers. Suction outlets shall be designed and installed in accordance with ANSI/APSP-7. 
( Ord. No. 2016-08 , § 3(Exh. A), 11-15-16) 
15.04.070 - Permit expiration. 
    Every permit issued by the building official under the provisions of this code shall expire by limitation and become null and void if the building or work authorized by such permit is not commenced within one hundred eighty (180) days from the date of issuance of such permit, or if a period of ninety (90) days lapses between each inspection approval. Before such work can be recommenced, a new permit shall be first obtained to do so, and the fee therefor shall be one-half the amount required for a new permit for such work, provided no changes have been made or will be made in the original plans and specifications for such work, and provided further that such suspension or abandonment has not exceeded one year. In order to renew action on a permit after expiration of more than one year, the permittee shall pay a new full permit fee. 
( Ord. No. 2016-08 , § 3(Exh. A), 11-15-16) 
Chapter 15.06 - GRADING[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2016-08 , § 4, adopted November 15, 2016, repealed the former Chapter 15.06, §§ 15.06.010-15.06.120, and § 5(Exh. B) of Ord. No. 2016-08 enacted a new Chapter 15.06 as set out herein. The former Chapter 15.06 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2013-09 , § 2, adopted November 5, 2013. 

15.06.010 - General provisions. 
A.  Scope. The provisions of this chapter apply to grading, excavation and earthwork construction, including fills and embankments and the control of grading site runoff, including erosion and transport of sediments and construction-related pollutants. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to safeguard life, limb, property, and the public welfare by regulating grading on private property. 
B.  Flood Hazard Areas. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to grading, excavation and earthwork construction, including fills and embankments, in floodways within flood hazard areas established in California Building Code (CBC) Section 1612.3 or in flood hazard areas where design flood elevations are specified but floodways have not been designated, unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the proposed work will not result in any increase in the level of the base flood. 
C.  General Hazards. Whenever the building official or designee determines that any existing excavation or embankment or fill on private property has become a hazard to life and limb, or endangers property, or adversely affects the safety, use or stability of a public way or drainage channel, the owner of the property upon which the excavation or fill is located, or other person or agent in control of said property, upon receipt of notice in writing from the building official or designee shall within the period specified therein repair or eliminate such excavation or embankment to eliminate the hazard and to be in conformance with the requirements of this code. 
D.  Safety Precautions. If at any stage of the work the building official or designee determines by inspection that further grading as authorized is likely to endanger any public or private property or result in the deposition of debris on any public way or interfere with any existing drainage course, the building official or designee may order the work stopped by notice in writing served on any persons engaged in doing or causing such work to be done, and any such person shall immediately stop such work. The building official or designee may authorize the work to proceed if the building official or designee finds adequate safety precautions can be taken or corrective measures incorporated in the work to avoid the likelihood of such danger, deposition or interference. If the grading work as done has created or resulted in a hazardous condition, the building official or designee shall give written notice requiring correction thereof as specified in Section 15.06.050 of this chapter. 
E.  Protection of Utilities. The owner of any property on which grading has been performed and that requires a grading permit under Section 15.06.030 shall be responsible for the prevention of damage to any public utilities or services. 
F.  Protection of Adjacent Property. The owner of any property on which grading has been performed and that requires a grading permit under Section 15.06.030 is responsible for the prevention of damage to adjacent property and no person shall excavate on land sufficiently close to the property line to endanger any adjoining public street, sidewalk, alley, or other public or private property without supporting and protecting such property from settling, cracking or other damage that might result. Special precautions approved by the building official or designee shall be made to prevent imported or exported materials from being deposited on the adjacent public way and/or drainage courses. 
G.  Storm Water Control Measures. The owner of any property on which grading has been performed and that requires a grading permit under Section 15.06.030 shall put into effect and maintain all precautionary measures necessary to protect adjacent water courses and public or private property from damage by erosion, flooding, and deposition of mud, debris, and construction-related pollutants originating from the site during grading and related construction activities. 
H.  Maintenance of Private Devices. The owner of any property on which grading has been performed pursuant to a permit issued under the provisions of this code, or any other person or agent in control of such property, shall maintain in good condition and repair all drainage structures and other protective devices when they are shown on the grading plans filed with the application for grading permit and approved as a condition precedent to the issuance of such permit. 
I.  Conditions of Approval. In granting any permit under this code, the building official or designee may include such conditions as may be reasonably necessary to prevent creation of a nuisance or hazard to public or private property. Such conditions may include, but shall not be limited to: 
1.  Improvement of any existing grading to comply with the standards of this code; 
2.  Requirements for fencing of excavations or fills which would otherwise be hazardous. 
( Ord. No. 2016-08 , § 5(Exh. B), 11-15-16) 
15.06.020 - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this chapter, the terms, phrases, and words listed in this section and their derivatives have the indicated meanings: 
    "Bench" means the relatively level step excavated into earth material on which fill is to be placed. 
    "Borrow" means earth material acquired from an off-site location for use in grading on a site. 
    "Civil engineer" means a professional engineer registered in the State of California to practice in the field of civil works. 
    "Civil engineering" means the application of the knowledge of the forces of nature, principles of mechanics, and the properties of materials to the evaluation, design, and construction of civil works. 
    "Compactions" means the densification of a fill by mechanical means. 
    "Construction general permit (CGP)" means the current version of the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) General Permit for Storm Water Discharges Associated with Construction and Land Disturbance Activities. The Construction General Permit (CGP) is issued by the Storm Water Resources Control Board (SWRCB) for storm water discharges associated with construction projects over one acre, or smaller sites that are part of a larger common plan of development or sale. 
    Cut. See "excavation." 
    "Design engineer" means the civil engineer responsible for the preparation of the grading plans for the site grading work. 
    "Desilting basins" means physical structures constructed for the removal of sediments from surface water runoff. 
    "Down drain" means a device for collecting water from a swale or ditch located on or above a slope, and safely delivering it to an approved drainage facility. 
    "Earth material" means any rock, natural soil, or fill or any combination thereof. 
    "Erosion" means the wearing away of the ground surface as a result of the movement of wind, water, or ice. 
    "Erosion and sediment control plan" means a site-specific plan which identifies and describes the best management practices proposed to control erosion and prevent sediment and construction-related pollutants from being carried off-site by storm water. 
    "Excavation" means the removal of earth material by artificial means, also referred to as a cut. 
    "Field engineer" means the civil engineer responsible for performing the functions as set forth in Section 15.06.050(B). 
    "Fill" means the deposition of earth materials by artificial means. 
    "Geotechnical engineer" means a professional engineer, registered in the State of California, and experienced and knowledgeable in the practice of geotechnical engineering. 
    "Geotechnical hazard" means an adverse condition due to landslide, settlement, and/or slippage. These hazards include but are not limited to loose debris, slope wash, and mud flows from natural or graded slopes. 
    "Grade" means the vertical location of the ground surface. 
    Grade, Existing. "Existing grade" means the grade prior to grading. 
    Grade, Final. See Section 15.06.050(F)(4). 
    Grade, Finished. "Finished grade" means the grade of the site at the conclusion of all grading efforts. 
    Grade, Initial. See Section 15.06.050(F)(2). 
    Grade, Rough. See Section 15.06.050(F)(3). 
    "Grading" means an excavation or fill or combination thereof. 
    "Key" means a compacted fill placed in a trench excavated in earth material generally constructed at the toe of the slope. 
    "Landscape architect" means a person who holds a certificate to practice landscape architecture in the State of California under the applicable landscape architecture provisions of Division 3, Chapter 3.5 of the Business and Professions Code. 
    "Private sewage disposal system" means a septic tank with effluent discharging into a subsurface disposal field, into one or more seepage pits or into a combination of subsurface disposal field and seepage pit or such other facilities as may be permitted. 
    "Professional inspection" means the inspection required by this code to be performed by the project consultants. Such inspections shall be sufficient to form an opinion relating to the conduct of the work. 
    "Project consultants" means the professional consultants required by this code which may consist of the design engineer, field engineer, geotechnical engineer, engineering geologist, and landscape architect as applicable to this chapter. 
    "Site" means a lot or parcel of land or contiguous combination thereof, under the same ownership, where grading is performed or permitted. 
    "Slope" means an inclined ground surface, the inclination of which is expressed as a ratio of horizontal distance to vertical distance. 
    "Soil" means naturally occurring superficial deposits overlying parent bedrock. 
    "Soil testing agency" means an agency regularly engaged in the testing of soils and rock under the direction of a civil engineer experienced in soil testing. 
    "Storm drain system" means a conveyance or system of conveyances, including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, and man-made channels, designed or used for collecting and conveying storm water. 
    "Storm water pollution prevention plan (SWPPP)" means a site drawing with details, notes and related documents that identify the measures proposed by the permittee to (1) control erosion and prevent sediment and construction-related pollutants from being carried off-site by storm water, and (2) to prevent non-storm water discharges from entering the storm drain system. 
    "Storm water pollution prevention plan (SWPPP)" means a pollution control plan documenting site activities, pollutant sources; and all stormwater and non-stormwater BMPs used at the site, required under 40 CFR Part 122, the Clean Water Act (CWA), the CGP, industrial general permit (IGP), and most municipal separate storm sewer systems (MS4) permits. A plan to minimize and manage pollutants to minimize pollution from entering the MS4, identifying all potential sources of pollution and describing planned practices to reduce pollutants from discharging off the site. 
    "Surface drainage" means flows over the ground surface. 
    "Terrace" means a relatively level step constructed in the face of a graded slope for drainage and maintenance purposes. 
( Ord. No. 2016-08 , § 5(Exh. B), 11-15-16) 
15.06.030 - Permits required. 
A.  Permits Required. Except as exempted in this section, no grading shall be performed without first having obtained a permit from the building official or designee. A grading permit does not include the construction of retaining walls or other structures. A separate permit shall be obtained for each site and may cover both excavations and fills. Any engineered grading as described in Section 15.06.040 shall be performed by a contractor licensed by the State of California to perform the work described herein. Regular grading less than five thousand (5,000) cubic yards may require a licensed contractor if the building official or designee determines that special conditions or hazards exist. 
B.  Exemptions. A grading permit shall not be required for the following: 
1.  When approved by the building official or designee, grading in an isolated, self-contained area, provided there is no danger to the public, and that such grading will not adversely affect adjoining properties; 
3.  Cemetery graves; 
4.  Refuse disposal sites controlled by other regulations; 
5.  Excavations for wells, or trenches for utilities; 
6.  Mining, quarrying, excavating, processing or stockpiling rock, sand, gravel, aggregate, or clay controlled by other regulations, provided such operations do not affect the lateral support of, or significantly increase stresses in, soil on adjoining properties; 
7.  Exploratory excavations performed under the direction of a geotechnical engineer. This shall not exempt grading of access roads or pads created for exploratory excavations. Exploratory excavations must be restored to existing conditions, unless approved by the building official or designee; 
8.  An excavation that does not exceed fifty (50) cubic yards (38.3 m 3 ) and complies with one of the following conditions: 
a.  Is less than two feet (0.6 m) in depth, 
b.  Does not create a cut slope greater than five feet (1.5 m) measured vertically upward from the cut surface to the surface of the natural grade and is not steeper than two units horizontal to one unit vertical (fifty (50) percent slope); 
9.  A fill not intended to support a structure, that does not obstruct a drainage course and complies with one of the following conditions: 
a.  Is less than one foot (0.3 m) in depth and is placed on natural terrain with a slope flatter than five units horizontal to one unit vertical (twenty (20) percent slope), 
b.  Is less than three feet (0.9 m) in depth at its deepest point measured vertically upward from natural grade to the surface of the fill, does not exceed fifty (50) cubic yards, and creates a fill slope no greater than two units horizontal to one unit vertical (fifty (50) percent slope), 
c.  Is less than five feet (1.5 m) in depth at its deepest point measured vertically upward from natural grade to the surface of the fill, does not exceed twenty (20) cubic yards, and creates a fill slope no steeper than two units horizontal and one unit vertical (fifty (50) percent slope). 
    Exemption from the permit requirements of this appendix shall not be deemed to grant authorization for any work to be done in any manner in violation of the provisions of this code or any other laws or ordinances of this jurisdiction. 
C.  Unpermitted Grading. A person shall not own, use, occupy or maintain any site containing un-permitted grading. For the purposes of this code, unpermitted grading shall be defined as any grading that was performed, at any point in time, without the required permit(s) having first been obtained from the building official or designee, pursuant to subsection A of this section. 
D.  Availability of Permit at Site. No person shall perform any grading that requires a permit under this chapter unless a copy of the grading permit and approved grading plans is in the possession of a responsible person and available at the site for the building official or designee. 
( Ord. No. 2016-08 , § 5(Exh. B), 11-15-16) 
15.06.040 - Permit application submittals. 
A.  Submittal Requirements. In addition to the provisions of CBC, Section 105.3, the applicant shall state the estimated quantities of excavation and fill. 
B.  Site Plan Requirements. In addition to the provisions of CBC Section 107, a grading plan shall show the existing grade and finished grade in contour intervals of sufficient clarity to indicate the nature and extent of the work and show in detail that it complies with the requirements of this code. The plans shall show the existing grade on adjoining properties in sufficient detail to identify how grade changes will conform to the requirements of this code. 
C.  Grading Designation. Grading in excess of five thousand (5,000) cubic yards (three thousand eight hundred twenty-five ((3,825) m 3 ) shall be performed in accordance with the approved grading plan prepared by a civil engineer, and shall be designated as "engineered grading." Grading involving less than five thousand (5,000) cubic yards (three thousand eight hundred twenty-five ((3,825) m 3 ) shall be designated "regular grading" unless the permittee chooses to have the grading performed as engineered grading, or the building official or designee determines that special conditions or unusual hazards exist, in which case grading shall conform to the requirements for engineered grading. 
D.  Regular Grading Requirements. In addition to the provisions of CBC Section 105.3 and subsection B of this section, an application for a regular grading permit shall be accompanied by two sets of plans in sufficient clarity to indicate the nature and extent of the work. The plans shall give the location of the work, the name of the owner, and the name of the person who prepared the plan. The plan shall include the following information: 
1.  General vicinity of the proposed site; 
2.  Limits and depths of cut and fill; 
3.  Location of any buildings or structures where work is to be performed and the location of any buildings or structures within fifteen (15) feet (4.6 m) of the proposed grading; 
4.  Contours, flow areas, elevations, or slopes which define existing and proposed drainage patterns. 
E.  Engineered Grading Requirements. In addition to the provisions of CBC Section 105.3 and subsection B of this section, an application for an engineered grading permit shall be accompanied by four sets of plans and specifications, and supporting data consisting of a geotechnical report. The plans and specifications shall be prepared and signed by an individual licensed by the state to prepare such plans or specifications when required by the building official or designee. 
    Specifications shall contain information covering construction and material requirements. Plans shall be drawn to scale upon substantial paper or cloth and shall be of sufficient clarity to indicate the nature and extent of the work proposed and show in detail that it will conform to the provisions of this code and all relevant laws, ordinances, rules, and regulations. The first sheet of each set of plans shall give location of the work, the name and address of the owner, and the person by whom they were prepared. 
    The plans shall include but shall not be limited to, the following information: 
1.  General vicinity of the proposed site; 
2.  Property limits and accurate contours of existing ground and details of terrain and area drainage; 
3.  Limiting dimensions, elevations, or finish contours to be achieved by the grading, proposed drainage channels, and related construction; 
4.  Detailed plans of all surface and subsurface drainage devices, walls, cribbing, dams, and other protective devices to be constructed with, or as a part of, the proposed work. A map showing the drainage area and the estimated runoff of the area served by any drains shall also be provided; 
5.  Location of any existing or proposed buildings or structures on the property where the work is to be performed and the location of any buildings or structures on land of adjacent owners who are within fifteen (15) feet (4.6 m) of the property that may be affected by the proposed grading operations; 
6.  Recommendations in the geotechnical engineering report shall be incorporated into the grading plans or specifications. When approved by the building official or designee, specific recommendations contained in the geotechnical engineering report that are applicable to grading may be included by reference; 
7.  The dates of the geotechnical engineering reports together with the names, addresses, and phone numbers of the firms or individuals who prepared the reports; 
8.  A statement of the earthwork quantities of material to be excavated and/or filled. Earth work quantities shall include quantities for geotechnical and geological remediation. In addition, a statement of material to be imported or exported from the site; 
9.  A statement of the estimated starting and completion dates for work covered by the permit; 
10.  A statement signed by the owner acknowledging that a field engineer, or geotechnical engineer when appropriate, will be employed to perform the services required by this code, whenever approval of plans and issuance of permit are to be based on the condition that such professional persons be so employed. These acknowledgements shall be on a form furnished by the building official or designee; 
11.  A drainage plan for that portion of a lot or parcel to be utilized as a building site (building pad), including elevations of floors with respect to finish site grade and locations of proposed stoops, slabs and fences that may affect drainage; 
12.  Location and type of any proposed private sewage disposal system; 
13.  Location of existing and proposed utilities, drainage facilities, and recorded public and private easements; and 
14.  Location of all recorded natural drainage courses and drainage easements. 
F.  Geotechnical Report. The geotechnical report required by Section 15.06.040(E) shall include data regarding the nature, distribution and strength of existing soils, conclusions and recommendations for grading procedures and design criteria for corrective measures, including buttress fills, when necessary, and opinion on adequacy for the intended use of sites to be developed by the proposed grading as affected by geotechnical engineering factors, including the stability of slopes and liquefaction. Supplemental reports and data may be required as the building official or designee may deem necessary. Recommendations included in the reports and approved by the building official or designee shall be incorporated in the grading plan or specifications. 
    The geotechnical report required by subsection E of this section shall also include an adequate description of the geology of the site, conclusions and recommendations regarding the effect of geologic conditions on the proposed development, and an opinion on the adequacy for the intended use of sites to be developed by the proposed grading, as affected by geologic factors. The geotechnical report shall include a geologic map and cross sections utilizing the most recent grading plan as a base. Supplemental reports and data may be required as the building official or designee may deem necessary. Recommendations included in the reports and approved by the building official or designee shall be incorporated in the grading plan or specifications. 
G.  NPDES Permit Documents. For applicable projects, a SWPPP and a water quality management plan, each approved by the city, shall be provided with the grading permit application. Projects for which a SWPPP is not required shall provide a city-approved erosion and sediment control plan (ESCP). 
( Ord. No. 2016-08 , § 5(Exh. B), 11-15-16) 
15.06.050 - Grading inspection. 
A.  General. Grading inspections shall be governed by CBC Section 110 and as indicated herein. Grading operations for which a permit is required shall be subject to inspection by the building official or designee and professional inspection of grading operations shall be provided by the field engineer or geotechnical engineer retained to provide such services in accordance with this section for engineered grading and as required by the building official or designee for regular grading. 
B.  Special and Supplemental Inspections. The special inspection requirements of CBC Section 1704 shall apply to work performed under a grading permit where required by the building official or designee. In addition to the called inspections specified in subsection F of this section, the building official or designee may make such other inspections as may be deemed necessary to determine that the work is being performed in conformance with the requirements of this code. Investigations and reports by an approved soil testing agency, geotechnical engineer, and field engineer may be required. Inspection reports shall be provided when requested by the building official or designee. 
    Continuous inspection of drainage devices by the field engineer in accordance with this section may be required when the building official or designee determines the drainage devices are necessary for the protection of the structures in accordance with Section 15.06.090 of this chapter. 
C.  Field Engineer. The field engineer shall provide professional inspection within such engineer's area of technical specialty, oversee and coordinate all field surveys, set grade stakes, and provide site inspections during grading operations to ensure the site is graded in accordance with the approved grading plan and the appropriate requirements of this code. During site grading, and at the completion of both rough grading and final grading, the field engineer shall submit statements and reports required by subsections J, K and L. If the revised grading plans are required during the course of work, they shall be prepared by a civil engineer and approved by the building official or designee. 
D.  Geotechnical Engineer. The geotechnical engineer shall provide inspection within such engineer's area of technical specialty, which shall include professional inspection of the excavation to determine if conditions encountered are in conformance with the approved report and observation during grading and testing for required compaction. 
    The geotechnical engineer shall provide sufficient observation during the preparation of the natural ground and placement and compaction of the fill to verify that such work is being performed in accordance with the conditions of the approved plan and the appropriate requirements of this chapter. Revised recommendations relating to conditions differing from the approved geotechnical engineering reports shall be submitted to the permittee, the building official or designee and the field engineer. 
E.  Permittee. The permittee shall be responsible for the work to be performed in accordance with the approved plans and specifications and in conformance with the provisions of this code and the permittee shall engage project consultants, if required, to provide professional inspections on a timely basis. The permittee shall act as a coordinator between the project consultants, the contractor, and the building official or designee. In the event of changed conditions, the permittee shall be responsible for informing the building official or designee of such change and shall provide revised plans for approval. 
F.  Building Official or Designee. The building official or designee shall inspect the project site at the following various stages of work requiring approval to determine that adequate control is being exercised by the project consultants. 
1.  Pre-Grade. Before any construction or grading activities occur at the site. The permittee shall schedule a pre-grade inspection with the building official or designee. The permittee is responsible for coordinating that all project consultants are present at the pre-grade inspection; 
2.  Initial. When the site has been cleared of vegetation and unapproved fill and it has been scarified, benched, over excavated, or otherwise prepared for fill. No fill shall have been placed prior to this inspection; 
3.  Rough. When approximate final elevations have been established; drainage terraces, swales, and other drainage devices necessary for the protection of the building sites from flooding are installed; berms are installed at the top of the slopes; and the statements required by subsection L of this section have been received; 
4.  Final. When grading has been completed; all drainage devices necessary to drain the building pad are installed; slope planting is established, irrigation systems are installed; and the as-graded plans and required statements and reports have been submitted. 
G.  Notification of Non-Compliance. If, in the course of fulfilling their respective duties under this chapter, the field engineer, or the geotechnical engineer finds that the work is not being done in conformance with this chapter or the approved grading plans, the discrepancies and corrective measures which should be taken shall be reported immediately in writing to the permittee and to the building official or designee. 
H.  Transfer of Responsibility. If the field engineer, or the geotechnical engineer of record is changed during the grading, the work shall be stopped until the replacement has agreed in writing to accept their responsibility within the area of technical competence for approval upon completion of the work. It shall be the duty of the permittee to notify the building official or designee in writing of such change prior to the recommencement of such grading. 
I.  Non-Inspected Grading. No person shall own, use, occupy, or maintain any non-inspected grading. For the purpose of this code, non-inspected grading shall be defined as any grading for which a grading permit was first obtained, pursuant to Section 15.06.030, but which has progressed beyond any point requiring inspection and approval by the building official or designee without such inspection and approval having been obtained. 
J.  Routine Field Inspections and Reports. Unless waived by the building official or designee, routine inspection reports shall be provided by the field engineer for all engineered grading projects. The field engineer shall file these reports, with the building official or designee as follows: 
1.  Weekly during all times when grading of more than ten thousand (10,000) cubic yards per week is occurring on the site. 
2.  Bi-weekly during all times when grading of four hundred (400) cubic yards or more per week is occurring on the site; 
3.  Monthly, at all other times; 
4.  At any time when requested in writing by the building official or designee; and 
5.  Such reports shall certify to the building official or designee that the field engineer has inspected the grading site and related activities and has found them in compliance with the approved grading plans, the building code, grading permit conditions, and other applicable ordinances and requirements. 
K.  Completion of Work. Upon completion of the rough grading work and at the final completion of the work, the following reports and drawings and supplements thereto are required for engineered grading or when professional inspection is required by the building official or designee: 
1.  An "as-built" grading plan prepared by the field engineer retained to provide such services in accordance with subsection C of this section showing all plan revisions as approved by the building official or designee. This shall include original ground surface elevations, as-built ground surface elevations, lot drainage patterns, and the locations and elevations of surface drainage facilities and the outlets of subsurface drains. As-built locations, elevations and details of subsurface drains shall be shown as reported by the geotechnical engineer. 
    The field engineer shall state in a report, to the building official or designee, that to the best of their knowledge, the work within their area of responsibility was done in accordance with the final approved grading plan; 
2.  A report prepared by the geotechnical engineer retained to provide such services in accordance with subsection D of this section including locations and elevations of field density tests, summaries of field and laboratory tests, other substantiating data, a final description of the geology of the site and any new information disclosed during the grading, and comments on any changes made during grading and their effect on the recommendations made in the approved geotechnical engineering report. Geotechnical engineers shall submit a statement that, to the best of their knowledge, the work within their area of responsibilities is in accordance with the approved geotechnical engineering report and applicable provisions of this chapter. The reports shall contain a finding regarding the safety of the completed grading and any proposed structures against hazard from landslide, settlement, or slippage, as well as a final as-built geologic map and cross sections depicting all the information collected prior to and during grading. 
3.  The grading contractor shall submit in a form prescribed by the building official or designee a statement of conformance to said as-built plan and the specifications. 
L.  Notification of Completion. The permittee shall notify the building official or designee when the grading operation is ready for final inspection. Final approval shall not be given until all work, including installation of all drainage facilities and their protective devices, and all erosion control measures have been completed in accordance with the final approved grading plan, and the required reports have been submitted and approved. 
M.  Change of Ownership. If a grading permit has been issued on a property and the building official or designee has not approved the final grading when a property changes ownership, a new grading application and permit will be required from the new property owner. 
( Ord. No. 2016-08 , § 5(Exh. B), 11-15-16) 
15.06.060 - Excavations. 
A.  General. Unless otherwise recommended in the approved geotechnical engineering, cuts shall conform to the provisions of this section. In the absence of an approved geotechnical engineering report, these provisions may be waived, as approved by the building official or designee, for minor cuts not intended to support structures or subject to a surcharge. 
B.  Maximum Cut Slope. The slope of cut surfaces shall be no steeper than is safe for the intended use and shall be no steeper than two units horizontal to one unit vertical (fifty (50) percent slope) unless the permittee furnishes a geotechnical engineering report, or both, stating that the site has been investigated and giving an opinion that a cut at a steeper slope will be stable and not create a hazard to public or private property. The building official or designee may require the excavation to be made with a cut face flatter in slope than two units horizontal to one unit vertical if the building official or designee finds it necessary for stability and safety. 
C.  Slope Surface Protection. All slopes must be stabilized against surface erosion. Stabilization may be accomplished through the application of erosion control blankets, soil stabilizers or other means as approved by the building official or designee. 
( Ord. No. 2016-08 , § 5(Exh. B), 11-15-16) 
15.06.070 - Fills. 
A.  General. Unless otherwise recommended in the approved geotechnical engineering report, fills shall conform to the provisions of this section. In the absence of an approved geotechnical engineering report, and if approved by the building official or designee, these provisions may be waived for minor fills not intended to support structures. 
B.  Preparation of Ground. Fill slopes shall not be constructed on natural slopes steeper than two units horizontal to one unit vertical (fifty (50) percent slope). The ground structure shall be prepared to receive fill by removing vegetation, non-complying fill, topsoil and other unsuitable materials scarifying to provide a bind with the new fill. Where slopes are steeper than five units horizontal to one unit vertical (twenty (20) percent slope) and the height is greater than five feet (1.5 m), the ground surface shall be prepared to receive fill by benching into sound bedrock or other competent material as determined by the geotechnical engineer. The ground preparation shall be in accordance with Figure 15.06.070 or as determined by the geotechnical engineer. The key under the toe of the fill on a slope steeper than five units horizontal to one unit vertical (twenty (20) percent slope) shall be at least ten feet (3.0 m) wide. The area beyond the toe of fill shall be sloped for sheet overflow or a paved drain shall be provided. When fill is to be placed over a cut, the key shall be at least ten feet (3.0 m) wide. The cut shall be made before placing the fill and the geotechnical engineer shall accept the cut as suitable for the foundation and placement of fill material. 
C.  Subdrains. Except where recommended by the geotechnical engineer as not being necessary, subdrains shall be provided under all fills placed in natural drainage courses and in other locations where seepage is evident. Such subdrainage systems shall be of a material and design approved by the geotechnical engineer and acceptable to the building official or designee. The geotechnical engineer shall provide continuous inspection during the process of subdrain installation to conform to the approved plans and the geotechnical engineer's recommendation. Testing of materials shall be done by a soil testing agency based on the geotechnical engineer's recommendation. The location of the subdrains shall be shown on a plan by the geotechnical engineer. Excavations for the subdrains shall be inspected by the geotechnical engineer when such subdrains are included in the recommendations of the geotechnical engineer. 
D.  Fill Material. Detrimental amounts of organic material shall not be permitted in fills. Unless approved by the building official or designee, no rock or similar irreducible material with a maximum dimension of greater than twelve (12) inches (0.3 m) shall be buried or placed in fills. 
    Exception: The building official or designee may permit placement of larger rock when the geotechnical engineer properly devises a method of placement, and continuously inspects its placement and approves the fill stability. The following conditions shall also apply: 
1.  Prior to issuance of the grading permit, potential rock disposal areas shall be delineated on the grading plan; 
2.  Rock sizes greater than twelve (12) inches (0.3 m) in maximum dimension shall be ten feet (3.0 m) or more below grade, measured vertically; 
3.  Rocks shall be placed so as to assure filling of all voids with well-graded soil; 
4.  The reports submitted by the geotechnical engineer shall acknowledge the placement of the oversized material and whether the work was performed in accordance with the engineer's recommendations and the approved plans; 
5.  The location of the oversized rock dispersal areas shall be shown on the as-built plan. 

BENCHING REQUIRED: FILL IS 5 FT. OR GREATER AND SLOPE IS 5:1 TO 2:1 
FIGURE 15.06.070 
BENCHING DETAILS 
E.  Compaction. All fills shall be compacted to a minimum of ninety (90) percent of maximum density. Fills shall be compacted throughout their full extent to a minimum relative compaction of ninety (90) percent of maximum dry density within forty (40) feet (12.19 m) below finished grade and ninety-three (93) percent of maximum dry density deeper than forty (40) feet (12.19 m) below finished grade, unless a lower relative compaction (not less than ninety (90) percent of maximum dry density) is justified by the geotechnical engineer. The relative compaction shall be determined by A.S.T.M. soil compaction test D1557 where applicable. Where not applicable, a test acceptable to the building official or designee, shall be used unless the owner furnishes a geotechnical engineering report conforming with the requirements of Section 15.06.040(E), stating that the site has been investigated and giving an opinion that a fill at a steeper slope will be stable and not create a hazard to public or private property. Substantiating calculations and supporting data may be required where the building official or designee determines that such information is necessary to verify the stability and safety of the proposed slope. The building official or designee may require the fill slope be constructed with a face flatter in slope than two units horizontal to one unit vertical (fifty (50) percent slope) if the building official or designee finds it necessary for stability and safety. 
    Field density shall be determined by a method acceptable to the building official or designee. However, not less than ten percent of the required density tests, uniformly distributed, shall be obtained by the sand cone method. 
    Fill slopes steeper than two units horizontal to one unit vertical (fifty (50) percent slope) shall be constructed by the placement of soil a sufficient distance beyond the proposed finish slope to allow compaction equipment to operate at the outer surface limits of the final slope surface. The excess fill is to be removed prior to completion or rough grading. Other construction procedures may be utilized when it is first shown to the satisfaction of the building official or designee that the angle of slope, construction method and other factors will comply with the intent of this section. 
F.  Maximum Fill Slope. The slope of fill surfaces shall be no steeper than is safe for the intended use. Fill slopes shall be no steeper than two units horizontal in one unit vertical (fifty (50) percent slope) unless calculations are provided by a geotechnical engineer which indicate a steeper slope will be stable and approved by the building official or designee. 
G.  Slopes to Receive Fill. Where fill is to be placed above the top of an existing slope steeper than three units horizontal to one unit vertical (thirty-three (33) percent slope), the toe of the fill shall be set back from the top edge of the slope a minimum distance of six feet (1.8 m) measured horizontally or such other distance as may be specifically recommended by a geotechnical engineer and approved by the building official or designee. 
H.  Inspection of Fill. For engineered grading, the geotechnical engineer shall provide sufficient inspections during the preparation of the natural ground and the placement and compaction of the fill ensuring that the work is being performed in accordance with the conditions of plan approval and the appropriate requirements of this chapter. In addition to the above, the geotechnical engineer shall be present during the entire fill placement and compaction of fills that will exceed a vertical height or depth of thirty (30) feet (9.1 m) or result in a slope surface steeper than two units horizontal to one unit vertical (fifty (50) percent slope). 
I.  Testing of Fills. Sufficient tests of the fill soils shall be made to determine the density and to verify compliance of the soil properties with the design requirements. This includes soil types and shear strengths in accordance with referenced standards in Section 15.06.120. 
( Ord. No. 2016-08 , § 5(Exh. B), 11-15-16) 
15.06.080 - Setbacks. 
A.  General. Cut and fill slopes shall be set back from the property lines in accordance with this section. Setback dimensions shall be horizontal distances measured perpendicular to the property line and shall be as shown in Figure 15.06.080 unless substantiating data is submitted justifying reduced setbacks is recommended by the geotechnical engineering report, approved by the building official or designee. 
B.  Top of Slope. The setback at the top of a cut slope shall not be less than that shown in Figure 15.06.080, or than is required to accommodate any required interceptor drains, whichever is greater. For manufactured slopes the grading design must be such that the property line between adjacent lots will be at the apex of the berm at the top of the slope. Property lines between adjacent lots cannot be located on a graded slope equal to five units horizontal to one unit vertical (twenty (20) percent slope). 

FIGURE 15.06.080 
SETBACK DIMENSIONS 
C.  Toe of Fill Slope. The setback from the toe of a fill slope shall not be less than that shown by Figure 15.06.080. Where required to protect adjacent properties at the toe of a slope from adverse effects of the grading, additional protection, approved by the building official or designee, shall be included. Such protection may include but shall not be limited to: 
1.  Setbacks greater than those required by Figure 15.06.080; 
2.  Provisions for retaining walls or similar construction; 
3.  Erosion protection of the fill slopes; 
4.  Provision for the control of surface waters. 
D.  Alternate Setbacks. The building official or designee may approve alternate setbacks. The building official or designee may require an investigation and recommendation by a qualified geotechnical engineer to demonstrate that the intent of this section has been satisfied. 
( Ord. No. 2016-08 , § 5(Exh. B), 11-15-16) 
15.06.090 - Drainage and terracing. 
A.  General. Unless otherwise recommended by a registered design professional, and approved by the building official or designee, drainage facilities and terracing shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of subsection B of this section for all cut and fill slope where the ground slope is steeper than three units horizontal to one unit vertical (thirty-three (33) percent slope). 
    For slopes flatter than three units horizontal to one unit vertical (thirty-three (33) percent slope) and steeper than five units horizontal to one unit vertical (twenty (20) percent slope), a paved swale or ditch shall be provided at thirty (30) foot (9.1 m) vertical intervals to control surface drainage and debris. Swales shall be sized based on contributory area and have adequate capacity to convey intercepted waters to the point of disposal as defined in subsection E of this section. Swales must be paved with reinforced concrete not less than three inches (.08 m) in thickness, reinforced with six-inch (0.2 m) by six-inch (0.2 m) "No. 10 by No. 10" welded wire fabric or equivalent reinforcing centered in the concrete slab or an approved equal. Swales must have a minimum gradient of not less than five percent. There shall be no reduction in grade along the direction of flow unless the velocity of flow is such that slope debris will remain in suspension on the reduced grade. 
B.  Drainage Terraces. Drainage terraces at least eight feet (2.4 m) in width shall be established at not more than thirty (30) foot (9.1 m) vertical intervals on all cut and fill slopes to control surface drainage and debris. When only one terrace is required, it shall be mid-height. For cut or fill slopes greater than one hundred (100) feet (30.5 m) and up to one hundred twenty (120) feet (6.1 m) in vertical height, one terrace at approximately mid-height shall be twenty (20) feet (6.1 m) in width. Terrace widths and spacing for cut and fill slopes greater than one hundred twenty (120) feet (36.6 m) in height shall be designed by the civil engineer and approved by the Building Official or designee. Suitable access shall be provided to permit proper cleaning and maintenance. Drainage swales on terraces shall have a longitudinal grade of not less than five percent and no more than twelve (12) percent and a minimum depth of one foot (0.3 m) at the flow line. There shall be no reduction in grade along the direction of flow unless the velocity of flow is such that slope debris will remain in suspension on the reduced grade. Such terraces must be paved with reinforced concrete not less than three inches (0.08 m) in thickness, reinforced with six-inch (0.2 m) by six-inch (0.2 m) "No. 10 by No. 10" welded wire fabric or equivalent reinforcing centered in the concrete slab or an approved equal paving. They shall have a minimum depth at the deepest point of one foot (0.3 m) and a minimum paved width of five feet (1.5 m). Drainage terraces exceeding eight feet (2.4 m) in width need only be so paved for a width of eight feet (2.4 m), provided such pavement provides a paved swale at least one foot (0.3 m) in depth. Down drains or drainage outlets shall be provided at approximately three hundred (300) foot (91.44 m) intervals along the drainage terrace or at equivalent locations. Down drains and drainage outlets shall be of approved materials and of adequate capacity to convey the intercepted waters to the point of disposal as defined in subsection E of this section. 
C.  Interceptor Drains and Overflow Protection. Berms, interceptor drains, swales, or other devices shall be provided at the top of cut or fill slopes to prevent surface waters from overflowing onto and damaging the face of a slope. Berms used for slope protection shall not be less than twelve (12) inches (3.0 m) above the level of the pad and shall slope back at least four feet (1.2 m) from the top of the slope. 
    Interceptor drains shall be installed along the top of manufactured slopes greater than five feet in height receiving drainage from a slope with a tributary width greater than thirty (30) feet (9.1 m) measured horizontally. They shall have a minimum depth of one foot (0.3 m) and a minimum width of three feet (0.9 m). The slope shall be approved by the building official or designee, but shall not be less than fifty (50) horizontal to one vertical (two percent). The drain shall be paved with concrete not less than three inches (0.08 m) in thickness, or by other materials suitable to the application and reinforced as required for drainage terraces. Discharge from the drain shall be accomplished in a manner to prevent erosion and shall be approved by the building official or designee. 
D.  Drainage Across Property Lines. Drainage across property lines shall not exceed that which existed prior to grading. Excess or concentrated drainage shall be contained on site or directed to an approved drainage facility. Erosion of the ground in the area of discharge shall be prevented by installation of non-erosive down drains or other devices. 
E.  Disposal. All onsite drainage facilities shall be designed to carry runoff waters discharged from the site to the nearest practicable street, storm drain system, or natural watercourse drainage way approved by the building official or designee or other appropriate governmental agency jurisdiction, provided it is a safe place to deposit such waters. Erosion of ground in the area of discharge shall be prevented by installation of non-erosive down drains or other devices. Desilting basins, filter barriers or other methods, as approved by the building official or designee, shall be utilized to remove sediments from surface waters before such waters are allowed to enter streets, storm drains, or natural watercourses. If the drainage device discharges onto natural ground, riprap or a similar energy dissipater may be required. 
    Building pads shall have a minimum drainage gradient of two percent toward approved drainage facilities, a public street or drainage structure approved to receive storm waters unless waived by the building official or designee. A lesser slope may be approved by the building official or designee for sites graded in relatively flat terrain, or where special drainage provisions are made, when the building official or designee finds such modification will not result in unfavorable drainage conditions. 
( Ord. No. 2016-08 , § 5(Exh. B), 11-15-16) 
15.06.100 - Slope planting and erosion control. 
A.  General. The faces of cut and fill slopes shall be prepared and maintained to control against erosion. This control shall consist of effective planting, erosion control blankets, soil stabilizers or other means as approved by the building official or designee. 
    Exception: Erosion control measures need not be provided on cut slopes not subject to erosion due to the erosion-resistant character of materials as approved by the project consultants to the satisfaction of the building official or designee. 
    Erosion control for the slopes shall be installed as soon as practicable and prior to calling for final inspection. 
B.  Other Devices. Where necessary, check dams, cribbing, riprap or other devices or methods shall be employed to control erosion and provide safety. 
C.  Planting. The surface of all cut slopes more than five feet (1.6 m) in height and fill slopes more than three feet (9.1 m) in height shall be protected against damage by erosion. Slopes exceeding fifteen (15) feet (4.6 m) in vertical height shall be planted with shrubs, spaced at not to exceed ten feet (3.0 m) on centers; or trees, spaced at not to exceed twenty (20) feet (6.1 m) on centers; or a combination of shrubs and trees at equivalent spacings. The plants selected and planting methods used shall be suitable for the soil and climatic conditions of the site. Plant material shall be selected which will produce a coverage of permanent planting to effectively control erosion. Consideration shall be given to deep-rooted plant material needing limited watering, maintenance, high root to shoot ratio, wind susceptibility and fire retardant characteristics. All plant materials must be approved by the building official or designee. 
    Planting may be modified for the site if specific recommendations are provided by both the geotechnical engineer and a landscape architect. Specific recommendations must consider soils and climatic conditions, irrigation requirements, planting methods, fire retardant characteristics, water efficiency, maintenance needs, and other regulatory requirements. Recommendations must include a finding that the alternative planting will provide a permanent and effective method of erosion control. This modified planting shall be approved by the building official or designee. 
D.  Irrigation. Slopes required to be planted by subsection C of this section shall be provided with an approved system of irrigation that is designed to cover all portions of the slope. Irrigation system plans shall be submitted and approved prior to installation. A functional test of the system may be required. Specific recommendations must consider soils and climatic conditions, plant types, planting methods, fire retardant characteristics, water efficiency, maintenance needs, and other regulatory requirements. Modifications for irrigation systems shall be approved by the building official or designee. 
E.  Plans and Specifications. Planting and irrigation plans shall be submitted for slopes required to be planted and irrigated by subsections C and D of this section. Except as waived by the building official or designee for minor grading, the plans for slopes twenty (20) feet (6.1 m) or more in vertical height shall be prepared and signed by a civil engineer or landscape architect. If requested by the building official or designee, planting and irrigation details shall be included on the grading plan. 
F.  Release of Security. The planting and irrigation systems required by this section shall be installed as soon as practical after rough grading. Prior to final approval of grading and before the release of the grading security, the planting shall be well established and growing on the slopes. 
( Ord. No. 2016-08 , § 5(Exh. B), 11-15-16) 
15.06.110 - National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) compliance. 
A.  General. All grading plans and permits shall comply with the provisions of this section for NPDES compliance. 
    All best management practices shall be installed before grading begins. All best management practices shall be updated as necessary to prevent erosion and control construction-related pollutants from discharging from the site. All best management practices shall be maintained in good working order to the satisfaction of the building official or designee unless final grading approval has been granted by the building official or designee and all permanent drainage and erosion control systems, if required, are in place. 
B.  Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP). For project sites subject to the CGP, or when requested by the building official or designee, no grading permit shall be issued unless the plans for such work include a city-approved SWPPP with details of best management practices, including desilting basins or other temporary drainage or control measures, or both, as may be necessary to control construction-related pollutants which originate from the site as a result of construction-related activities. For project sites not subject to the CGP, no grading permit shall be issued unless the plans for such work include a city-approved ESCP. 
( Ord. No. 2016-08 , § 5(Exh. B), 11-15-16) 
15.06.120 - Referenced standards. 
    These regulations establish minimum standards and are not intended to prevent the use of alternate materials, methods or means of conforming to such standards, provided such alternate has been approved. 
    The building official or designee shall approve such an alternate, provided he or she finds that the alternate is, for the purpose intended, at least the equivalent of that prescribed in this code in quality, strength, effectiveness, durability and safety. 
    The building official or designee shall require that sufficient evidence or proof be submitted to substantiate any claims regarding the alternate. 
    The standards listed below are recognized standards. 
Testing 
1.1 ASTM D 1557 Laboratory Characteristics Compaction of Soil Using Modified Effort 1.2 ASTM D 1556 Density and Unit Weight of Soils in Place by the Sand Cone Method 1.3 ASTM D 2167 Density and Unit Weight of Soils in Place by the Rubber-Balloon Method 1.4 ASTM D 2937 Density of Soils in Place by the Drive-Cylinder Method 1.5 ASTM D 2922 Density of Soil and Soil Aggregate in Place by Nuclear Methods 1.6 ASTM D 3017 Water Content of Soil and Rock in Place by Nuclear Methods  
( Ord. No. 2016-08 , § 5(Exh. B), 11-15-16) 
Chapter 15.12 - CONSTRUCTION SITE MAINTENANCE[3] 
Section: 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2014-13 , § 5, adopted May 20, 2014, repealed the former Chapter 15.12, §§ 15.12.020-15.12.060, and enacted a new Chapter 15.12 as set out herein. The former Chapter 15.12 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 226, 1996. 

15.12.010 - Solid waste compliance. 
    Solid waste and other construction and demolition debris on a construction site shall comply with Chapter 8.04. 
( Ord. No. 2014-13, § 5, 5-20-14 ) 
Chapter 15.16 - CONSTRUCTION SITE SANITATION 
Sections: 

15.16.010 - Water closet required. 
A.  There shall be not less than one water closet for each twenty (20) employees, or fraction thereof, working at a construction job site. 
B.  Water closets shall be located on the same lot as the construction site. Where multiple construction sites under the same ownership occur contiguously, one water closet shall be placed for every ten construction sites, but in no event shall water closets be located more than five hundred (500) feet from any construction site. 
C.  Water closets shall be placed on the site from the time of the first construction inspection, excluding grading on a single lot, until either the final inspection or a conventionally constructed water closet is available on the site. 
(Ord. 226 § 6 (part), 1996) 
Chapter 15.20 - MOBILE HOME PARKS ACT ENFORCEMENT 
Sections: 

15.20.060 - Definitions. 
    All terms used in this chapter are defined in the Mobile Home Parks Act, California Health and Safety Code, Division 13, Part 2.1 and the applicable regulations adopted pursuant thereto by the State Department of Housing and Community Development and are used in this chapter as so defined unless, from the context thereof, it clearly appears that a different meaning is intended. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 33.1022) 
15.20.070 - Health permit. 
    Any person or owner who operates or permits the use of a mobile home park or special occupancy park or portion thereof shall first obtain a permit issued by the building and safety department, authorizing such person or owner to operate such a mobile home park or special occupancy park. Application for permits may be secured from the building and safety department. A permit to operate shall not be issued for a mobile home park or special occupancy park or any portion thereof that has been constructed, reconstructed, or altered unless a valid certificate of occupancy has been written by the building and safety department. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; Ord. 75 § 2 (part), 1989; SBCC § 33.1023) 
15.20.080 - Health permit fee. 
    Prior to the issuance of the building and safety department permit, the building and safety department shall be paid a fee in the amount set forth in the city's fee schedule. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; Ord. 75 § 2 (part), 1989; SBCC § 33.1024) 
15.20.090 - Expiration of permit. 
    Permits issued pursuant to this chapter shall expire on December thirty-first following issuance and such permit must be renewed within thirty (30) days following the expiration date. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 33.1025) 
15.20.100 - Permit to operate-Penalty fees. 
    Annual permit fees submitted after January thirty-first of each year are subject to penalty fees as follows: 
A.  The fees for a permit to operate submitted on or after February first, but before March first of each year are subject to a ten percent penalty fee. The fees for a permit to operate submitted on or after March first of each year are subject to a one hundred (100) percent penalty fee. When fees are submitted by mail, the postmark shall establish the date of submittal. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 33.1026) 
15.20.110 - Amended permit to operate. 
    An amended permit to operate shall be required when there is any change in the information on the permit to operate. Changes in information shall include, but not be limited to, change of name or ownership; limits on lot occupancy; or number of lots resulting from the sale, lease, construction, or alteration of existing lots or facilities. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 33.1027) 
15.20.120 - Mobile home and accessory structure installations. 
A.  Prior to the installation of each mobile home or accessory structure on a mobile home lot, a permit shall be obtained from the building and safety department. Permit application shall be submitted on forms provided by the building and safety department. 
B.  Park operator approval shall be required on all applications for permits to install a mobile home or to alter a mobile home if such alteration would affect the electrical, fuel gas, or plumbing system of the mobile home park. 
C.  Park operator approval shall be required on all applications for permits to construct, reconstruct, install, or alter a mobile home accessory structure to be located or proposed to be located within a mobile home park. 
D.  Appropriate fees shall be submitted to building and safety department with each permit application in those amounts set forth in the city's fee schedule. 
E.  A mobile home shall not be located or installed in a special occupancy park except where so designated. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; Ord. 75 § 2 (part), 1989; SBCC § 33.1028) 
Title 16 - DEVELOPMENT CODE 
Chapters: 
Chapter 16.04 - INTRODUCTION 
Sections: 

16.04.010 - Citation. 
    This title shall be known as the "Development Code of the City of Hesperia" or as the "Development Code." 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 81.0101) 
16.04.020 - Intent. 
    The provisions of this title are intended to elaborate upon, and otherwise augment standards, specifications and land uses set forth in community plan land use districts and countywide zone districts adopted under the provisions of the development code. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 87.0101) 
16.04.030 - Modification of general regulations. 
    The provisions of this title shall prevail should they conflict with the provisions of a community plan or specific plan, unless otherwise specified by this title or where the provisions have been specifically overridden and modified by a community plan or specific plan. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 87.0105) 
Chapter 16.08 - DEFINITIONS 
Sections: 

16.08.005 - Accessory building. 
    "Accessory building" means a subordinate building, the use of which is incidental to that of the main building or main use of the land. The use of an accessory building may be for either a primary or an accessory use allowed by the appropriate zone/land use district. An accessory building shall be located on either the same parcel as the main building or main use; or shall be located on a contiguous abutting parcel that is owned by the same owner who owns the parcel which has the main use. An accessory building shall always exist in conjunction with and never without a legally established main building or main use that has the same common owner. An accessory building is at least partially enclosed by walls and a roof. A covered patio, lattice patio, or partial patio enclosure whose sides are less than fifty (50) percent open to the elements shall be considered a building. The use of screen, cloth, netting or similar material shall be considered a wall and/or roofing material. A building shall not include machinery, equipment or appliances installed for manufacture or process purposes only, nor shall it include any construction installations which are not a part of a building, any tunnel, mine shaft, highway or bridge, or include any house trailer or vehicle which conforms to the vehicle code. 
(Ord. 2001-13 Exh. A § 1, 2001: Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.010112) 
16.08.007 - Accessory structure. 
    "Accessory structure" means a subordinate structure, the use of which is incidental to that of the main building or main use of the land. The use of an accessory structure may be for either a primary or an accessory use allowed by the appropriate zone/land use district. An accessory structure shall be located on either the same parcel as the main building or main use; or shall be located on a contiguous abutting parcel that is owned by the same owner who owns the parcel which has the main use. An accessory structure shall always exist in conjunction with and never without a legally established main building or main use that has the same common owner. Accessory structures, as opposed to accessory buildings, are not completely enclosed by walls and a roof. A covered patio, lattice patio, or partial patio enclosure whose sides are fifty (50) percent or more open to the elements shall be considered a structure as opposed to a building. Any structure which is less than fifty (50) percent open to the elements shall be considered a building. The use of screen, cloth, netting or similar material shall be considered a wall and/or roofing material. 
(Ord. 2001-13 Exh. A § 2, 2002) 
16.08.010 - Accessory use. 
    "Accessory use" means a subordinate use, which may be permanent or temporary, that is incidental, ancillary and customarily associated with the principal, primary or main use of the land. An accessory use shall be located on the same parcel, or on a contiguous abutting parcel, that is owned by the same person who owns the parcel on which the main building or main use is located. An accessory use shall always exist in conjunction with, and never without, a legally established primary use that has the same common owner. Notwithstanding these provisions, the keeping of animals on a contiguous parcel is only allowed when the zone/land use district designation on the parcel with the principal, primary or main use allows the keeping of such animals and in the specified numbers. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.010115) 
16.08.011 - Accessory vehicles. 
    "Accessory vehicles" include the following types: travel trailers, fifth-wheel trailers, motor homes, campers, camper shells, boats, and similar vehicles that could be stored on private property. 
(Ord. 299 § 4 (Exh. A § 5), 2000) 
16.08.015 - Adult-oriented businesses. 
A.  "Adult-oriented businesses" are: (1) any business which is conducted exclusively for the patronage of adults and from which minors are specifically excluded by law; provided, that any business licensed by the State Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control shall not be an adult-oriented business unless it complies with another definition within this section; and/or (2) any business, where employees or patrons expose "specified anatomical areas" or engage in "specified sexual activities;" and/or (3) any business or establishment which offers its patrons services or entertainment characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, exposing, describing, discussing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
B.  These types of businesses shall not include the following: (1) any bona fide medical establishment operated by properly licensed and registered medical personnel with appropriate medical credentials for the treatment of patients; (2) any massage establishment, the clientele of which consists substantially of persons referred to the establishment in writing for massage therapy by physicians, surgeons, chiropractors or osteopaths duly licensed to practice their respective professions in the State of California; provided, that the massage establishment retains such written referrals in its records for a period of not less than three years, and makes such written references available for inspection by the county health officer or his designated representative at all times during the normal business hours of operation of the massage establishment; and (3) an athletic club, health club, school, gymnasium, state licensed cosmetology or barber establishment, reducing salon, spa or similar establishment where massage or similar manipulation of the human body is offered as an incidental or accessory service. 
C.  Adult-oriented businesses shall include but shall not be limited to the following: 
1.  Adult bookstore. "Adult bookstore" means an establishment having as a substantial portion of its stock-in-trade, and offering for sale for any form of consideration, any one or more of the following: 
a.  Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other visual representations which are characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of "specified anatomical areas;" or 
b.  Instruments, devices or paraphernalia which are designed for use in connection with "specified sexual activities." 
2.  Adult Cabaret. An "adult cabaret" means a cabaret which features topless and/or bottomless dancers, strippers, male or female impersonators, or similar entertainers. 
3.  Adult Theater. An "adult theater" means any place, building, enclosure or structure partially or entirely, temporarily or permanently used for dramatic or operatic presentations, motion pictures, or any picture projected from slides or films, vaudeville show, performances, or any place of public entertainment which are used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas," for observation by patrons therein. Adult theaters specifically include places to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin or slug-operated or electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors or other image-producing devices are maintained, used or available for presenting material distinguished by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas," for observation by patrons therein. 
4.  Massage Establishment. "Massage establishment" means any room, parlor, place or institution having a fixed place of business where any person, association, firm or corporation administers or permits the administration of massage of the human body for consideration of any kind. For the purposes of this section the word "massage" means any method of pressure on or friction against, or stroking, kneading, rubbing, tapping, pounding, or stimulating the external parts of the body with the hands or other parts of the body, with or without the aid of any mechanical or electrical apparatus or appliances, or with or without supplementary aids such as rubbing alcohol, liniments, antiseptics, oils, powder, creams, lotions, ointments, or other similar preparations used in this practice. 
5.  Sexual Novelty Store. A "sexual novelty store" means an establishment having as a substantial portion of its stock-in-trade goods which are replicas of, or which simulate, "specified anatomical areas," or goods which are designed to be placed on "specified anatomical areas," or to be used in conjunction with "specified sexual activities" to cause sexual excitement. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.010124) 
16.08.020 - Advertising structure. 
    "Advertising structure" means any structure of any kind or character erected or maintained for advertising purposes, upon which any advertising sign may be placed, including advertising statuary. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.010130) 
16.08.025 - Agricultural use. 
    "Agricultural use" means the use of land for the cultivation of food or fiber or the grazing or pasturing of livestock, usually for commercial purposes. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.010148) 
16.08.030 - Airport reference point (A.R.P.) 
    "A.R.P." means the point established as the approximate geographic center of the airport landing area and so designated. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.010157) 
16.08.035 - Aliquot part. 
    "Aliquot part" means the division of sectionalized land, by a series of divisions by one quarter. Such divisions shall not be less than two and one-half (2 1/2) acres or equivalent as allowed by Section 16.10.050. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.010163) 
16.08.040 - Alley. 
    "Alley" means a public thoroughfare, not exceeding thirty (30) feet in width for the use of pedestrians or vehicles, which affords only a secondary means of access to the abutting property. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.010166) 
16.08.045 - Anatomical areas, specified. 
    "Specified anatomical areas" shall include any of the following human anatomical areas: 
A.  Less than completely and opaquely covered genitals, pubic regions, buttocks, anuses or female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areolae; or 
B.  Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.010172) 
16.08.050 - Apartment. 
    "Apartment" means a room, or suite of rooms when combined constitute a single dwelling unit in a multiple-family dwelling, and which are designed for, intended for, suitable as a residence for, and/or occupied by one family. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.010175) 
16.08.055 - Apartment hotel. 
    "Apartment hotel" means a building or any portion thereof, designed for or containing both individual guest rooms or suites of rooms and dwelling units. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.010178) 
16.08.060 - Apartment house. 
    "Apartment house" means the same as "multiple-family dwelling," as defined in Section 16.08.190. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.010181) 
16.08.065 - Applicant. 
    "Applicant" means the owner(s), or authorized agent of the owner(s) who is legally authorized to act for the owner(s) of record. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.010184) 
16.08.070 - Approved access. 
A.  Approved access. Access required to subdivisions for which a tentative and final map are not required shall mean one of the following: 
1.  A dedicated right-of-way; 
2.  An offer to dedicate to the city a width as established by the circulation element of the general plan or the city's right-of-way standards and an easement of a strip of land at least twenty (20) feet in width which expressly grants to the owner of the subdivision and any successors in interest the right to use the easement without limit as to the quantity of vehicular traffic from each lot created by the owners or successors in interest to improved roadways in the city street system, both of which abut or connect to a publicly maintained roadway or connect to existing traveled roads where a prescriptive right by user exists for public use. 
3.  An offer to dedicate to the city and to the public in general, an easement for public road, county highway and public utility purposes, of a width as established by the circulation element of the general plan or to the public in general can be accepted by public use, but the easement or road constructed thereon shall not become a city street until and unless the city council, by appropriate resolution, has caused said road to be accepted into the city street system. 
4.  An existing traveled way where a prescriptive right by user has been established for public use by a court decree. 
5.  A traveled way which was in existence prior to 1967, as determined by the county surveyor. Such traveled way must connect to a publicly maintained roadway and must meet each of the following criteria: 
a.  Have all-weather capability for normal passenger car use; 
b.  Be of adequate width to provide two-way vehicular access; 
c.  Be improved and maintained by the use of hand or power machinery or tools in order to allow relatively regular and continuous use. A traveled way maintained solely by the passage of vehicles does not constitute approved access. 
B.  Approved access shall not be approved by the city engineer unless the access: 
1.  Substantially conforms to the alignment shown in the circulation element where applicable; and 
2.  May practically and feasibly be applied to road use. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.010187) 
16.08.075 - Automobile and trailer sales area. 
    "Automobile and trailer sales area" means an open area used for the display and sale or rental of new or used automobiles or trailers, and where repair work is limited to minor incidental repair of those automobiles or trailers to be displayed, rented or sold on the premises. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.010195) 
16.08.080 - Bed and breakfast use. 
    "Bed and breakfast use" means a special accessory use to a one-family residential dwelling where a limited or specified number of guest rooms are made available to transient guests for rent to provide overnight sleeping accommodations on a less than weekly basis. Bed and breakfast uses are subdivided into three basic categories as follows: 
A.  "Host home" means a one-family dwelling containing one to two guest rooms which are made available for rent to transient guests to provide sleeping accommodations on a less than weekly basis where said dwelling is occupied by the owner of the property. 
B.  "Bed and breakfast home" means a one-family-dwelling containing three to five guest rooms which are made available for rent to transient guests to provide sleeping accommodations on a less than weekly basis where the dwelling is occupied by the owner of the property. 
C.  "Bed and breakfast inn/lodge" means an existing one-family dwelling which has been designated a historical structure containing a minimum of six and a maximum of ten guest rooms which are made available for rent to transient guests to provide sleeping accommodations on a less than weekly basis where the dwelling is occupied by the owner of the property. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.010213) 
16.08.085 - Block. 
    "Block" means the property abutting on one side of a street between two nearest intersection streets, railroad right-of-way or other natural barrier; provided, however, that where a street curves so that any two chords thereof form an angle of one hundred twenty (120) degrees or less measured on the lot side, each curve shall be construed as an intersection street. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.010220) 
16.08.090 - Boarding house. 
    "Boarding house" means a dwelling with not more than five guest rooms, with not more than one person per room, where lodging and meals are provided for compensation on a weekly or greater basis, not including those facilities defined as social care facilities. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.010230) 
16.08.095 - Buffer. 
    "Buffer" means a strip of land established to separate incompatible or different land uses. Normally a buffer area is landscaped and retained as open space. The term may be used more broadly to describe any area or use that separates two unlike land uses, such as the use of multiple-family housing between single-family housing and commercial uses. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.010235) 
16.08.100 - Building coverage. 
    "Building coverage" means the alterations of a lot by the creation of surface area upon which a building rests. The percentage surface coverage does not include roadways, swimming pools, tennis courts, solar collection devices or related apparatus. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.010245) 
16.08.105 - Building envelope. 
    "Building envelope" means an area delineated on development plans in which all clearing and land disturbance for building construction must be confined. If not delineated, it is the area of a lot not included within any required front yard, rear yard, side yard or side street yard setback area, or any recorded easement, or offer of dedication. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.010250) 
16.08.110 - Building height. 
    "Building height" means the vertical distance above a referenced datum measured to the highest point of the coping of a flat roof or to the deck line of a mansard roof or to the average height of the highest gable of a pitched or hipped roof. The reference datum shall be selected by either of the following, whichever yields a greater height of building: 
A.  The elevation of the highest adjoining sidewalk or ground surface within a five foot horizontal distance of the exterior wall of the building when such sidewalk or ground surface is not more than ten feet above lowest grade; 
B.  An elevation ten feet higher than the lowest grade when the sidewalk or ground surface described in subsection (A) of this section is more than ten feet above lowest grade. 
    The height of a stepped or terraced building is the maximum height of any segment of the building. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.010255) 
16.08.115 - Carport. 
    "Carport" means a permanent roofed structure with no more than two enclosed sides, used or intended to be used for automobile shelter and storage. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.010311) 
16.08.120 - Cemetery. 
    "Cemetery" means land used or intended to be used for the permanent internment of dead human bodies or the cremated remains thereof and dedicated for cemetery purposes. A cemetery is established and operated in compliance with the state Health and Safety Code and any mapping and site approval requirements of this title. Cemetery purposes include columbariums, crematoriums, mausoleums and mortuaries when operated in conjunction with and within the boundary of such a cemetery. "Pet cemetery" shall be a cemetery for domesticated animals and shall be in compliance with applicable state and county regulation, including mapping and applicable site approval requirements. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.010314) 
16.08.125 - City standards. 
    "City standards" means any current improvement standards or design standards which have been adopted by the city council, and are described, delineated and on file for use and examination by the public in the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.010385) 
16.08.130 - Composite development plan. 
    "Composite development plan" means a map or plan on file with the building and safety department which reflects additional information related to the development of lots created by a final or parcel map recorded after March 1, 1986. Notes on this plan or map are for informational purposes and indicate conditions and criteria that exist on the property that were known and identified as of the date of the recordation of the final or parcel map. Authority for this plan is derived from Government Code Section 66434.2. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.010338) 
16.08.135 - Community apartment project. 
    "Community apartment project" means a common interest development in which an undivided interest in land is coupled with the right of exclusive occupancy of any apartment located thereon. This use includes apartment complexes that were convened to allow for individual ownership of units that were not constructed to condominium building standards. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.010342) 
16.08.140 - Community noise equivalency level (CNEL). 
    "Community noise equivalency level (CNEL)" means a CNEL is a measure of the cumulative noise exposure level in the community. It results from a summation of average noise levels based on the average energy level of the sound over a twenty-four (24) hour period, with an increased weighting factor applied to the evening and night time period. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.010349) 
16.08.142 - "Computerized sweepstakes device" defined. 
    "Computerized sweepstakes device" shall mean any computer, machine, game or apparatus which, upon insertion of a coin, token, access number, magnetic card or similar object, or upon payment of anything of value, may be operated by the public generally for use in a contest of skill, entertainment, amusement or chance whether or not registering a score, and which provides the user with a chance to win anything of value or any cash payout or anything that could be redeemed, directly or indirectly, for any cash payout and which is not otherwise permitted as gambling, a lottery or as a gaming device under state law. 
(Ord. No. 2013-06, § 3, 6-18-13) 
16.08.145 - Contiguous or contiguous property. 
    "Contiguous" in actual close contact; touching; bounded or traversed by. "Contiguous property" means those properties which touch property lines of any parcel including those properties which touch said property lines of a subject parcel when such lines are projected across public or private rights-of-way, easements, roads, streets, or railroad rights-of-way. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.010369) 
16.08.150 - Cooling opportunities, passive or natural. 
    "Passive or natural cooling opportunities" means the ability to orient or site a structure, including a dwelling on its lot in order to take optimum advantage of prevailing breezes for cooling purposes. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.010372) 
16.08.155 - County. 
    "County" means the county of San Bernardino, California. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.010375) 
16.08.160 - Court. 
    "Court" means an open, unoccupied space, other than a yard, on the same lot with a building or buildings and which is bounded on two or more sides by such building or buildings. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.010390) 
16.08.165 - Dairy. 
    "Dairy" means any premises where milk is produced for sale or distribution and where three or more cows or goats are in lactation. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.010405) 
16.08.170 - Day care facility. 
    "Day care facility" means a facility which provides nonmedical care to children under eighteen (18) years of age in need of personal services, supervision or assistance essential for sustaining the activities of daily living or for the protection of the individual on less than a twenty-four (24) hours basis. Day care facility includes family day care homes, infant centers, preschools, and extended day care facilities. A "family day care home" means a day care facility located in a residence which regularly provides care, protection and supervision of twelve (12) or fewer children from more than one other family, in the provider's own home, for periods of less than twenty-four (24) hours per day, while the parents or guardians are away and includes the following: 
A.  "Large family day care home" means those which provide family day care to seven to twelve (12) children, inclusive, including children who reside at the home. 
B.  "Small family day care home" means those which provide family day care to six or fewer children, including children who reside at the home. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.010412) 
16.08.175 - Development code. 
    "Development code" means a set of land use regulations adopted by the city council in conformance with the general plan. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.010432) 
16.08.180 - Development permit, city. 
    "Development permit, city" means a permit issued by the building official for construction or land disturbance, including, but not limited to, building permits, mobile home set-down permits and grading permits. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; Ord. 75 § 2 (part), 1990; SBCC § 83.010438) 
16.08.185 - Development plan (PUD). 
    "Development plan" means a detailed, comprehensive plan of development for a planned unit development. This development plan applies limits and parameters for development derived from a development suitability analysis to a specific development scheme. Development plans shall include a detailed description of the proposed development and its effects including, but not limited to, a written text, diagrams or maps describing the program for development and the functional arrangement of structures and uses, the effect of such arrangement upon the physical characteristics of the site, available public services, the capacity of the existing circulation system and the existing and planned land use of adjacent properties. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.010441) 
16.08.187 - Drug paraphernalia. 
    "Drug paraphernalia" has the meaning set forth in California Health and Safety Code Section 11014.5, as that section may be amended from time to time. 
( Ord. No. 2017-10 , § 3(Exh. A), 6-6-17) 
16.08.188 - Dude/guest ranch. 
    "Dude/guest ranch" means a working or guest ranch that provides equestrian and recreational activities, overnight accommodations for guests, and facilities related to a working ranch. The dude/guest ranch does not include a commercial restaurant, cafe or bar available to the general public. 
(Ord. 2011-10, § 3(Exh. A), 8-16-11) 
16.08.190 - Dwelling, multiple-family. 
    "Dwelling" means a building or portion thereof used and/or designed as a residence for two or more families living independently of each other in separate dwelling units. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.010484) 
16.08.195 - Dwelling, one-family. 
    "One-family dwelling" means a detached building designed and/or used to house not more than one family, including all domestic employees of such family. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.010487) 
16.08.200 - Dwelling, two-family. 
    "Two-family dwelling" means a building designed and/or used to house not more than two families living independently of each other. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.010490) 
16.08.205 - Dwelling unit. 
    "Dwelling unit" means any building or portion thereof, including a mobile home or portion thereof, which contains living facilities, including provisions for sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation as required by this code and the Uniform Building Code, for not more than one family. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.010493) 
16.08.207 - Electrical generating stations. 
    "Electrical generating stations" means a facility that is operated by a power producer and whose primary function is the provision of electricity to the electrical distribution system or transmission grid. Electrical generating station does not include solar or wind farms. 
(Ord. No. 2012-07, § 3(Exh. A), 6-19-12; Ord. No. 2017-10 , § 3(Exh. A), 6-6-17) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2017-10 , § 3(Exh. A), adopted June 6, 2017, renumbered § 16.08.280 as § 16.08.270. 
16.08.208 - Electrical substations. 
    "Electrical substations" means a facility that is operated by a public utility where electric energy is received at a sub-transmission voltage and transformed to a lower voltage for distribution for general consumer use. Electrical substations does not include solar or wind farms. 
(Ord. No. 2012-07, § 3(Exh. A), 6-19-12; Ord. No. 2017-10 , 3(Exh. A), 6-6-17) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2017-10 , § 3(Exh. A), adopted June 6, 2017, renumbered § 16.08.290 as § 16.08.280. 
16.08.209 - Electronic smoking product and/or device. 
    "Electronic smoking product and/or device" (also known as "electronic cigarette," "e-cigarette," "electronic nicotine delivery system," "e-cigar," "e-cigarillo," "e-pipe," "e-hookah," "hookah pen," "vape pen," etc.) shall mean a battery operated device used to inhale a vaporized liquid solution that frequently, though not always, contains nicotine. 
( Ord. No. 2017-10 , 3(Exh. A), 6-6-17) 
16.08.210 - Environmental impact report (EIR). 
    Environmental Impact Report (EIR). An "environmental impact report (EIR)" is the public document used by a governmental agency to analyze the significant environmental effects of a proposed project, to identify alternatives, and to disclose possible ways to reduce or avoid possible environmental damage. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.010525) 
16.08.215 - Exotic animal. 
    "Exotic animal" means any warm or cold blooded animal of the biological family animalia generally considered as wild, exotic, dangerous, venomous or not normally domesticated. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.010550) 
16.08.220 - Family. 
    "Family" means a person or persons living together as a single housekeeping unit in a dwelling unit. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.010605) 
16.08.225 - Final map. 
    "Final map" means the same as California Government Code, Title 7, Division 2 definition. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.010610) 
16.08.227 - Financial institution. 
    "Financial Institution" consists of an establishment, facility or institution, such as a bank and credit union, involved in financial transactions, including the custody, deposit, investment, loan, exchange, or issuance of money. A financial institution is also registered with and regulated by the Securities and Exchange Commission or the Commodity Futures Trading Commission. 
( Ord. No. 2017-10 , 3(Exh. A), 6-6-17) 
16.08.230 - Findings. 
    "Findings" means a set of conclusions which are required before specified permits, deviations, ordinance changes or other entitlement may be granted. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.010615) 
16.08.235 - Fire-resistive or fire-resistive construction. 
    "Fire-resistive" or "fire-resistive construction" means construction to resist the spread of fire, details of which may be specified in the building code of the jurisdiction. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.010625) 
16.08.237 - Fish farming. 
    "Fish farming" involves raising fish commercially in tanks or enclosures, usually for food. A facility that releases young (juvenile) fish into the wild for recreational fishing or to supplement a species' natural numbers is generally referred to as a fish hatchery. 
(Ord. 2011-13, § 3(Exh. A), 9-20-11) 
16.08.238 - Floor-area ratio. 
The "floor-area ratio" or "FAR" means the ratio of the total gross floor area of all buildings on a lot to the total gross area of the lot or parcel. Exhibit "A" provides examples of the calculation of the FAR on a specific piece of property. 
Exhibit A 

( Ord. No. 2012-02, § 3(Exh. A), 2-7-12 ) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2012-02 , § 3(Exh. A), adopted February 7, 2012, set out provisions intended for use as § 16.08.237. For purposes of classification, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as § 16.08.238. 
16.08.240 - Fuel modified area. 
    "Fuel modified area" means an area where living and dead vegetation is managed regularly, usually by trimming, removal or substitution of natural vegetation, in order to reduce fire hazard, by use of mechanical, chemical and biological means and/or prescribed burning. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.010677) 
16.08.245 - Future right-of-way. 
    "Future right-of-way" means future right-of-way of streets shown in the circulation element of the general plan assuming an equal dedication of right-of-way on both sides of the existing centerline, or shall otherwise be determined as shown on any adopted specific plan or community plan. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.010680) 
16.08.250 - Garage, private. 
    "Private garage" means an accessory building or an accessory portion of the main building designed and/or used for the shelter or storage of up to four motor vehicles belonging to the occupants of the main building. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.010705) 
16.08.255 - Garage, public. 
    "Public garage" means any building, other than a private or storage garage, used for the storage, care or repair of motor vehicles and where any such vehicles are equipped for operation or kept for hire or sale. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.010710) 
16.08.260 - Garage, storage. 
    "Storage garage" means any building, other than a public or private garage, used exclusively for the storage of motor vehicles. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.010715) 
16.08.265 - General plan. 
    "General plan" means an official or adopted general plan, or any element thereof, as defined in California Government Code, Title 7, Division 1, Chapter 3. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.010720) 
16.08.270 - Grading. 
    "Grading" means excavating, filling, leveling or smoothing, or combination thereof, for which a grading permit is required by the Uniform Building Code. "Major grading" is grading in excess of one hundred (100) cubic yards, whereas "minor grading" is one hundred (100) cubic yards or less. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.010740) 
16.08.273 - Gross lot area. 
    "Gross lot area" means the total area of a parcel or lot, including any proposed public highways, streets or alleys, other public sites; and existing private streets, alleys or easements, and other areas where development is restricted. 
(Ord. 2011-10, § 3(Exh. A), 8-16-11) 
16.08.275 - Guest house. 
    "Guest house" means living quarters within a detached accessory building located on the same parcel with the main building or a contiguous parcel with the same common owner, for use by temporary guests of the occupants of the premises. Such quarters have no kitchen facilities, laundry facilities, a wet bar, or other plumbing fixtures, but may contain bathroom facilities. A guest house shall not be rented or otherwise used as a separate dwelling. 
(Ord. 299 § 4 (Exh. A § 1), 2000: Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.010760) 
16.08.280 - Hazardous fire area. 
    "Hazardous fire area" means any land which is covered with grass, grain, brush or forest, whether privately or publicly owned, which is so situated or is of such inaccessible location that a fire originating upon such land would present an abnormally difficult job of suppression or would result in great and unusual damage through fire or resulting erosion. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.010815) 
16.08.285 - Heating opportunities, passive or natural. 
    "Passive or natural heating opportunities" means the ability to orient or site any structure, including a dwelling on its lot in order to take optimum advantage of natural solar heating capabilities. Structures should wherever possible orient their longest/largest axis from east to west and include special treatment of the south facing wall. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.010825) 
16.08.290 - Hog raising. 
    "Hog raising" means any premises used for the raising or keeping of more than six weaned hogs. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.010830) 
16.08.295 - Home occupation. 
    "Home occupation" means any occupation customarily conducted entirely within a dwelling by its inhabitants, the purpose being incidental to the use of the dwelling for dwelling purposes and provided that no article is sold or offered for sale except that produced by the inhabitants, as stipulated in Chapter 5.44 of this code. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.010835) 
16.08.300 - Hotel. 
    "Hotel" means any building or portion thereof containing six or more guest rooms, designed for and/or used by six or more guests for compensation on a daily basis, and with no provision for cooking in any individual room or suite, but not including those facilities defined as social care facilities. Such establishments provide lodging and usually meals, various personal services and sometimes entertainment and recreational opportunities. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.010840) 
16.08.305 - Hotel, residential. 
    "Residential hotel" means a hotel which has seventy-five (75) percent or more of the available rooms occupied by permanent guests for compensation on a monthly or greater basis. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.010845) 
16.08.310 - House, lodging or rooming. 
    "Lodging or rooming house" means a building having no more than five guest rooms and no more than one person per room, where lodging is provided for compensation on a weekly or greater basis; but not including those facilities defined as social care facilities. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.010865) 
16.08.315 - Housing, caretaker. 
    "Caretaker housing" means residential occupancy of a permanent or temporary dwelling unit, by a caretaker hired to guard part or all of the property on which the caretaker's dwelling is located as an accessory use. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; Ord. 84 § 6(B), 1990; SBCC § 83.010850) 
16.08.320 - Housing, dependent. 
    "Depending housing" means residential occupancy of a temporary accessory living unit located on the same parcel as the principal unit, which is occupied by one or two adults, who: (1) have reached the age of sixty (60), or (2) are dependents of the residents of the principal unit, or (3) are court-appointed conservatees of a resident of the principal unit. For the purposes of this section, "dependent" means a related individual who is dependent upon the resident of the principal unit for financial support or health care. An individual will be determined to be a financial dependent if claimed by the resident of the principal unit as a dependent on his or her federal or state income tax return. An individual will be determined to be a dependent for health care reasons if he or she is considered blind or disabled as defined in Section 1614(a) of Part A of Title XVI of the Social Security Act. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 82.01855) 
16.08.325 - Housing, group. 
    "Group housing" means multi-residential living facilities, each of which contains group quarters in permanently fixed buildings or those portions thereof, which accommodate or are intended to accommodate residential land use types. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.010860) 
16.08.330 - Housing, secondary. 
    "Secondary housing" means residential occupancy of a living unit located on the same parcel as the principal unit. In a commercial land use district, secondary housing may be located either above the first floor, or if on the ground floor not on the street frontage. In a residential land use district the parcel containing the principal unit and the secondary housing unit shall not be less than five acres. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.010875) 
16.08.332 - Housing supportive. 
    "Housing supportive" means housing with no limit on length of stay, that is occupied by the target population as defined in subdivision (d) of Section 53260, and that is linked to onsite or offsite services that assist the supportive housing resident in retaining the housing, improving his or her health status, and maximizing his or her ability to live and, when possible, work in the community. 
( Ord. No. 2014-02, § 3(Exh. A), 2-18-14 ) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2014-02 , § 3(Exh. A), adopted February 18, 2014, set out provisions intended for use as § 16.08.032. For purposes of classification, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as § 16.08.332. 
16.08.333 - Housing transitional. 
    "Housing transitional" means buildings configured as rental housing developments, but operated under program requirements that call for the termination of assistance and recirculation of the assisted unit to another eligible program recipient at some predetermined future point in time, which shall be no less than six months. 
( Ord. No. 2014-02, § 3(Exh. A), 2-18-14 ) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2014-02 , § 3(Exh. A), adopted February 18, 2014, set out provisions intended for use as § 16.08.033. For purposes of classification, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as § 16.08.333. 
16.08.334 - Hydroponic store. 
    "Hydroponic store" shall mean any business whose primary sales consist of product and apparatus used for growing plants without soil or in a non-soil medium such as water or other nutrient rich solutions; with or without an inert medium (i.e. gravel, perlite, etc.), and/or controlled conditions of light, temperature, and humidity. For the purpose of this Title, hydroponic stores also include businesses whose sales include grow lights (i.e. plant lights), artificial light sources, and other supplies typically used for hydroponics as the primary use. Hydroponics stores are also synonymous with aeroponics, aquaculture, fogponics, etc. 
( Ord. No. 2017-10 , 3(Exh. A), 6-6-17) 
16.08.335 - Improvement, subdivision. 
    "Subdivision improvement" means any street work and utilities to be installed or agreed to be installed, by the subdivider on the land to be used for public or private streets, highways, ways, and easements, as are necessary for the general use of the lot owners in the subdivision and local neighborhood traffic, drainage and flood control needs as a condition precedent to the approval and acceptance of the final map thereof. "Improvement" also refers to any other specific improvements or types of improvements, the installation of which, either by the subdivider, by the city, by private utilities, by any other entity approved by the city or by a combination thereof, is necessary to ensure consistency with, or implementation of, the general plan, community plan, or any applicable specific plan. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.010910) 
16.08.338 - Initial study. 
    "Initial study" means a preliminary analysis of a project subject to CEQA prepared by the lead agency to determine whether an EIR or a negative declaration shall be prepared. 
(Ord. 2011-04, § 3(Exh. A), 5-3-11) 
16.08.340 - Institutional use. 
    "Institutional use" means an organizational use of a public character including governmental, educational, religious, medical, scientific research, cultural, social, eleemosynary and sometimes, recreational or entertainment uses. Such organizations often utilize large structures and/or large grounds for public assembly purposes to education, treat, train, help or entertain groups of people on a regular or periodic basis. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.010930) 
16.08.345 - Interim land uses. 
    "Interim land uses" means a provisional or temporary land use often used while studies are being conducted to evaluate the long-term use. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.010935) 
16.08.347 - "Internet sweepstakes café" defined. 
    "Internet sweepstakes café" shall mean any premises upon which a computerized sweepstakes device is located for the use or entertainment of the public, whether or not such premises has other business purposes of any nature whatsoever. 
(Ord. No. 2013-06, § 3, 6-18-13) 
16.08.350 - Junk and salvage facility. 
    "Junk and salvage facility" means the primary or accessory use of a parcel of land for open storage, dismantling and/or selling of old cast-off, unused, scrap or salvage material of any sort. Such materials shall include but to be limited to: 
A.  Copper, aluminum, brass, ferrous or nonferrous metals, whether fabricated or not; 
B.  Rope, rags, paper, glass, rubber, plastic or other polymer material; 
C.  Scrap lumber or other construction material; 
D.  Appliances, batteries or junk, dismantled or wrecked motor vehicles or parts thereof; 
E.  Trash, debris (organic and inorganic) or other waste material. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.011010) 
16.08.353 - Keeping or kept. 
    "Keeping" or "kept" includes maintaining, grazing, riding, leading, exercising, tying, hitching, stabling and allowing animals to run at large. The foregoing, however, shall not preclude the riding or leading of horses or other animals generally recognized as suited to ride such as mules and donkeys to or from the premises in order to gain access to a bridle path, alley or street. 
(Ord. 2011-13, § 3(Exh. A), 9-20-11) 
16.08.355 - Kennel. 
    "Kennel" means any lot or premises on which five or more dogs over four months old are kept for boarding, breeding, training and/or marketing. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.011105) 
16.08.360 - Kitchen. 
    "Kitchen" means any room, all or any part of which is designed or used for cooking and the preparation of food. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.011110) 
16.08.365 - Labor camp. 
    "Labor camp" means premises used for residential purposes for temporary or seasonal periods by five or more persons employed to perform agricultural or industrial labor. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.011205) 
16.08.370 - Labor quarters. 
    "Labor quarters" means residential occupancy of living units by farm, ranch, logging, mining, construction, testing and research lab employees, and employees of similar uses, and their families for any amount of time. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.011207) 
16.08.375 - Land use. 
    "Land use" means the manner in which land is developed and used. The general categories of land use include: residential, commercial, industrial, public, quasi-public, agricultural and recreational. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.011220) 
16.08.380 - Land use application. 
    An applicant initiated request for city approval of a discretionary permit that is subject to one of the review processes specified by the municipal code. Ministerial permit actions such as building permits and mobile home set-down permits are not land use applications. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.011222) 
16.08.385 - Land use decision. 
    "Land use decision" means any decision to approve, deny or modify, or to recommend approval, denial, or modification of a request to develop, divide or otherwise utilize land or to alter or establish land use regulations. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.011226) 
16.08.390 - Land use district. 
    "Land use district" means a land use regulatory district adopted in accordance with the provisions of Title 16, establishing all necessary rules and regulations necessary to guide development within the area affected by the district. Also see "zone district." 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.011230) 
16.08.395 - Land use intensity. 
    "Land use intensity" means the density of development versus open space of an area or property. For example, multiple-family residential is a higher land use intensity than single-family residential. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.011232) 
16.08.397 - Lead agency. 
    "Lead agency" means the City of Hesperia, the Hesperia Community Redevelopment Agency, the Hesperia Water District, and/or the Hesperia Fire District. The lead agency has principal responsibility for carrying out or approving a project, and which shall prepare the environmental documents for a project. 
(Ord. 2011-04, § 3(Exh. A), 5-3-11) 
16.08.400 - Liveable floor area. 
    "Liveable floor area" means the living area as measured from the exterior of walls and excluding garages, carports, exterior courtyards, patios or balconies. 
(Ord. 148 § 5(A), 1992) 
16.08.405 - Loading space. 
    "Loading space" means an off-street space or berth on the same lot with a building or contiguous to a group of buildings for the temporary parking of a commercial vehicle while loading or unloading merchandise or materials, which abuts upon a street, alley or other appropriate means of access. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.011250) 
16.08.410 - Local agency. 
    "Local agency" means the city of Hesperia. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.011252) 
16.08.415 - Lot. 
    "Lot" means an area shown on and created by a final map, official map or parcel map recorded with the county recorder. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.011264) 
16.08.420 - Lot areas. 
    "Lot areas" means the total horizontal area included within lot lines of a lot. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.011266) 
16.08.425 - Lot, corner. 
    "Corner lot" means a lot situated at the intersection of two or more streets, or bounded on two or more adjacent sides by street lines; provided, that the angle of intersection does not exceed one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.011268) 
16.08.430 - Lot coverage. 
    "Lot coverage" means the percentage of a lot that has been altered to create a surface area that is either impervious or is covered by a structure. In zone districts only "building coverage" as specified will be calculated. Community plan land use districts may allow calculations to be based upon either "building coverage" or total impervious surface area. "Building coverage" shall mean the percentage of lot surface area occupied by any building, but does not include roadways, swimming pools, tennis courts or solar collection devices which are on top of, enclosed, or covered by a building. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.011270) 
16.08.435 - Lot depth. 
    "Lot depth" means the horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines measured in the mean direction of the side lot lines. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.011272) 
16.08.440 - Lot dimension ratio. 
    "Lot dimension ratio" means a land area ratio of width to depth which determines the shape of a lot. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.011274) 
16.08.445 - Lot, frontage. 
    "Frontage lot" means the dimension of a lot or portion of a lot which abuts a street or an approved road easement, except the side of a corner lot. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.011276) 
16.08.450 - Lot, interior. 
    "Interior lot" means a lot other than a corner lot. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.011278) 
16.08.455 - Lot, key. 
    "Key lot" means the first interior lot to the rear of a reversed corner lot, the front line of which is a continuation of the side line of the reversed corner lot, exclusive of the width of an alley, and fronting on the street which intersects or intercepts the street upon which the corner lot fronts. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.011280) 
16.08.460 - Lot line adjustment. 
    "Lot line adjustment" means the adjustment of a lot line between two or more adjacent parcels, where the land taken from one parcel is added to an adjacent parcel, and where no additional parcels are thereby created or the number of parcels reduced. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.011284) 
16.08.465 - Lot line, front. 
    "Front lot line" means, in the case of an interior lot, a line separating the lot from the street; and in the case of a corner lot, a line separating the narrowest street frontage of the lot from the street. Based on the position of the residence and other factors, which may include the topography of the site, development on adjacent parcels, and legally located structures and utilities, the director of development services or his designee may determine that the widest street frontage is the front lot line, except in those cases where the latest tract deed restrictions or the recorded map specify another line as the front lot line. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.011286) 
(Ord. No. 2009-10, § 3(Exh. A), 10-20-09) 
16.08.470 - Lot line, rear. 
    "Rear lot line" means a line which is opposite and most distant from the front lot line, and in the case of a triangular or other irregularly shaped lot, a line within the lot ten feet in length, parallel to and at the maximum distance from the front lot line. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.011288) 
16.08.475 - Lot line, side. 
    "Side lot line" means any lot line other than the front or rear lot lines. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.011290) 
16.08.480 - Lot merger. 
    "Lot merger" means a process by which contiguous lots are merged into one land holding. In order to be merged, such lots must be held by the same owner and the lots must have a common lot line. This process is subject to all of the requirements of the municipal code and may be initiated by either the owner(s) of the lots or the city. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.011291) 
16.08.485 - Lot, mobile home park. 
    "Mobile home park lot" means a portion of a mobile home park designated or used for the occupancy of one trailer coach or camping party. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.011292) 
16.08.490 - Lot, reversed corner. 
    "Reversed corner lot" means a corner lot which rears upon the side of another lot, whether or not across an alley. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.011294) 
16.08.495 - Lot, through. 
    "Through lot" means a lot having frontage on two parallel or approximately parallel streets. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.011296) 
16.08.500 - Lot width. 
    Lot width. The following methods which yields the smallest dimension shall be chosen to measure lot width: (1) the distance measured at the building setback line (BSL) along a line or arc which is parallel or concentric to the right-of-way; or (2) the average horizontal distance between the side lot lines measured at right angles to the lot depth. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.011282) 
16.08.505 - Maintained public street. 
    "Maintained public street" means any roadway maintained by a public agency for public use. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.011305) 
16.08.510 - Manufactured home. 
    "Manufactured home" means a dwelling unit fabricated in an off-site manufacturing facility for installation or assembly at the building site that has been built in compliance with the Federal Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards and bears certification of said compliance. 
(Ord. 84 § 5(A), 1990) 
16.08.513 - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2017-15 , § 4(Exh. A), adopted December 5, 2017, repealed § 16.08.513, which pertained to medical marijuana dispensary and derived from Ord. No. 2005-12, § 4, 11-16-05. 
16.08.515 - Minimum parcel size. 
    "Minimum parcel size" means the smallest unit of land permitted through subdivision within a specific land use designation, as outlined in the municipal code or an adopted community plan. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.011326) 
16.08.520 - Mining and reclamation plan. 
    "Mining and reclamation plan" means a plan required by the city for all surface mining operations. The plan requires measures to be taken which provide for reclamation of mined lands to a usable condition that is readily adaptable for alternate land uses and creates no danger to public health or safety. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.011330) 
16.08.525 - Mining waste. 
    "Mining waste" means and includes the residual of soil, rock, mineral, liquid, vegetation, equipment, machines, tools, or other materials or property directly resulting from, or displaced by, surface mining operations. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.011334) 
16.08.527 - Mitigation or mitigation measures. 
    "Mitigation" of environmental effect may include avoiding an impact by not taking a certain action, limiting an impact, repairing or restoring the affected environment, reducing impacts by preservation and maintenance operations during the life of the project, and compensating for an impact by replacing or providing substitute resources or environments. 
(Ord. 2011-04, § 3(Exh. A), 5-3-11) 
16.08.530 - Mobile home. 
    "Mobile home" means a transportable, factory-built home, designed to be used as a year-round residential dwelling and built prior to enactment of the Federal Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, which became effective June 15, 1976. 
(Ord. 84 § 5(B), 1990) 
16.08.532 - Mobile food vehicle. 
    "Mobile food vehicle" means any vehicle or facility that falls within the definition of a mobile food facility under the California Retail Food Code (Part 7 of Division 104 of the Health & Safety Code), upon which food is sold or distributed at retail. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01, § 3(Exh. A), 2-5-13) 
16.08.535 - Mobile home park. 
    "Mobile home park" means an area or tract of land designed as a single unit where spaces for two or more mobile homes used for human habitation are rented or leased on a monthly or greater basis, or owned separately. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.011358) 
16.08.537 - Money service business. 
    "Money service business" consists of a business whose primary function is to provide cash to patrons in exchange for personal and business checks and money orders and to perform similar financial transactions for a service fee or commission. This term also applies to a business that offers a short-term loan in which the borrower's car title, or other personal asset, is used as collateral. Money service businesses include, but are not limited to, payday loan, check cashing and car title loan businesses. "Money service business" does not include a state or federally chartered bank, savings association, credit union or industrial loan company. This term also does not apply to a retail seller engaged primarily in the business of selling consumer goods, including consumables, to retail buyers that cash checks or issues money orders for a minimum flat fee not exceeding two dollars ($2.00) per transaction as a service to its customer that is incidental to its main purpose or business. 
( Ord. No. 2017-10 , 3(Exh. A), 6-6-17) 
16.08.540 - Motel. 
    "Motel" means a building or group of two or more detached, semi-detached or attached buildings containing guest rooms for compensation on a daily basis. These establishments provide lodging and parking for automobile travelers and the rooms are usually accessible from an outdoor parking area. These establishments may include guest rooms with food preparation areas (kitchenettes) and are designed, intended or used primarily for the accommodation of automobile travelers. Included are lodging establishments designated as cabins, motor courts, and similar designations; not including those facilities defined as social care facilities. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.011366) 
16.08.542 - Negative declaration. 
    "Negative declaration" means a written statement by the lead agency which briefly presents reasons why a proposed project will not have a significant effect on the environment and therefore does not require the preparation of an EIR. 
(Ord. 2011-04, § 3(Exh. A), 5-3-11) 
16.08.543 - Net lot area. 
    "Net lot area" means the area of a parcel or lot, excluding any proposed public highways, streets or alleys or other public sites. 
(Ord. 2011-10, § 3(Exh. A), 8-16-11) 
16.08.545 - Noise contour. 
    "Noise contour" means a mapped line connecting points where the same sound pressure level prevails. Contours form bands of width emanating from a noise source, and approximate true ambient noise levels. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.011420) 
16.08.550 - Nonaccess. 
    "Nonaccess" means access rights that have been relinquished by appropriate dedication certificate and labeled on a recorded final map and/or parcel map. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.011425) 
16.08.555 - Nonconforming building. 
    "Nonconforming building" means any building, or portion thereof, which does not conform to the regulations of the municipal code, applicable community plan and/or specific plan and which lawfully existed at the time the regulations, or an amendment thereto, with which it does not conform became effective. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.011435) 
(Ord. No. 2010-09, § 3(Exh. A), 9-7-10) 
16.08.556 - Nonconforming structure. 
    "Nonconforming structure" means any structure or portion thereof, which does not conform to the regulations of the municipal code, applicable community plan and/or specific plan and which lawfully existed at the time the regulations, or an amendment thereto, with which it does not conform became effective. In Article IX, a nonconforming structure shall also refer to walls and fences that no longer comply with regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2010-09, § 3(Exh. A), 9-7-10) 
16.08.557 - Nonconforming use. 
    "Nonconforming use" means any use of building or land which does not conform to the regulations of the municipal code, applicable community plan and/or specific plan and which lawfully existed at the time the regulations, or an amendment thereto, with which it does not conform became effective. 
(Ord. No. 2010-09, § 3(Exh. A), 9-7-10) 
16.08.560 - Nonvehicular access. 
    "Nonvehicular access" means vehicular access rights to abutting lots have been relinquished by appropriate dedication certificate and labeled on a recorded final map and/or parcel map. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.011430) 
16.08.565 - On-site detention. 
    "On-site detention" means temporary storage of runoff on the site. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.011510) 
16.08.570 - On-site retention. 
    "On-site retention" means the permanent holding of runoff on the site through percolation to the ground. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.011515) 
16.08.575 - Open space. 
    "Open space" means land where basic natural values have been retained. Open space can include wilderness areas, a small park in the middle of a city, pastures, forested areas, agricultural groves, vineyards, golf courses, flood washes, etc. The function of open space may differ, depending upon the location. It may have a protective function, as in the case of open space in flood plain areas, where it serves to protect health and safety. It can have a structural or buffer function to space and separate conflicting land uses. It may serve a recreational function, or a scenic function to provide aesthetic views of forests or mountains. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.011520) 
16.08.580 - Open space, common. 
    "Common open space" means open space within a single unified development owned, designed and set aside for all occupants of the development or by occupants of a designated portion of the development. Common open space is not dedicated to the public and is owned and maintained by a private organization made up of the open space users. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.011525) 
16.08.585 - Open space, private. 
    "Private open space" means open space directly adjoining the living areas of dwelling units, which is intended for all private enjoyment of the residents of the dwelling unit. Private open space shall in some manner be defined such that its boundaries are evident. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.011530) 
16.08.590 - Outdoor advertising. 
    "Outdoor advertising" means a structure, of any kind or character, erected or maintained for outdoor advertising purposes, upon which any poster, bill, printing, painting or other advertisement of any kind whatsoever may be placed, including statuary, for advertising purposes. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.011545) 
16.08.595 - Overburden. 
    "Overburden" means soil, rock, or other materials that lie above a natural mineral deposit or in between deposits, before or after their removal by surface mining operations. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.011555) 
16.08.600 - Owner. 
    "Owner" means a person or persons shown by the most current legally prepared document that has been recorded by the county recorder's office that transfers, grants or imports total or partial ownership of a parcel. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.011570) 
16.08.605 - Parcel. 
    "Parcel" means any real property described or created by map or deed. "Parcel" shall also refer to a legally defined lot, or contiguous group of lots in single ownership or under single control, and considered a unit for purposes of development. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.011605) 
16.08.610 - Parcel map. 
    "Parcel map" means parcel map as defined in California Government Code, Title 7, Division 2, Chapter 2, Article 3. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.011610) 
16.08.615 - Parcel, original. 
    "Parcel, original" means any improved or unimproved land shown on the latest county equalized assessment roll as a unit or contiguous units. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.011613) 
16.08.620 - Parcel, remainder. 
    "Remainder parcel" means that portion of an original lot or parcel which is not a part of the subdivision but, after recordation of the final or parcel map may be sold subject to the recordation of a certificate of compliance or a conditional certificate of compliance. The designated remainder shall not be counted as a parcel for the purposes of determining whether a parcel map or final map is required. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.011615) 
16.08.625 - Parcel, reserve. 
    "Reserve parcel" refers to that strip of land not less than one foot wide for the purpose of regulating access to part width and dead-end streets until such time as the streets may be completed or extended. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.011620) 
16.08.630 - Park and ride. 
    "Park and ride" means a voluntary system where participants drive to a central location in order to carpool or gain access to public transportation to another location. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.011625) 
16.08.635 - Parking area, public. 
    "Public parking area" means an open area, other than a street, used for the temporary parking of five or more automobiles and available for public use, whether free, for compensation or as an accommodation for clients, customers or employees. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.011630) 
16.08.640 - Parking space, automobile. 
    "Automobile parking space" means space within a public or private parking area or a building for the temporary parking or storage of one automobile. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.011635) 
16.08.642 - Pawnshop. 
    "Pawnshop" means any business whose primary operations include lending money on the security of pledged goods left in pawn, or in the business of purchasing tangible personal property to be left in pawn on the condition that it may be redeemed or repurchased by the seller for a fixed price within a fixed period of time. This definition shall also include businesses that purchase tangible personal property such as precious metals with the intent to resell items in bulk and/or deconstructed, establishments known variously as gold buying, gold exchange, etc., as determined by planning department. 
( Ord. No. 2017-10 , 3(Exh. A), 6-6-17) 
16.08.645 - Permittee. 
    "Permittee" means any person undertaking development activities upon a site pursuant to a permit granted by the city. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.011640) 
16.08.650 - Person. 
    "Person" means any individual, firm, copartnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, company, joint stock association, corporation, estate, trust, organization, business, business trust, public agency, school district, the state of California and its political subdivisions or instrumentalities, receiver, syndicate or any group or combination thereof, acting as a unit, including any trustee, receiver or assignee. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.011645) 
16.08.655 - Phase. 
    "Phase" means any contiguous part or portion of a single unified development project which is developed as a unit in the same time period. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.011650) 
16.08.660 - Premature development. 
    "Premature development" means the building or construction of new projects in areas usually outside city limit boundaries or in areas where necessary public facilities cannot economically be provided by city or county jurisdictions. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.011675) 
16.08.665 - Pre-zone. 
    "Pre-zone" means the process by which a city or county determines the actual future zoning of specified parcels of land before these parcels are annexed to the city. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.011670) 
16.08.670 - Property owners association. 
    "Property owners association" means a private organization composed of property owners of a single unified project which may own common property and shall be responsible for the maintenance and management of commonly owned property. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.011680) 
16.08.672 - Project. 
    "Project" means an activity which may cause either a direct physical change in the environment, or a reasonably foreseeable indirect physical change in the environment, and which is any of the following: 
1.  A private activity or undertaking that involves the issuance of a lease, permit, license, certificate, or other entitlement for use by one or more public agencies. 
2.  An activity directly undertaken by any public agency. 
3.  An activity undertaken by a person which is supported, in whole or in part, through contracts, grants, subsidies, loans, or other forms of assistance from one or more public agencies. 
(Ord. 2011-04, § 3(Exh. A), 5-3-11) 
16.08.675 - Public facilities. 
    "Public facilities" means any civic or service-oriented facility available to the general public such as schools, fire protection, water and sewering, rapid or mass transit routes, public golf courses, libraries, public health centers, etc. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.011685) 
16.08.680 - Public improvements. 
    "Public improvements" means and includes traffic controls, streets, roads, highways, freeways, bridges, over crossings, street interchanges, flood control or storm drain facilities, sewer facilities, water facilities, lighting facilities, and any other service and/or infrastructure improvement that is publicly maintained and operated by a public agency and/or quasi-public agency, excepting utilities and common carriers. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.011690) 
16.08.685 - Public way. 
    "Public way" means and includes street, highway, avenue, boulevard, parkway, road, lane, walk, alley, channel, viaduct, subway, tunnel, bridge, public casement, public right-of-way, and other ways in which a public agency has a proprietary right. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.011695) 
16.08.690 - Reclamation, mining. 
    "Reclamation, mining" means the combined process of land treatment that minimizes water degradation, air pollution, damage to aquatic or wildlife habitat, flooding, erosion, and other adverse effects from surface mining operations, including adverse surface effects incidental to underground mines. Mined lands are reclaimed to a usable condition which is readily adaptable for alternate land uses and create no danger to public health or safety. The process may extend to affected lands surrounding mined lands, and may require backfilling, grading, resoiling, revegetation, soil compaction, stabilization, or other measures. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.011805) 
16.08.695 - Recreational use. 
    "Recreational use" means public use of land for walking, hiking, skiing, riding, driving, picnicking, camping, swimming, boating, fishing, hunting or other outdoor games or sports for which land or facilities are provided for public participation. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.011810) 
16.08.700 - Recreational vehicle park (R.V.P.) 
    "Recreational vehicle park" means any area or tract of land, within an area where zoning allows recreational uses and where one or more lots are rented or leased or held out for rent, or lease to owners or users of recreational vehicles for temporary occupancy for increments of time not exceeding one week. Any such owner or user shall not occupy a recreational vehicle park for a period or periods of time which exceed a total of one month in any given twelve (12) consecutive months. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.011820) 
16.08.705 - Retail sale. 
    "Retail sale" means a sale of commodities or goods for personal household or farm consumption directly to the ultimate consumer. Such sales are normally in small quantities and may include the rendering of services incidental to and supportive of the sale of such merchandise. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.011840) 
16.08.707 - Responsible agency. 
    "Responsible agency" means a public agency, other than the lead agency, which has the responsibility for carrying out or approving a project. 
(Ord. 2011-04, § 3(Exh. A), 5-3-11) 
16.08.710 - Reversion to acreage. 
    "Reversion to acreage" refers to the process by which subdivided real property may be reverted to acreage pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 16.32. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.011860) 
16.08.712 - Roaming mobile food vehicle. 
    "Roaming mobile food vehicle" means a mobile food vehicle that travels throughout the city and the vehicle parks, stops or stands for food vending purposes. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01, § 3(Exh. A), 2-5-13) 
16.08.715 - Schools, elementary and high. 
    "Schools, elementary and high" means institutions of learning which offer instruction in the several branches of learning and study required to be taught in the public schools by the Education Code of the state of California. High schools include junior and senior. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.011904) 
16.08.720 - Screening. 
    "Screening" means the use of landscaping, earth, fences, walls, trees, shrubs or other materials for visual, background, noise or sun exposure control. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.011906) 
16.08.725 - Scrap metal processing facility. 
    "Scrap metal processing facility" means any establishment or place of business which is maintained, used, or operated solely for the processing and preparing of scrap metals for remelting by steel mills and foundries. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.011908) 
16.08.730 - Service station. 
    "Service station" means any building, structure, premises or other place used primarily for the retail sale and dispensing of motor fuels or oils, the retail sale of lubricants, tires, batteries and other automobile accessories, and the installation and servicing of such lubricants, tires, batteries and other automobile accessories. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.011916) 
16.08.735 - Setback, street. 
    See "Yard, front" and "Yard, side street" as defined in this chapter. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.011918) 
16.08.740 - Setback line, street. 
    "Street setback line" means a line which defines the depth of the required street setback, front yard, or side yard or side street where said yard or yards abut a street. Said street setback line shall be parallel or concentric with the street right-of-way line. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.011920) 
16.08.745 - Sewage disposal area. 
    "Sewage disposal area" means an area utilized for the holding, leaching and percolation of sewage wastes including an area that would provide a one hundred (100) percent expansion of such a leaching and percolation field for future use. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.011923) 
16.08.750 - Sexual activities, specified. 
    "Specified sexual activities" means and includes all the following: 
A.  The fondling or other erotic touching of the following human anatomical areas: genitals, pubic regions, buttocks, anuses or female breasts; 
B.  Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation, or sodomy; 
C.  Masturbation, actual or simulated; or 
D.  Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in subsections (A) through (C) of this section. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.011924) 
16.08.755 - Site. 
    "Site" means a parcel of land or contiguous parcels where land alterations, including grading, clearing or construction are performed or proposed. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.011956) 
16.08.760 - Site planning. 
    "Site planning" means a process to develop a plan that shows how a parcel of land may be developed, taking into consideration the natural and man-made characteristics of the parcel. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.011957) 
16.08.763 - Smoking lounge. 
    "Smoking lounge" means a business establishment that is dedicated, in whole or in part, to the smoking of tobacco or other legal substances and vaporizing, including, but not limited to, establishments known variously as cigar lounges, hookah cafes, hookah lounges, tobacco clubs, tobacco bars, vape, vapor cafes, vapor lounges, etc. (collectively referred to as "smoking lounge(s)"). 
( Ord. No. 2017-10 , 3(Exh. A), 6-6-17) 
16.08.764 - Smoke shop. 
    "Smoke shop" shall mean an establishment that either devotes more than ten percent of its total floor area to tobacco products, including paraphernalia, or devotes more than a two-foot depth by four-foot length section of a single shelf space for display for sale of tobacco paraphernalia. 
( Ord. No. 2017-10 , 3(Exh. A), 6-6-17) 
16.08.765 - Social care facility. 
    "Social care facility" means any facility in the general classification of boarding home for aged persons, boarding home for children, day care home for children, day nursery, nursing home or parent-child boarding home. These facilities consist of a building or group of buildings used or designed for the housing of sick, demented, injured, convalescent, infirm, or well, normal healthy persons, requiring licensing or certification by regulating government agencies. This definition shall not include use of a part of any single or multiple-family dwelling, hotel, apartment, or motel not ordinarily intended to be occupied by said persons unless so licensed or certified by the governmental agency concerned with the administration of each specific classification. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.011961) 
16.08.770 - Solar energy system. 
    "Solar energy system" means any solar collector solar device, or structural design feature of a building whose primary purpose is to provide for the collection, storage and distribution of solar energy for space heating or cooling; for domestic, recreational, therapeutic or service water heating; for the generation of electricity; for the production of process heat; and for the production of mechanical work. The term "solar energy system" shall include, but is not limited to, passive thermal systems, semipassive thermal systems, active thermal systems and photovoltaic systems. This category does not include parabolic mirror and devices of a similar nature. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.011965) 
16.08.771 - Solar or wind farms. 
    "Solar or wind farms" means a facility that is operated by a power producer and whose primary function is the provision of electricity to the electrical distribution system or transmission grid and produces electricity using windmills or solar energy systems. The number or area of the solar panels and windmills are in excess of the accessory use limitations allowed in Section 16.16.063. 
(Ord. No. 2012-07, § 3(Exh. A), 6-19-12) 
16.08.775 - Solid wastes. 
    "Solid wastes" means any variety of waste, including household garbage, metal, glass, shattered concrete, bricks from demolished houses, radioactive wastes and mining talus. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.011967) 
16.08.780 - Stable, private. 
    "Private stable" means a detached accessory building for the keeping of horses, burros or mules owned by the occupants of the premises and not for remuneration, hire or sale. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.011970) 
16.08.785 - Stable, public. 
    "Public stable" means a stable other than a private stable for keeping of horses, burros or mules. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.011971) 
16.08.790 - Story. 
    "Story" means that portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor immediately above it, or, if there is no floor above it, then the space between such floor and ceiling immediately above it. A basement, having more than one-half (1/2) of its height above the average level of the adjoining ground, shall be considered a story. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC §§ 83.010210 (part), 83.011977) 
16.08.795 - Stream. 
    "Stream" means any watercourse designated by a solid line or dash and three dots symbol on the largest scale of the United States Geological Survey map most recently published, or as indicated in the development permit when it has been field-determined that a watercourse either: 
A.  Supports fish at any time of the year; or 
B.  Has a significant water flow after any rainstorm; or 
C.  Has a well-defined channel. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.011980) 
16.08.800 - Street. 
    "Street" means any public or private thoroughfare with a width of twenty (20) feet or more, which affords a primary means of access to abutting property. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.011982) 
16.08.805 - Street line. 
    "Street line" means the boundary line between a street and abutting property. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.011983) 
16.08.810 - Structure. 
    "Structure" means anything constructed, built, or installed by man, an edifice or building of any kind, or any piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts joined together in some definite manner, including, but without limitation, buildings, towers, smokestack and overhead lines. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.011985) 
16.08.815 - Structure, approved. 
    "Approved structure" means a structure, paved area of impervious substance or sewage disposal area which has been approved by the building and safety department as an improvement of the site, and which complies with all codes, ordinances and regulations of the city of Hesperia. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; Ord. 75 § 2 (part), 1990; SBCC § 83.011987) 
16.08.820 - Structure height. 
    "Structure height" means the altitude, measured in feet, of a building from a line perpendicular to the main or ground floor to the apex of the roof. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.011989) 
16.08.825 - Substandard housing unit. 
    "Substandard housing unit" means a dwelling unit which is either dilapidated or unsafe, thus endangering the health or safety of the occupant, or does not have adequate plumbing or heating facilities. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.011996) 
16.08.830 - Substandard lot. 
    "Substandard lot" means a unit of land, the area, width or other characteristic which fails to meet the requirements of the land use district in which it is located. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.011995) 
16.08.835 - Surface mining operations. 
    "Surface mining operations" means all, or any part of, the process involved in the mining of minerals on mined lands by removing overburden and mining directly from the mineral deposits, open-pit mining of minerals naturally exposed, mining by the auger method, dredging and quarrying, or surface work incidental to an underground mine. Surface mining operations shall include, but are not limited to: 
A.  In-place distillation, retorting or leaching; 
B.  Production and disposal of mining waste; 
C.  Prospecting and exploratory activities. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.011997) 
16.08.840 - Tentative map. 
    "Tentative map" means a map made for the purpose of showing the design and improvements of the proposed subdivision, to include the street pattern, lot layout, easements which are to remain, and existing and proposed subdivision. The tentative map need not be based upon an accurate or detailed final survey of the property. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.012004) 
16.08.843 - Tobacco paraphernalia. 
    "Tobacco paraphernalia" shall mean any paraphernalia, equipment, device, or instrument that is primarily designed or manufactured for the smoking, chewing, absorbing, dissolving, inhaling, snorting, sniffing, or ingesting by any other means into the body of tobacco, tobacco products, or other controlled substances as defined in California Health and Safety Code Section 11054 et seq. Items or devices classified as tobacco paraphernalia include but are not limited to the following: pipes, punctured metal bowls, bongs, water bongs, electric pipes, e-cigarettes, e-cigarette juice, buzz bombs, vaporizers, hookahs, and devices for holding burning material. Lighters and matches shall be excluded from the definition of tobacco paraphernalia. 
( Ord. No. 2017-10 , 3(Exh. A), 6-6-17) 
16.08.844 - Tobacco product. 
    "Tobacco product" product shall mean any product in leaf, flake, plug, liquid, or any other form, containing nicotine derived from the tobacco plant, or otherwise derived, which is intended to enable human consumption of the tobacco or nicotine in the product, whether smoked, chewed, absorbed, dissolved, inhaled, snorted, sniffed, or ingested by any other means. For the purposes of this chapter, the term "tobacco product" excludes any product that has been specifically approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for sale as a tobacco/smoking cessation product or for other medical purposes, where such product is marketed and sold solely for such an approved purpose. 
( Ord. No. 2017-10 , 3(Exh. A), 6-6-17) 
16.08.845 - Trailer camp or park. 
    "Trailer camp or park" means any area or premises where space for house trailers is rented for compensation on a daily basis, or where free occupancy or camping is permitted to house trailer owners or users, but not including automobile or trailer sales lots on which unoccupied house trailers are parked for inspection and sales. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.012020) 
16.08.850 - Tree, native. 
    "Native tree" means trees which grow or live naturally in the city of Hesperia. This shall not be construed to mean fruit or nut-bearing trees, orchards, planted landscaping or commercial nursery stock. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.012048) 
16.08.855 - Tree removal. 
    "Tree removal" means to cut down, fell, push over, dig up, burn, poison or severely prune such that death of a tree is caused, or to destroy a tree in any manner. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.012052) 
16.08.860 - Truck terminal. 
    "Truck terminal" means a lot, lot area or parcel of land used, designed or maintained for the purpose of storing, parking, refueling, repairing, dispatching, servicing or keeping motor trucks and associated equipment, together with those facilities necessary to service, dispatch, store or maintain aforementioned vehicles, and their cargos and crews. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.012060) 
16.08.865 - Use. 
    "Use" means the purpose for which the land or a building is arranged, designed or intended, or for which either land or a building is or may be occupied or maintained. A primary, principal or main use is the use that occupies the majority of the subject land, a building, business production or activity as opposed to an accessory use (see "Accessory use"). 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.012130) 
16.08.870 - Vehicles, operative. 
    "Operative vehicles" means a new or used vehicle which is self-propelled or capable of being self-propelled with the installation of minor parts (e.g., batteries, tires, plugs). 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.012240) 
16.08.875 - Vehicular-access rights. 
    "Vehicular-access rights" means the right of access of owners or occupants of abutting lands to a public road or way, other than as pedestrians. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.012220) 
16.08.880 - Watercourse. 
    "Watercourse" means any natural or man-made channel where water is concentrated or collected from a tributary drainage area. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.012305) 
16.08.885 - Wild land. 
    "Wild land" means timber, range, watershed and brush lands not under cultivation and in which development is essentially nonexistent; usually rugged open space terrain. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.012307) 
16.08.889 - Wind farm. 
    "Wind farm" for purposes of this chapter shall be multiple windmills on a lot or parcel in which the windmills are not accessory to a primary use, with the intent to provide energy to a location other than the site that the windmills are located. 
(Ord. No. 2009-12, § 3(Exh. A), 2-16-10) 
16.08.890 - Windmill. 
    "Windmill" for purposes of this chapter shall include wind machines and similar accessory structures harnessing wind energy. 
(Ord. No. 2009-12, § 3(Exh. A), 2-16-10) 
16.08.895 - Yard. 
    "Yard" means an open space on a lot or parcel of land, other than a court, unobstructed and unoccupied from the ground upward. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.012510) 
16.08.900 - Yard, front. 
    "Front yard" means an area extending across the full width of the lot between the front lot line or the existing or future street right-of-way and a street setback line parallel thereto. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.012515) 
16.08.905 - Yard, interior side. 
    "Interior side yard" means an area extending from the required front yard or, where there is no required front yard, from the front lot line to the required rear yard or, where there is no required rear yard, to the rear lot line and from the interior side lot line to a setback line parallel thereto. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.012525) 
16.08.910 - Yard, rear. 
    "Rear yard" means an area extending across the full width of the lot between the rear lot line and a setback line parallel thereto. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.012530) 
16.08.915 - Yard, side street. 
    "Side street yard" means an area extending from the required front yard or, where there is no required front yard, form the front lot line to the rear lot line, and from the side street lot line, or the existing or future side street right-of-way (whichever is greater) to a street setback line parallel thereto. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.012520) 
16.08.920 - Zone district. 
    "Zone district" means a land use regulatory district adopted in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 16.04, establishing all rules and regulations necessary to guide development within the area affected by the district. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.012610) 
16.08.925 - Zone/land use district. 
    "Zone/land use district" means a term used to describe any applicable land use regulating district in the city. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.012620) 
16.08.930 - Diagram of lot and yard definitions. 
    The following are depictions of the lot and yard definitions: 

(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 83.012700) 
Chapter 16.12 - PERMITS AND PROCEDURES 
Sections: 
ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROCEDURES 

16.12.005 - Development review procedures. 
A.  Land use applications will be reviewed and approved in accordance with four basic procedures: 
1.  Noticed public hearing by the city council and/or planning commission, in which the reviewing authority hears public testimony for and against the land use proposal, reviews evidence and renders its decision; 
2.  Administrative review with notice, in which a posted and/or published notice is given to affected and interested parties, followed by a decision by the reviewing authority. The notice shall be designed to ensure that all interested parties are aware of the pending decision and are given a chance to comment before the reviewing authority renders its decision. The reviewing authority shall be the development review committee; 
3.  Administrative review without notice, used when land use decisions made by the reviewing authority are based upon standards that have been adopted by the city as law or policy, and the reviewing authority is allowed to render a decision without giving notice to surrounding property owners and other parties. The reviewing authority shall be the development review committee; 
4.  Tenant improvement review, used when a proposed land use is to be located within a facility that meets the city's development standards, or when the existing facility has been previously approved for the same or similar use. The reviewing authority is not required to give notice prior to rendering a decision. The reviewing authority shall be the building official, or his or her designee, with concurrence with other city agencies. 
B.  Review procedures for each application type are specified in Articles II through XII of this chapter. 
(Ord. 192 Exh. A (§ 83.01.010), 1994) 
(Ord. No. 2009-08, § 3(Exh. A), 10-20-09; Ord. No. 2012-14, § 3(Exh. A), 8-7-12) 
16.12.010 - Notification procedures. 
A.  Notice of Land Use Decisions. 
1.  General Provisions. 
a.  Notice shall be given by first class mail or delivery to all surrounding property owners for land use decisions using the public hearing or administrative review with notice procedures. 
b.  Notice shall be given by first class mail to any person who has filed a written request for such notice. 
c.  When the discretionary power of the reviewing authority permits decisions with limited notice, notice shall be given by first class mail or delivery to all contiguous property owners. 
d.  Notice shall be given in the case of a conversion of residential real property to a condominium project, community apartment project or stock cooperative, pursuant to Section 66427.1 of state law. 
e.  Notice may be given in such other manner as is deemed necessary or desirable by the reviewing authority. 
f.  The notice shall include all necessary information to give those receiving the notice a reasonable opportunity to evaluate the implications of the proposal and to participate in the decision-making process. The information shall include, but not be limited to, date, time, and place of the public hearing as well as a general description and location of the proposal. 
g.  "Surrounding property," for the purposes of this section, shall be defined as those properties which fall within a radius drawn from the nearest limits of the property that is the subject of the land use application, as follows: 
i.  Notice of the hearing shall be mailed or delivered at least ten days prior to the hearing to all owners of real property as shown on the latest equalized assessment roll within three hundred (300) feet of the real property that is the subject of the hearing. 
ii.  If the subject property is thirty-five (35) acres or less, all properties within a three hundred (300) foot radius shall be notified. For projects requiring a density transfer, density bonus, legislative act or an environmental impact report, all properties within a six hundred (600) foot radius shall be notified. 
iii.  If the subject property is greater than thirty-five (35) acres, all properties within a six hundred (600) foot radius shall be notified. For projects requiring a density transfer, density bonus, legislative act or an environmental impact report, all properties within a nine hundred (900) foot radius shall be notified. 
iv.  The reviewing authority may expand the surrounding property notice requirement if deemed necessary to include all properties potentially affected by the application. 
v.  "Contiguous property," for the purpose of this section, shall be defined as those properties which touch property lines of any parcel that is the subject of a land use decision, including those properties which touch said property lines of the subject parcel when projected across public or private rights-of-way or easements. 
    A one-eighth page display advertisement in a newspaper of general circulation may be substituted for individual property owner noticing, whenever the individual notice would require notification of one thousand (1,000) or more property owners. 
vi.  An ownership of surrounding and contiguous properties shall be determined from the latest equalized tax assessment role. 
2.  Public Hearing Notification. At least ten days before the meeting date of a project requiring a public hearing, the reviewing authority shall cause notice of the time and place of the public hearing on the project to be given in the following manner: 
a.  Notice shall be published once in a newspaper of general circulation for land use approvals requiring a public hearing, if such a newspaper has been legally adjudicated for this purpose; or, 
b.  Notice shall be posted at least ten days prior to the public hearing in at least three public places pursuant to state law. 
c.  Supplemental Notice Requirements. Additional public notification beyond the boundaries specified in Section 16.12.010(A)(1)(g) may be required for a development application as determined by the reviewing authority in any one of the following circumstances: 
i.  The proposed development is a residential infill project with a higher intensity land use than that of the existing neighborhood; or, 
ii.  The proposed infill project requires a general plan land use amendment; or, 
iii.  The proposed infill project requires an EIR; or, 
    As deemed to be necessary and desirable by the reviewing authority, based on the nature of the proposed project. For large projects, the reviewing authority may determine that additional noticing is necessary. 
iv.  In determining the boundaries of an expanded notification area, the following criteria shall be used: 
(A)  The expanded area may be directly affected by the proposed project due to proposed or established circulation and drainage pattern, access, view, grading, or other similar considerations, or 
(B)  The expanded area is an integral part of the affected neighborhood or subdivision. 
v.  If it is determined upon initial submittal that supplemental notification is necessary, the applicant shall be notified within thirty (30) days as part of the city's notice of complete application, of the expanded notification area to be included in the mailings. 
d.  Other Notice Requirements. Notices required by this section shall be in addition to any other or different notice required by other provisions of this code or by state law, provided, however, that nothing therein shall require separate notices to be given if the same notice will satisfy the requirements of this section and any other applicable section of this code or state law. 
e.  Any public hearing may be continued to a specific date from time to time by the reviewing authority, subject to limitations provided by law; and in such case no further notice need be given. 
(Ord. 213 Exh. A (part), 1995; Ord. 192 Exh. A (§ 83.01.020), 1994) 
(Ord. No. 2012-14, § 3(Exh. A), 8-7-12) 
16.12.015 - Preapplication conference. 
A.  The planning department may require that the applicant submit materials for and attend a preapplication conference to review the development proposal prior to acceptance of the application. The purpose of this conference is to acquaint the city with the intentions of the applicant, to acquaint the applicant with any applicable policies and procedures, to identify city ordinances and improvement standards applicable to the proposal, and to identify any significant development opportunities and/or constraints on the site. 
B.  The preapplication conference shall include an exchange of information concerning the whole of the area intended by the applicant to be developed, even if such development is intended to proceed by stages, whether or not applications for review of the entire project area are made at the time of the initial application. 
C.  Application for a preapplication conference shall be made at planning department, and shall be accompanied by the appropriate fee as adopted by the city council. The applicant shall submit the required number of copies of a conceptual plan, showing proposed land use types, areas and locations. The conceptual plan shall include sufficient information about the proposal to permit evaluation of the development issues identified in this section. 
D.  The preapplication conference shall address, but not be limited to, the following subject matter: 
1.  Subject Parcel. Its size, location, dimensions and area; any existing improvements or development on-site; existing general plan land use designations; 
2.  Proposed Development Project. Uses proposed for the site; type and placement of buildings and other improvements; 
3.  Characteristics of the Project Site and Vicinity. Existing and proposed land use designations and development on adjacent parcels; any identified natural or man-made hazards on-site or in vicinity; 
4.  Proposed Circulation Improvements, Both On and Off-site. Access points and vehicular access ways, parking, loading, and pedestrian circulation; 
5.  Public Improvements. Type, location and sizes of public facilities likely to be required to support the proposal, including utilities, sewer, water and drainage, along with a plan for providing and maintaining improvements; 
6.  Location, amount, type and method of maintenance for proposed open space and landscaped areas; 
7.  Community Service Impacts. Estimated impacts on public services, including schools, parks, fire and police protection, and solid waste disposal. 
(Ord. 192 Exh. A (§ 83.01.030), 1994) 
16.12.020 - Application procedures. 
A.  Application forms for all land use decisions shall be filed with the planning division. Each application for a land use decision shall be accompanied by such information and materials deemed necessary by the reviewing authority to render the requested land use decision. A uniform fee, as established by the city council, shall be paid to the city upon filing of each application. Any application made under the provisions of the development code may be initiated by the city council or by any interested party unless otherwise indicated in this chapter. 
B.  All land use decisions subject to the California Environmental Quality Act shall be reviewed by the planning division in accordance with Article XIII of this chapter. 
C.  When more than one land use decision is required for a single project, all applications shall be filed concurrently, unless separate filings are authorized by the reviewing authority. 
D.  The planning division shall prepare written guidelines that set forth detailed procedures for the review of each application type and which outline the information and materials required for each application. Any application for a land use decision that does not meet the requirements set forth in the applicable guidelines may be rejected by the reviewing authority. 
(Ord. 192 Exh. A (§ 83.01.040), 1994) 
(Ord. No. 2012-14, § 3(Exh. A), 8-7-12) 
16.12.025 - Time limitations for application acceptance. 
    The following time limits are established for reviewing land use applications as complete. 
A.  Pursuant to Government Code Section 65943, not later than thirty (30) days after the city has received an application for a development project, it shall determine whether the submitted application materials are complete, and shall transmit such determination to the applicant. Upon receipt of any resubmittal, a new thirty-day time period shall begin during which the city shall determine the completeness of the application. If the application together with submitted materials are determined not to be complete, the applicant may appeal the decision to require additional information to the planning commission, as provided for in Section 16.12.055(A)(2) of this article. If the final written determination on the appeal is not made within sixty (60) days, the application as well as the submitted materials shall be deemed complete. 
B.  The reviewing authority and the applicant may mutually agree to a reasonable extension of these time limits. 
(Ord. 192 Exh. A (§ 83.01.050), 1994) 
(Ord. No. 2012-14, § 3(Exh. A), 8-7-12) 
16.12.030 - Denial of incomplete applications. 
A.  In the event that the application is lacking as shown below and it is not provided by the applicant within the time limits specified by Section 16.12.025 of this article, the city may continue or deny a permit or entitlement for a development project to allow time to obtain the needed information. Information whose absence would constitute a reason for such a denial includes: 
1.  Information which is necessary to prepare a legally adequate environmental document; 
2.  Information without which the city's decision to approve a project would not be supported by substantial evidence. 
B.  The city may deny an application for the above reasons. The reviewing authority may choose to deny the project without prejudice, allowing the applicant the right to reapply for the same permit within a year. 
(Ord. 192 Exh. A (§ 83.01.060), 1994) 
(Ord. No. 2012-14, § 3(Exh. A), 8-7-12) 
16.12.035 - Time limits for rendering land use decisions. 
    The following time limits are established for rendering land use decisions: 
A.  Except for legislative acts of the city council, the reviewing authority shall render its decision on a land use application within the following time limits, or the application shall be deemed approved: 
1.  If a negative declaration is prepared, or if the project is exempt pursuant to the Public Resources Code, the project shall be approved or disapproved within six months from the date on which an application requesting approval of the project has been received and accepted as complete by the reviewing authority, except as provided in Section 16.12.025 of this article. 
2.  If an environmental impact report (EIR) is prepared, the project shall be approved or disapproved within one year from the date that the project has been accepted as complete by the reviewing authority, except as provided in Section 16.12.025. 
3.  Should compelling circumstances justify additional time beyond one hundred five (105) days to complete a negative declaration or beyond one year to complete and certify an environmental impact report, then a reasonable extension of time may be granted by the reviewing authority if the project applicant requests or consents to such an extension, subject to the following provisions: 
a.  In the case of an environmental impact report, the planning agency shall approve or disapprove the project within forty-five (45) days after certification of the environmental impact report for a tentative map or parcel map; and ninety (90) days after the certification of the environmental impact report for all other types of development projects. 
b.  In the case of a negative declaration, a reasonable extension of time shall not exceed six months and an additional ninety (90) days for all development projects; provided however, subdivisions shall be subject to the time limits specified in the development code, or other applicable adopted codes or ordinances, unless a waiver has been obtained in accordance with this section to allow for such an extension of time. 
4.  Pursuant to Section 66452.1 of the Subdivision Map Act, the planning agency shall approve, conditionally approve, extend or disapprove a tentative map or minor subdivision plot plan or a proposed subdivision within fifty (50) days from completion of the negative declaration or completion and certification of an environmental impact report except as otherwise provided by such Act. These time limits or any other time limits for reporting and acting on maps as specified in the development code or any other applicable adopted code, policy or ordinance, may be extended by mutual consent of the subdivider and the reviewing authority. Upon consent of the subdivider, a waiver of any of these time limits may be obtained for the purpose of permitting concurrent processing of related land use applications, or an environmental review on the same development project or subdivision. 
B.  When a land use application decision is contingent on approval of another application or ordinance which requires legislative action, such as a general plan amendment, zone change, or ordinance, the time limits specified by this section for acting on such a land use application shall commence on the effective date of the last such legislative action on which that land use application is contingent 
(Ord. 192 Exh. A (§ 83.01.070), 1994) 
(Ord. No. 2012-14, § 3(Exh. A), 8-7-12) 
16.12.040 - Decisions by the reviewing authority. 
A.  A reviewing authority may refer a request for a land use decision to the reviewing authority designated as the appeal body for that type of land use application. In such cases, a statement containing the reasons for referring the land use decision shall be prepared by the referring authority. 
B.  All land use decisions which require a legislative act prior to their approval or denial shall be referred to the city council for final action. 
C.  Prior to rendering a land use decision; the reviewing authority shall address each of the findings that apply to the application type as described in Articles II through XII of this chapter. Evidence or testimony shall be given to substantiate each of the required findings for the decision, and shall be specifically cited in the action taken by the reviewing authority. 
D.  A land use application which has been denied by the development review committee (DRC), planning commission and/or city council cannot be resubmitted to the city within one year from the decision date. 
E.  The DRC, planning commission and/or city council may take an action of denial without prejudice on a land use application. Such action allows the applicant to reapply for the same permit within one year of the decision date. The city council shall have the authority to waive reapplication fees when such action is taken; however, if reapplication is not accomplished within one year of the decision date, the application will be subject to full application fees. 
(Ord. 192 Exh. A (§ 83.01.080), 1994) 
(Ord. No. 2012-14, § 3(Exh. A), 8-7-12) 
16.12.045 - Effective date of land use decisions. 
    Unless appealed, land use application decisions become effective as follows: 
A.  Unless adopted on an urgency basis, land use ordinances shall become effective thirty (30) days after the second reading of the ordinance. 
B.  Land use decisions made at a public hearing shall be effective on the eleventh day after the decision date, except when the tenth such day is not a city business day. In such instances, the land use decision shall become effective on the second consecutive city business day following such tenth day. 
C.  Land use decisions not made at a public hearing by a reviewing authority become effective on the eleventh day after the written notice of the land use decision has been deposited in the U.S. mail, except when the tenth such day is not a city business day. In such instances, the land use decision shall become effective on the second consecutive city business day following such tenth day. 
D.  Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, land use application decisions which are made contingent on the approval of another application or ordinance requiring legislative action, such as a general plan amendment, zone change, or ordinance, shall become effective on the date when the approval of the last such application on which they are subject becomes effective. 
(Ord. 192 Exh. A (§ 83.01.090), 1994) 
(Ord. No. 2012-14, § 3(Exh. A), 8-7-12) 
16.12.050 - Conditions of approval. 
A.  In approving an application for a land use decision, the reviewing authority may establish reasonable conditions to its approval necessary to protect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
B.  Minor modifications of the conditions of approval for a development project may be approved by the reviewing authority through the administrative review without notice procedure pursuant to Section 16.12.005. However, should the reviewing authority determine that the modification(s) may have significant impacts on the project site or surrounding properties, then the requested modification(s) may be referred back to the reviewing authority who required the condition(s). The review procedures for the requested modification(s) shall be those which were applicable to the project when originally reviewed. 
(Ord. 192 Exh. A (§ 83.01.100), 1994) 
(Ord. No. 2012-14, § 3(Exh. A), 8-7-12) 
16.12.055 - Appeal procedures. 
A.  Prior to its effective date, any land use decision made by a reviewing authority other than the city council may be appealed by the applicant or other affected party, as follows: 
1.  "Affected party" includes any resident or business interest, the city, including its elected or appointed officials, and responsible or trustee agencies as defined in the California Environmental Quality Act. 
2.  The planning commission shall consider appeals regarding land use decisions made by the DRC, including the decision to require preparation of an environmental impact report (EIR). 
3.  The planning commission may refer consideration of an appeal to the city council, except for those decisions involving only a minor exception, a determination as to the completeness of an application, or the requirement for preparation of an environmental impact report. In these instances, the planning commission decision shall be the final and conclusive decision. 
4.  The city council shall consider appeals regarding land use decisions made by the planning commission, except as specified above. 
B.  Application for an appeal of a land use decision shall be made upon forms supplied by the reviewing authority to which the appeal is being made. Applications for appeals shall be accompanied by a written statement of the grounds upon which the appeal is based. A uniform fee, as established by the city council, shall be paid to the city upon the filing of each appeal. 
C.  An appeal of a land use decision must be filed prior to the date on which such land use decision becomes effective, as specified in Section 16.12.045. A properly filed application for appeal stays proceedings in the matter appealed until a decision is rendered on the appeal. 
D.  Within thirty (30) days of the acceptance of an application for an appeal of a land use decision, the reviewing authority shall set the matter for hearing and shall give notice of the date, time and place of the hearing to the appellant, the applicant, and to any other party who has requested in writing to be so notified. In addition, notice shall also be given in the same manner as notice was given for the land use decision being appealed. 
E.  Upon hearing the appeal, the appeal body shall consider the record and such additional evidence as may be offered, and may affirm, reverse or modify, in whole or in part, the order, requirements, decision, determination, interpretation or ruling appealed from, or make and substitute such other or additional decision or determination as it may find warranted under the provisions of the development code, or other applicable adopted city code, ordinance, resolution or standards. The appeal body is subject to all of the criteria and findings requirements imposed upon the original decision maker. The appropriate authority shall forthwith transmit a copy of the decision to the applicant, and the appellant. 
(Ord. 2003-05 § 4 (part), 2003; Ord. 192 Exh. A (§ 83.01.110), 1994) 
(Ord. No. 2012-14, § 3(Exh. A), 8-7-12) 
16.12.060 - Approval period for land use decisions. 
A.  Any land use decision made in accordance with the provisions of this title shall be subject to the following time limitations: 
B.  Unless substantial construction in reliance upon building permits has occurred or division of land authorized by the land use decision has taken place or been recorded within the time specified for each land use application type within this title, the land use decision shall become null and void. 
C.  Where circumstances warrant, the development review committee may grant extensions of time for a period of time not to exceed twelve (12) months each. The development review committee shall consider each extension of time on its own merits and may amend the conditions as necessary to bring the project into compliance with the development standards in effect at the time of review of the extension. The development review committee may refer such request for extension to the planning commission for action. 
D.  Public projects shall not be subject to a time limitation unless specific time limits are included within conditions placed upon the project's approval. When time limits are placed within the conditional approval of a public project, extensions of time may be granted whenever warranted; provided, no single action is taken to grant an extension greater than twelve (12) months. 
E.  All entitlements subject to this section effective between January 1, 2007 and the effective date of approval of this amendment shall be granted one automatic twelve-month extension of time. 
(Ord. 192 Exh. A (§ 83.01.120), 1994) 
(Ord. No. 2009-08, § 3(Exh. A), 10-20-09; Ord. No. 2012-14, § 3(Exh. A), 8-7-12) 
16.12.065 - Issuance of building permits. 
A.  General Provisions. 
1.  Except as specified in the Uniform Administrative Code and the Uniform Building Code, it is unlawful to construct, erect, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert, or demolish any building or structure, unless a building permit for each building or structure has first been obtained from the department of building and safety for such work. 
2.  Each application for a building permit shall be made on a printed form to be obtained at the building division, and shall be accompanied by accurate information and dimensions as to the size and location of the lot; the size and location of the buildings on the lot, the dimensions of all yards and open spaces; and such other information as may be necessary for the enforcement of these regulations. Where complete and accurate information is not readily available from existing records, the building division may require the applicant to furnish a survey of the lot prepared by a licensed surveyor. The original of such application shall be retained by the building division. 
3.  A building permit shall not be issued for the construction or use of any structure or part thereof, or for the use of any land which is not in accordance with the provisions of the development code, or other applicable governmental entities adopted codes, ordinances, resolutions or standards. The use shall also be in conformity with the approved entitlement, where required by this chapter. Any permit issued contrary to the provisions of this chapter, or other applicable governmental adopted codes, ordinances, resolutions or standards, or not in conformity with approved land use action shall be void and of no effect. 
4.  A building permit shall not be issued where the structure or structures to be erected will have the effect of depriving other persons of the use of their property, or will have the effect of invalidating the general plan. 
5.  A building permit shall not be issued for a residential building or structure on a lot which does not have a minimum frontage of forty (40) feet unless otherwise approved in a planned development or equivalent development plan, with access on a dedicated street or way acceptable to the city engineer. 
a.  Acceptable access shall include a public thoroughfare or right-of-way which is dedicated, deeded or condemned for use as a principal means of access to abutting property, and which is constructed to acceptable standards for the purpose of carrying through traffic; any exceptions to these requirements must be approved by the city engineer. 
b.  Where substandard alleys are located at the rear or sides of property, such alleys shall be used primarily for service functions, including but not limited to trash collection, utility service and fire access; alleys shall not be intended or used for conveyance of through traffic, required parking, or for primary access. 
c.  Alleys which conform to city standards may be allowed for secondary access. 
d.  Any existing alleys must conform to standards contained herein in order to be approved for public use of access. 
e.  Paving for alleyways shall meet specifications of the public works department. 
f.  Minimum alley right-of-way width shall be twenty (20) feet, and dedication to the city shall be required. 
B.  Flood Hazard. The reviewing authority is authorized and shall have the duty to refuse the issuance of a building permit or permits to any applicant whose lot is geographically located in such a manner as to constitute a flood hazard either to the proposed structure of the applicant or to any other property. Such a decision by the reviewing authority may be appealed to the planning commission, pursuant to Section 16.12.055. 
(Ord. 192 Exh. A (§ 83.01.130), 1994) 
(Ord. No. 2012-14, § 3(Exh. A), 8-7-12) 
16.12.070 - Certificate of occupancy. 
A.  No building or structure shall be used or occupied, and no change in the existing occupancy classification of a building or structure, or portion thereof, shall be made until the reviewing authority has issued a certificate of occupancy thereof as provided for under the development code and other applicable codes and ordinances adopted or amended by the city and its subsidiary districts. 
B.  New Buildings. The reviewing authority may refer any application for a certificate of occupancy to the planning commission for their review and approval. 
(Ord. 192 Exh. A (§ 83.01.140), 1994) 
(Ord. No. 2012-14, § 3(Exh. A), 8-7-12) 
16.12.075 - Revocation of land use approvals. 
A.  A land use decision may be modified or revoked by the planning commission for the following reasons: 
1.  Violation of applicable provisions of the development code, or other applicable city codes, resolutions, ordinances or standards; 
2.  Failure to comply with the conditions of approval placed upon the project; 
3.  Approval obtained by fraud. 
B.  Procedure. 
1.  After setting a date for public hearing, the reviewing authority shall notify the applicant and owners of the project in question. Such notice shall be sent by mail and shall state that the commission will be reviewing the project for possible modification or revocation. It shall also state the date, time and place of hearing. The public hearing shall be conducted and notice given in accordance with Section 16.12.005(A). 
2.  The reviewing authority shall fully investigate the evidence and prepare a report for the commission's consideration. Upon conclusion of the public hearing, the commission shall render a decision to do one of the following measures: 
a.  Find that the use is being conducted in an appropriate manner and that no action to modify or revoke is necessary; or 
b.  Find that the use is not being conducted in an appropriate manner and that modifications to conditions are necessary; or, 
c.  Find that the use is not being conducted in an appropriate manner and that modifications are not available to mitigate the impacts and therefore revokes the permit which requires the operation to cease and desist in the time allotted by the commission. 
3.  If the planning commission either modifies or revokes a use, then it shall state specific reasons for such action within the resolution. 
C.  New Applications Following Denial or Revocation. Following the denial or revocation of a land use application, an application for the same or substantially the same use of the same or substantially the same site shall not be filed within one year of the date of denial or revocation. 
D.  Any building permits issued for a project on which the approved land use decision has been revoked shall be null and void. 
(Ord. 192 Exh. A (§ 83.01.150), 1994) 
(Ord. No. 2012-14, § 3(Exh. A), 8-7-12) 
16.12.076 - Development impact fees/connection charges. 
    In accordance with Government Code Section 66018, the city council shall establish development impact fees and connection charges by resolution at a regularly scheduled meeting where a public hearing is held for the consideration of said fees/charges. 
(Ord. 2001-11 § 3, 2001) 
(Ord. No. 2012-14, § 3(Exh. A), 8-7-12) 
ARTICLE II. - SITE PLANS AND REVISED SITE PLANS 

16.12.080 - Purpose of provisions. 
    The purpose of the land use application review process is to assist the property owner in obtaining the best utilization of the property in accordance with sound land use planning and design criteria, and to enable the planning agency to ensure that the proposed development is in conformance with the intent and provisions of the general plan and all applicable city regulations and policies. 
(Ord. 192 Exh. A (§ 83.02.010), 1994) 
(Ord. No. 2012-14, § 3(Exh. A), 8-7-12) 
16.12.085 - Approval required. 
A.  No person shall undertake, conduct or use, or cause to be undertaken, conducted or used, any development projects which require an approved land use application, without having first complied with the provisions of this article. 
    The following table summarizes the type of uses and their approval requirements. 
Ministerial Approval Administrative Review
with Notice Planning Commission
Hearing City Council
Hearing Interior Remodels Appeals of Ministerial
Approvals Appeals of DRC
Approvals Appeals of PC
Approvals Alterations to building exteriors not resulting in significant changes of use, drainage patterns, parking, traffic, easements, or greater impacts on infrastructure and public services, as determined by the reviewing authority with concurrence from the city agencies Additions to existing multiple residential, commercial or industrial structures which will result in an increase in total floor area of 25 percent or greater or expansion of 1,500 square feet or greater Retail Commercial, Industrial, Office or administrative/professional and/or wholesale and service commercial uses subject to a Conditional Use Permit. Alcohol Conditional Use Permits Development Code Amendments Repair and maintenance of structures or parking areas, unless constrained by existing waste disposal systems and existing drainage patterns and/or easements Revisions to previously approved site plans comprising of more than 25 percent expansion to the building area or developed area of the site Public Facility Reviews Specific Plan Amendments Replacement and or repair of a structure partially destroyed by fire, flood or other natural occurrence, when the repair is consistent with the design, use and intensity of the original structure and with the zoning and general plan Intensification of land use and/or establishment of new or different pattern of land uses as determined by the reviewing authority. Recommendation on Development Code Amendments General Plan Amendments Expansions to multiple residential, commercial or industrial buildings or structures less than 25 percent in total floor area or less than 1,500 square feet whichever is greater Projects that have been recommended for administrative review Specific Plan Amendments Development Agreements/Amendments Revisions to previously approved land use comprising less that 25 percent expansion to the building or developed area of the site Tentative Parcel Maps Development Agreements Density Bonus Agreements Single-family residential development 1-4 dwelling units or fewer Density Bonus Agreements Planned Developments Multiple-family dwelling with two units (duplex) Three or more dwelling units on a single parcel with at least one multiple-family dwelling Density Bonus Agreements Planned Developments Lot line adjustments Any project requiring an EIR Lot mergers Tentative Tracts Certificate of Corrections Certificate of Compliance  
(Ord. 192 Exh. A (§ 83.02.020), 1994) 
(Ord. No. 2012-14, § 3(Exh. A), 8-7-12; Ord. No. 2017-11 , § 3(Exh. A), 6-20-17) 
16.12.090 - Application procedure. 
A.  Application Submission. 
1.  The project applicant must be the property owner or an authorized agent of the property owner. 
2.  The applicant shall prepare a comprehensive site plan and complete the required application forms supplied by the city. The applicant shall file said plans and application with the planning department, along with the required fee as adopted by the city council. Information requested on the application form and other processing requirements, including but not limited to number of copies requested, maps, graphics or informational reports and studies, shall be determined by the planning division. 
3.  The applicant may be required to clarify, correct or supply additional information before the application is deemed complete. The department shall not accept a site plan for filing if the application does not conform to the standards as prescribed in this section. Upon making the determination that the application conforms to these standards, the department will notify the applicant in writing that the application has been accepted pursuant to Section 16.12.025 of this division 
B.  Site Plan. The application shall be accompanied by the required number of site plan maps, drawn at a minimum scale of one inch equals twenty (20) feet, or other scale approved by the reviewing authority, on standard sheets of twenty-four (24) inches by thirty-six (36) inches. The site plans shall indicate the location of all known and proposed easements and improvements; structures and improvements proposed to be demolished, relocated, or constructed; and all other pertinent information which can be graphically depicted on the plan, as specified in the checklist provided by the planning division. 
C.  Drawings and Elevations. Elevations showing the general appearance and features of proposed structures shall be submitted as required on the application checklist. 
    When required by the planning division, drawings and elevations shall be submitted in addition to those accompanying the site plan, which shall include but not be limited to the following: 
1.  Roof overhangs and any other parts of the structures that protrude from the building surfaces; 
2.  Uses of each room or floor plans if required. 
3.  A color set of exterior building elevations and a materials board or a color rendering. 
(Ord. 192 Exh. A (§ 83.02.030), 1994) 
(Ord. No. 2012-14, § 3(Exh. A), 8-7-12) 
16.12.095 - Approval requirements. 
A.  Site plan approval shall apply only to the property for which the application was made, and shall apply to that property as long as the use for which approval was granted is in effect, regardless of changes in ownership. 
B.  Site plan approval shall be granted for a period not to exceed thirty-six (36) months from the effective date of the decision; extensions of time to complete compliance with conditions of approval may be granted where warranted, pursuant to Section 16.12.060. 
C.  The following requirements may be placed upon the development project by the reviewing authority as conditions of approval: 
1.  Dedications and/or easements for streets, alleys, drainage, public utilities, recreational trails, flood control, and such other rights-of-way as may be determined essential to the orderly development of the site and abutting properties; 
2.  On and off-site improvements, including but not limited to the following: 
a.  Grading, drainage and drainage structures necessary to protect the public safety, 
b.  Curbs and gutters, street pavement, sidewalks, and traffic control devices; all road improvements are to be constructed pursuant to plans and specifications of the public works department of the city, 
c.  Adequate water system and fire protection equipment, pursuant to plans and specifications of the public works department and the Hesperia Fire Protection District (H.F.P.D.), 
d.  Sanitary sewer facilities and connections, 
e.  Services from public utilities where provided, 
f.  Street trees, 
g.  Landscaping, walls and/or fences, trash enclosures, and lighting fixtures, 
h.  Street lights and street name signs, 
i.  In addition to the above requirements, the reviewing authority shall require such additional improvements and facilities as determined necessary for the proper development of the site and area. 
(Ord. 192 Exh. A (§ 83.02.040), 1994) 
(Ord. No. 2009-08, § 3(Exh. A), 10-20-09; Ord. No. 2012-14, § 3(Exh. A), 8-7-12) 
16.12.100 - Determination by the approval authority. 
    The approval authority will determine the merits of the proposed site plan, and its compliance with the principles, standards, policies and goals of the general plan, development code and other applicable codes and ordinances adopted by the city and its subsidiary districts, in order to protect the public health, safety and general welfare. Approval shall be based upon the following minimum criteria, which shall also constitute the findings to be made by the approval authority in approving or denying a site plan: 
A.  The site for the proposed use is adequate in size and shape to accommodate all yards, open spaces, setbacks, walls and fences, parking areas, fire and building code considerations, and other features pertaining to the application; 
B.  The proposed use will not have a substantial adverse effect on abutting property or the permitted use thereof, and will not generate excessive noise, vibration, traffic, or other disturbances, nuisances or hazards; 
C.  The proposed use is consistent with the goals, policies, standards and maps of the development code, general plan, and other applicable codes and ordinances adopted by the city; 
D.  The site for the proposed use has adequate access, meaning that the site design incorporates street and highway limitations. 
(Ord. 192 Exh. A (§ 83.02.050), 1994) 
(Ord. No. 2012-14, § 3(Exh. A), 8-7-12) 
ARTICLE III. - CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS 

16.12.105 - Purpose of provisions. 
    The purpose of a conditional use permit is to allow certain uses which have the potential to pose a land use incompatibility but contribute to orderly growth and development of the city if properly integrated into the surroundings in which they are to be located. The conditional use permit process is intended to afford an opportunity for broad public review and evaluation of these requirements and characteristics, to provide adequate mitigation of any potentially adverse impacts, and to ensure that all site development regulations and performance standards are provided in accordance with the development code. 
(Ord. 192 Exh. A (§ 83.03.010), 1994) 
(Ord. No. 2012-14, § 3(Exh. A), 8-7-12) 
16.12.110 - General provisions. 
A.  No person shall undertake, conduct or use, or cause to be undertaken, conducted or used, any development project which requires approval of a conditional use permit, without having first complied with the provisions of this article. 
B.  Uses listed as "uses permitted subject to conditional use permit" may be permitted in said zones pursuant to the provisions of this title. 
C.  In granting any conditional use permit, the reviewing authority shall affix those conditions which it deems necessary in order to safeguard the public health, safety and general welfare of the area. 
D.  Any use existing on the effective date of this article which is listed as permitted subject to a conditional use permit shall be deemed a pre-existing conditional use. Such use may continue in accordance with Section 16.12.325; provided the use is operated and maintained in compliance with the conditions prescribed at the time of its establishment, if any. However, any expansion, alteration, or reconstruction of a building occupied by a pre-existing conditional use shall comply with Section 16.12.330 regulating nonconforming uses, until such time that a conditional use permit is granted as provided in this title. 
E.  The planning commission shall review requests for conditional use permits at a public hearing, pursuant to Section 16.12.010. The DRC may approve a revised conditional use permit through the administrative hearing with notice procedure. 
(Ord. 192 Exh. A (§ 83.03.020), 1994) 
(Ord. No. 2012-14, § 3(Exh. A), 8-7-12) 
16.12.115 - Application procedure. 
A.  Application Submittal. 
1.  The project applicant must be the property owner or an authorized agent of the property owner. 
2.  The applicant shall prepare a comprehensive site plan, floor plan and other information deemed necessary as well as complete the required application forms supplied by the city. The applicant shall file the plans and application with the planning division, along with the required fee as adopted by the city council. Information requested on the application form and other processing requirements, including but not limited to the number of copies requested, maps, graphics or informational reports and studies, shall be filed in accordance with Section 16.12.090. 
3.  The applicant may be required to clarify, correct or supply additional information before the application is determined by the department to be complete. The department shall not accept a conditional use permit for filing if the application does not conform to the standards as prescribed in this section. Upon making the determination that the application conforms to these standards, the department will notify the applicant in writing that the application has been accepted pursuant to Section 16.12.025 
B.  Site Plan. The application shall be accompanied by the required number of site plan maps, drawn at a minimum scale of one inch equals twenty (20) feet, or other scale approved by the planning department, on standard sheets of twenty-four (24) inches by thirty-six (36) inches. The site plans shall indicate the location of all known and proposed easements and improvements; structures and improvements proposed to be demolished, relocated, or constructed; and all other pertinent information which can be graphically depicted on the plan, as specified in the checklist provided by the planning department. 
C.  Drawings and Elevations. Elevations showing the general appearance and features of proposed structures shall be submitted, as required on the application checklist. When required by the planning agency, drawings and elevations shall be submitted in addition to those accompanying the site plan, which shall include but not be limited to the following: 
1.  Roof overhangs and any other parts of the structures that protrude from the building surfaces; 
2.  Uses of each room or floor plans if required. 
(Ord. 192 Exh. A (§ 83.03.030), 1994) 
(Ord. No. 2012-14, § 3(Exh. A), 8-7-12) 
16.12.120 - Approval requirements. 
A.  Conditional use permit approval shall apply only to the property for which the application was made, and shall apply to that property as long as the use has not been abandoned for over one year, regardless of changes in ownership. 
B.  A conditional use permit shall be granted for a period to be specified by the planning commission, not to exceed thirty-six (36) months from the effective date of the decision; extensions of time to complete compliance with conditions of approval may be granted where warranted, pursuant to Section 16.12.060 
C.  The following requirements may be placed upon the development project by the reviewing authority as conditions of approval: 
1.  Dedications and/or easements for streets, alleys, drainage, public utilities, recreational trails, flood control, and such other rights-of-way as may be determined essential to the orderly development of the site and abutting properties; 
2.  On and off-site improvements, including but not limited to the following: 
a.  Grading, drainage and drainage structures necessary to protect the public safety, 
b.  Curbs and gutters, street pavement, sidewalks, and traffic control devices; all road improvements are to be constructed pursuant to plans and specifications of the public works department of the city, 
c.  Adequate water service and fire protection equipment is provided, pursuant to plans and specifications of the public works department and the county fire department, 
d.  Sanitary sewer facilities and connections, 
e.  Services from public militias where provided, 
f.  Street trees, 
g.  Landscaping, walls and/or fences, trash enclosures, and lighting fixtures, 
h.  Street lights and street name signs, 
i.  Surfacing of parking areas subject to city specifications, 
j.  In addition to the above requirements, the reviewing authority shall require such additional improvements and facilities as determined necessary for the proper development of the site and area; 
3.  Regulation of uses and operations on the site, including but not limited to the following: 
a.  Regulation of uses, 
b.  Regulation of time for certain activities, 
c.  Duration of uses, 
d.  Regulation of noise, vibration, odors and lights, 
e.  Maintenance of special yards, spaces and buffer areas, 
f.  Regulation of points of vehicular ingress and egress, 
g.  Regulation of signs, 
h.  Required landscaping and site maintenance, 
i.  Such other conditions as will make possible the development and use of the site and surrounding area in an orderly and efficient manner, and in conformity with the intent and purpose of this chapter. 
(Ord. 192 Exh. A (§ 83.03.040), 1994) 
(Ord. No. 2009-08, § 3(Exh. A), 10-20-09; Ord. No. 2012-14, § 3(Exh. A), 8-7-12) 
16.12.125 - Determination by the approval authority. 
    The approval authority will determine the merits of the proposed conditional use permit, and its compliance with the principles, standards, policies and goals of the general plan, development code and other applicable codes and ordinances adopted by the city, in order to protect the public health, safety and general welfare. Approval shall be based upon the following minimum criteria, which shall also constitute the findings to be made by the approval authority in approving or denying a conditional use permit: 
A.  The site for the proposed use is adequate in size and shape to accommodate all yards, open spaces, setbacks, walls and fences, parking areas, fire and building code considerations, and other features pertaining to the application; 
B.  The proposed use will not have a substantial adverse effect on abutting property or the permitted use thereof, and will not generate excessive noise, vibration, traffic or other disturbances, nuisances or hazards; 
C.  The proposed use is consistent with the goals, policies, standards and maps of the development code, general plan and other applicable codes and ordinances adopted by the city; 
D.  The site for the proposed use has adequate access, meaning that the site design incorporates street and highway limitations. 
(Ord. 192 Exh. A (§ 83.03.050), 1994) 
(Ord. No. 2012-14, § 3(Exh. A), 8-7-12) 
16.12.130 - Revisions and modifications. 
    Revisions or modifications of conditional use permits can be requested by the applicant. 
A.  Revisions/Modifications by Applicant. 
1.  An application shall be approved for the establishment or expansion of alcohol uses, as specified in the Main Street and Freeway Corridor Specific Plan. Such request shall be processed as a new conditional use permit, pursuant to the provisions contained in this section, and is subject to the applicable fees. 
2.  Revised CUP. A major revision or modification to an approved conditional use permit such as, but not limited to, change in conditions, expansions, intensification, location or hours of operation, may be requested by the applicant. Such request shall be processed through application of a new conditional use permit, pursuant to Section 16.12.005(A)(2). The applicant shall supply necessary information as determined by the city, to indicate reasons for the requested change. 
3.  Minor Revisions. A revisions or modification to an approved conditional use permit such as, but not limited to, minor changes in the site design, parking or building placement, which will not increase or change the use or intensity of the site, may be acted on by the reviewing authority through the administrative review without notice procedure, by applying for a letter of substantial conformance or site plan review without application, pursuant to Section 16.12.005(A)(3). The applicant shall supply necessary information as determined by the planning division to indicate reasons for the revisions and/or modifications. 
B.  Review by Planning Commission. The planning commission may periodically review any conditional use permit to ensure that it is being operated in a manner consistent with conditions of approval and in a manner which is not detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare, or materially injurious to properties in the vicinity. If, after review, the commission deems that there is sufficient evidence to warrant a full examination, then a public hearing date shall be set. 
C.  Modification or Revocation by the Planning Commission. 
1.  After setting a date for public hearing, the review authority shall notify the applicant and owners of the subject property in question. Such notice shall be sent by mail and shall state that the commission will be reviewing the conditional use permit for possible modification or revocation. It shall also state the date, time and place of the hearing. The public hearing shall be conducted and notice given in accordance with Section 16.12.005(A)(1). 
2.  The planning division shall fully investigate the evidence and prepare a report for the commission's consideration. Upon conclusion of the public hearing, the commission shall render a decision to do one of the following measures: 
a.  Find that the conditional use permit is being conducted in an appropriate manner and that no action to modify or revoke is necessary; or 
b.  Find that the conditional use permit is not being conducted in an appropriate manner and that modifications to conditions are necessary; or 
c.  Find that the conditional use permit is not being conducted in an appropriate manner and that modifications are not available to mitigate the impacts. Upon revocation, the use shall cease and desist in the time allotted by the commission. 
3.  If the planning commission either modifies or revokes a conditional use permit, then it shall state the reasons for such action within the resolution. 
D.  New Applications Following Denial or Revocation. Following the denial or revocation of a conditional use permit application, an application for a conditional use permit for the same or substantially the same use cannot be filed within one year from the date of denial or revocation. 
(Ord. 192 Exh. A (§ 83.03.060), 1994) 
(Ord. No. 2012-14, § 3(Exh. A), 8-7-12) 
ARTICLE IV. - PLANNED DEVELOPMENTS 

16.12.135 - Purpose of provisions. 
    The planned development review procedure shall be used for large scale development projects generally below one thousand (1,000) dwelling units where, because of a mixture of uses or because of site constraints, flexibility in design and cohesive planning of the entire site is deemed necessary. Projects exceeding one thousand (1,000) dwelling units, or commercial, industrial or mixed-use projects of size or impacts should be filed as a specific plan. The planned development process provides an alternative site planning process that encourages creative and imaginative design of large-scale, multi- phased residential, commercial or industrial developments, or a mixture of such uses, within the framework of a single development plan. The procedure permits greater regulatory and design flexibility than conventional zoning, in order to achieve a more economical and efficient use of land and a high quality of design. 
(Ord. 192 Exh. A (§ 83.04.010), 1994) 
(Ord. No. 2012-14, § 3(Exh. A), 8-7-12) 
16.12.140 - Approval required. 
    Planned development approval shall be required for the following development applications: 
A.  Projects within areas designated for "planned mixed use" or "special development" on the city's adopted zoning or general plan maps; 
B.  Projects which, because of the scale, intensity of use, site constraints, or anticipated impacts on infrastructure, are determined by the agency to require comprehensive planning through the planned development process. 
(Ord. 192 Exh. A (§ 83.04.020), 1994) 
(Ord. No. 2012-14, § 3(Exh. A), 8-7-12) 
16.12.145 - General provisions. 
A.  A planned development may be used for residential, commercial, industrial and/or mixed use developments. 
B.  An application for a planned development shall include submittal of a preliminary and a final site plan. These applications shall encompass all land within the planned development area. An application for a tentative subdivision map, site plan review, or conditional use permit may subsequently be submitted for a portion of land within the planned development or a phase thereof in accordance with this title. However each phase shall function as a complete and separate development from the remaining phases, and that such application complies with all the standards contained in the approved planned development. 
C.  All applications for a planned development shall be reviewed by the development review committee. When the preliminary plan is submitted separately from the final plan, both documents shall be reviewed by the development review committee. 
D.  The planning commission shall make a recommendation and the city council shall act upon all proposed planned developments. 
E.  Application for a planned development shall also constitute a request for a general plan amendment. Upon approval of the final plan, the general plan land use map will be changed to show "planned development," followed by the number of the approved planned development. The regulations within the planned development approval will be used to provide greater design flexibility and will give the development its unique character. 
F.  The city land use map shall show the location of all approved planned developments. If a planned development is withdrawn or expired, the land use map shall reflect that change. 
G.  Any recommendation for denial of a planned development by the planning commission shall terminate the application, unless such action is appealed in accordance with the provisions of Section 16.12.055. 
H.  A planned development shall be effective for a up to five years. Extensions of time, not to exceed twelve (12) months at a time, may be granted upon application to the planning division. If no tracts have recorded or building permits have been issued within the project during that period, the planned development becomes void. Any tracts that record during the period in which the planned development is valid shall remain subject to the conditions imposed on the planned development even if the remaining portions of the planned development are later withdrawn or expired. 
(Ord. 192 Exh. A (§ 83.04.030), 1994) 
(Ord. No. 2012-14, § 3(Exh. A), 8-7-12) 
16.12.150 - Application for planned development. 
    The planned development application may be submitted so as to combine the preliminary and final plans into a single process, or the application may be submitted in separate stages depending on the degree of project design or land use commitment desired by the applicant or the city. The stages of planned development review are as follows: 
A.  Preliminary Plan. 
1.  The preliminary plan functions as a development suitability analysis and land use plan, which identifies opportunities and constraints within the planned development site. The intent of the preliminary plan is to establish limits, parameters, and planning objectives to guide development based on identified constraints and opportunities, including but not limited to physical characteristics, public services and facilities, capacity of the circulation system, and existing or planned uses of adjacent properties. 
2.  The preliminary plan shall provide information on the following planning issues: 
a.  The location, boundaries and acreage of the general land use types proposed within the planned development area, including open space; 
b.  Existing and proposed land uses within five hundred (500) feet of the project area boundaries, and anticipated impacts on adjacent land uses; 
c.  The proposed on-site circulation system, including roads, sidewalks and pathways for vehicular and pedestrian access and general locations of access points to major and secondary roadways; 
d.  Anticipated impacts on the existing circulation network, public facilities, and community services; 
e.  Where residential uses are proposed, the maximum number of dwelling units and the gross residential density shall be indicated; 
f.  Where applicable, a development program shall indicate the phasing and/or sequence in which the various development areas are to be developed. Each phase shall include sufficient development to enable that phase to exist as an independent entity integrated with previous phases, but not dependent upon later stages of construction with respect to drainage, road improvements, utilities, and environmental considerations. 
B.  Final Plan. 
1.  The final plan functions as a comprehensive, detailed plan of development for the planned development area. The final plan shall incorporate those provisions contained within the preliminary plan. 
2.  The final plan shall address the following issues: 
a.  Show the proposed land uses and building types, including the arrangement of such uses and building types. The development plan shall also illustrate the relationship of the buildings to the site, site grading, circulation, paving, parking, screening, lighting, setbacks, recreation and open space areas, and adjacent properties; 
b.  The level of public services and facilities required by the proposed development and the program for providing, operating, and maintaining such services and facilities; 
c.  Access and circulation requirements, and proposed improvements; 
d.  Known manmade and natural hazards and methods for mitigating such hazards; 
e.  Significant features and areas to be retained for common open space and provisions for the preservation, conservation, utilization and maintenance of such areas. 
3.  The final plan shall include a written text describing the proposed project and its development standards, which shall be mapped clearly showing the pertinent features of the proposed development, as well as conditions on and around the site affecting the overall design of the project. 
4.  The written text portion of the final development plan shall include but not be limited to the following sections, as applicable to the project: 
a.  Project description, including: 
i.  Legal description, 
ii.  Name of project, owner, developer and/or builder, 
iii.  Proposed uses, 
iv.  Existing site conditions, 
v.  Total net and gross site area, 
vi.  Total building area, 
vii.  Floor to lot area ratio (for commercial or industrial uses), 
viii.  Total net and gross density (for residential uses), 
ix.  Total lot coverage by impervious surfaces, 
x.  Development schedule, 
xi.  Proposed phasing, 
b.  Tabulation of each proposed phase, including: 
i.  Land use area, 
ii.  Estimated population and density, 
iii.  Number of dwelling units and dwelling units/gross acre (for residential areas), 
iv.  Building coverage, parking and road coverage, and open space, in acres and as a percentage of total site area, 
v.  Proposed site alteration (grading in cubic yards), 
vi.  Linear feet of proposed street, and percent grade, number of estimated commercial, office or industrial employees, and estimated number of customers, 
vii.  Proposed floor to lot area ratio (for commercial or industrial areas), 
viii.  Parking spaces required and provided; 
c.  Development standards, including standards for lot size, building density, population density, height, bulk, setbacks, and other applicable standards which shall be established by the planned development; 
d.  Public services and facilities, including estimated impacts of the development on schools, parks, medical facilities, libraries, fire and police protection, emergency services, solid waste disposal, and other community facilities as applicable to the project; the services and facilities to be provided as a part of the proposed project; and estimated costs for such services and utilities in relation to the proposed financing plan, including those costs which may be determined to be reimbursable; 
e.  Circulation, describing the standards, approximate costs, mileage, and type of financing for construction and maintenance of roads, rail, trails, public transit facilities and other public transportation systems. This section shall also discuss impacts of the proposed project on the existing circulation network in terms of average daily trips and peak hour trips generated; 
f.  Conservation and open space, describing proposed open space and recreation facilities, and preservation of natural features such as desert plants, cultural resources, protected species, or other natural resources; 
g.  Public safety, including seismic, flood or other safety hazards affecting the site, and safety features for protection of the project from hazards; 
h.  Noise, describing existing or proposed noise generators on or near the site, such as highways, freeways, rail lines, airports, etc., along with standards for the protection of present and future site occupants from noise disturbances associated with such features; 
i.  Site design, describing any major design features proposed on the site, including but not limited to use of landscaping, screening, architectural excellence, public amenity areas, art in public places, or other similar features which will provide an overall aesthetic benefit to the city; 
j.  Appendix, including the names, addresses and phone numbers of property owner(s), developer, and professional consultants. The appendix shall also contain all supporting technical reports prepared for the project. 
5.  The mapped portion of the final plan shall include the following: 
a.  A small-scale vicinity map showing the relationship of the site to natural and manmade features and facilities near the site; 
b.  A base map showing the site and surrounding area within five hundred (500) feet, including the location of natural contours and drainage features at two-foot intervals (contour interval may be five feet for hilly terrain); and any existing structures, improvements, excavations, easements and roadways; 
c.  An information map identifying the areas with respect to seismic, flood, noise, scenic or cultural resources as described in the text, along with a preliminary grading plan showing proposed cut and fill areas and grading elevations; 
d.  A land use and circulation design, including lot layouts and building pads with dimensions, proposed uses, and setbacks. Proposed circulation improvements shall include the location, width and names of proposed streets or highways, public transit routes, bikeways, pedestrian ways, riding and hiking trails, and parking facilities, including the number of spaces provided. This map shall also show mature trees to be retained, relocated or removed; any proposed phasing of the development; and major site design features; and any other information included on the checklists as provided by the planning division; 
e.  Aerial photograph of the site (if available); 
f.  Maps designated in Section 16.12.150(B)(5)(b-d) shall be of a uniform scale sufficient to clearly identify proposed development features included on the site and within five hundred (500) feet of the property line. 
6.  Where a subdivision of land is proposed concurrently with a planned development, a tentative tract map or minor subdivision plot plan shall accompany and be reviewed concurrently with the final plan. 
(Ord. 192 Exh. A (§ 83.04.040), 1994) 
(Ord. No. 2012-14, § 3(Exh. A), 8-7-12) 
16.12.155 - Required findings for approval. 
    Prior to approving an application for a planned development, the reviewing authority shall find that all of the following are true: 
A.  The proposed plan is consistent with the maps, goals and policies of the city's general plan and any other applicable land use policies and ordinances; 
B.  The site for the proposed development is adequate in size and shape to accommodate proposed uses and proposed development standards for all yards, open spaces, setbacks, walls and fences, parking areas, loading areas, landscaping, and other features; 
C.  The improvements required in the conditions of approval, and the manner of development, adequately address all natural and manmade hazards associated with the proposed development and the project site, including but not limited to flood, seismic, and fire hazards; 
D.  The site for the proposed development has adequate access, meaning that the site design and development plan conditions consider the limitations of existing streets and highways; 
E.  Adequate public services exist, or will be provided in accordance with the conditions of approval for the final plan to serve the proposed development; and the approval of the proposed development will not result in a reduction of such public services to properties in the vicinity so as to be a detriment to public health, safety and welfare; 
F.  The proposed development, as conditioned, will not have a substantial adverse effect on surrounding property or the permitted use thereof, and will be compatible with the existing and planned land use of adjacent properties; 
G.  The proposed development carries out the intent of the planned development provisions, by providing a more efficient use of the land and an excellence of design greater than that which could be achieved through the application of conventional development standards. 
(Ord. 192 Exh. A (§ 83.04.050), 1994) 
(Ord. No. 2012-14, § 3(Exh. A), 8-7-12) 
16.12.160 - Revisions to planned developments. 
    No revisions may be made in an approved planned development before, during or after construction, except upon application to and approval by the reviewing authority, under the procedures provided below: 
A.  Minor revisions, such as in the location and placement of buildings and structures, may be authorized by the reviewing authority under the administrative review without notice procedure, pursuant to Section 16.12.005(A)(3). Such revisions shall be permitted only if required by engineering or other circumstances not foreseen at the time the development plan was approved. These revisions shall be made prior to recording the final subdivision map, or the issuance of any building permits, whichever occurs first. 
B.  Major revisions, such as changes in use or density, any significant rearrangement of lots, blocks and building tracts, any substantial changes in the provisions of common open spaces, and all other modifications shall be approved by the reviewing authority authorized to approve the plan being revised. The reviewing authority shall hold a public hearing to consider such major revisions. No amendments may be made in the approved development plan unless they are shown to be required by changes in conditions that have occurred since the development plan was approved, or by changes in the general plan or other applicable city policy. 
(Ord. 192 Exh. A (§ 83.04.060), 1994) 
(Ord. No. 2012-14, § 3(Exh. A), 8-7-12) 
16.12.165 - Withdrawal, voidance or expiration of plans. 
A.  In the event a planned development is withdrawn, or the applicant fails to obtain approval of the application within the conditional land use decision time limitation specified herein, prior to adoption of the general plan amendment associated with the plan, said plan, including the general plan amendment, shall be void. 
B.  In the event the general plan amendment is adopted, but the applicant fails to complete the planned development process within the conditional land use decision time limitation specified herein; the planned development shall become void. The city council shall initiate a general plan amendment to revert the property to the land use designation which existed prior to the adoption of the planned development, or to a more appropriate designation. 
C.  Expiration of an approved or conditionally approved planned development shall terminate all proceedings. Where a tentative subdivision map application has been concurrently filed with a planned development application, no final subdivision map or parcel map for all or any portion of the real property included within the tentative subdivision map shall be filed for record, without first processing a new planned development application. 
(Ord. 192 Exh. A (§ 83.04.070), 1994) 
(Ord. No. 2012-14, § 3(Exh. A), 8-7-12) 
16.12.170 - Conformance of plans. 
A.  Where a planned development is developed in phases, each successive phase shall incorporate the findings, conditions and requirements of the approved planned development. 
B.  Approval of any development plan which modifies the findings, conditions and requirements of the previously approved planned development, shall constitute an amendment of the planned development approval. 
(Ord. 192 Exh. A (§ 83.04.080), 1994) 
(Ord. No. 2012-14, § 3(Exh. A), 8-7-12) 
ARTICLE V. - ZONE CHANGES 

16.12.175 - Purpose of provisions. 
    Whenever the public necessity, convenience, general welfare, good planning practices, or the policies set forth in the general plan justify such action, land use boundaries may be amended through the procedures established in this title. 
(Ord. 192 Exh. A (§ 83.05.010), 1994) 
(Ord. No. 2012-14, § 3(Exh. A), 8-7-12) 
16.12.180 - General provisions. 
A.  A change in the boundaries of any land use designation may be initiated by the owner or the authorized agent of the owner of property by filing an application for a specific plan amendment as prescribed in this section. If the property for which the specific plan amendment is proposed is in more than one ownership, all the owners or their authorized agents must join in filing the application. If deemed appropriate to expand the boundaries of any proposed specific plan amendment, notice shall be given to all property owners within the proposed expansion boundaries. Prior to any action on the proposed specific plan amendment, written authorization from all property owners shall be on file in the planning division. 
B.  A change in the boundaries of any land use designation may be initiated by the consensus of the city planning commission or city council. 
C.  An application for a specific plan amendment may be filed concurrently with any other application(s) on the same property. 
D.  Following the denial of an application for a specific plan amendment, an application for the same or substantially the same specific plan amendment shall not be accepted within one year of the date of denial. 
E.  A change in land use shall be indicated by listing on the general plan map the number of the ordinance amending the map. 
(Ord. 192 Exh. A (§ 83.05.020), 1994) 
(Ord. No. 2012-14, § 3(Exh. A), 8-7-12) 
16.12.185 - Application procedure. 
A.  An application for a change of land use shall be made on a form provided for that purpose by the planning division. 
B.  The planning division may require additional information if necessary to enable the commission and council to determine whether the amendment is consistent with the objectives of this code and the city's adopted general plan. 
C.  An application initiated by a property owner shall be accompanied by the fee established by the city council. 
(Ord. 192 Exh. A (§ 83.05.030), 1994) 
(Ord. No. 2012-14, § 3(Exh. A), 8-7-12) 
16.12.190 - Action by planning commission. 
A.  The planning commission shall hold a public hearing on each application for a specific plan amendment. The hearing shall be set and notice given as prescribed in Section 16.12.010. The hearing may be continued from time to time. 
B.  The planning commission shall determine whether the amendment is consistent with the objectives of this code and with the general plan, and shall recommend to the city council that the specific plan amendment be granted, granted in modified form or denied. 
C.  Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 16.12.055(C), an application for a specific plan amendment which has received a recommendation for denial shall be referred without appeal to the city council when accompanied by an amendment to the development code or development regulations of said specific plan. 
D.  When the commission determines, following a public hearing on a proposed specific plan amendment, that a change to a land use classification other than the proposed classification specified in the hearing notice is desirable, the commission may recommend an alternate classification. The commission must determine that the recommended alternative is more appropriate for the subject property and is consistent with the general plan and the intent of the development code. If it is more intense than the recommended alternative, a new public hearing is required. 
(Ord. 192 Exh. A (§ 83.05.040), 1994) 
(Ord. No. 2012-14, § 3(Exh. A), 8-7-12) 
16.12.195 - Action by the city council. 
A.  After the recommendation of the planning commission for approval on a proposed specific plan amendment, or if an appeal of a denial has been filed, the city council shall hold at least one public hearing. The hearing shall be set and notice given as prescribed in Section 16.12.010. The hearing may be continued from time to time. 
B.  Following the closing of a public hearing, the council shall make specific findings as to whether the change is consistent with the objectives of this code and the general plan. If the council finds that the change is consistent, it shall introduce an ordinance amending the land use map. 
C.  The city council may approve, modify or disapprove a recommendation of the planning commission on a land use change not previously considered by the planning commission; provided, it has requested and considered a report of the commission on the modification. Failure of the commission to report within forty (40) calendar days after receipt of the council request shall be deemed concurrence. 
(Ord. 192 Exh. A (§ 83.05.050), 1994) 
(Ord. No. 2012-14, § 3(Exh. A), 8-7-12) 
16.12.200 - Required findings for approval. 
    Prior to taking an action to approve or recommend approval of a change in land use, the reviewing authority shall find as follows: 
A.  The proposed change in zone is consistent with the general plan; 
B.  The site of the proposed change in land use designation is suitable for any of the land uses permitted within the proposed designation; 
C.  The proposed specific plan amendment is reasonable and beneficial at this time; 
D.  The proposed specific plan amendment in district classification will not have a substantial adverse effect on surrounding properties or the community in general. 
(Ord. 192 Exh. A (§ 83.05.060), 1994) 
(Ord. No. 2012-14, § 3(Exh. A), 8-7-12) 
16.12.205 - Prezoning/pre-designation. 
A.  For the purpose of establishing land use designation boundaries to become effective only upon annexation, property outside the corporate boundaries of the city, within the adopted sphere of influence, may be classified within one or more designations in the same manner and subject to the same procedural requirements as prescribed for property within the city. 
B.  Upon passage of an ordinance establishing the applicable land use designation for property outside the city, the general plan shall be revised to show the potential or designation to become effective upon annexation. 
(Ord. 192 Exh. A (§ 83.05.070), 1994) 
(Ord. No. 2012-14, § 3(Exh. A), 8-7-12) 
ARTICLE VI. - VARIANCES AND MINOR EXCEPTIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2011-08, § 3(Exh. A), adopted Aug. 2, 2011, amended Art. VI in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. VI pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. 192, Exh. A adopted 1994. See the Ordinance List and Disposition Table for full derivation. 

16.12.210 - Purpose of provisions. 
    The purpose of a variance or minor exception shall be to insure that no property, because of special circumstances applicable to it, due to size, shape, topography, location, or surroundings, shall be deprived of privileges commonly enjoyed by other properties in the same vicinity and land use designation. 
(Ord. No. 2011-08, § 3(Exh. A), 8-2-11) 
(Ord. No. 2012-14, § 3(Exh. A), 8-7-12) 
16.12.215 - General provisions. 
A.  In no case shall a variance or minor exception be granted to permit a use other than a use permitted in the land use designation. 
B.  Any variance or minor exception granted shall be subject to such conditions as will assure that the adjustment thereby authorized shall not constitute a grant of special privileges inconsistent with the limitations upon other properties in the vicinity and district in which such property is situated. 
(Ord. No. 2011-08, § 3(Exh. A), 8-2-11) 
(Ord. No. 2012-14, § 3(Exh. A), 8-7-12) 
16.12.220 - Reviewing authority. 
A.  The reviewing authority may grant minor exceptions and variances from any property development standard in the city's adopted development code, subject to the procedures set forth in this article, when it is found that the strict and literal interpretation of such provisions would deny a use of property consistent with the intent and purpose of the code and the general plan. 
B.  Review and approval for the following minor exception requests will be through the administrative review with notice procedure, pursuant to Section 16.12.005(A)(2). 
1.  Fence Height. In any zone, the maximum height of any fence, wall, hedge or equivalent screening may be increased by a maximum of two feet, for the total length or portion of said wall or other screening, where the topography of sloping sites or a difference in grade between abutting sites warrants such increase in height to maintain a level of privacy, or to maintain effectiveness of screening, provided that the increased height does not encroach into the clear sight triangle area. The requirement for an exception may be waived where the requesting party is located on the low side of said wall or other screening, and the proposal does not present visual impacts to an area larger than the properties directly involved in the request. 
2.  Setbacks. In any residential zone, the minimum setback may be decreased by not more than twenty (20) percent where the proposed setback area or yard is in character with the surrounding neighborhood and is not required as an essential open space or recreational amenity to the use of the site, and where such decrease will not unreasonably affect abutting sites. 
3.  Lot Coverage. In any residential zone, the maximum lot coverage may be increased by not more than ten percent of the lot area, where such increases are necessary for significantly improved site planning or architectural design, creation or maintenance of views, or otherwise facilitate highly desirable features or amenities, and where such increase will not unreasonably affect abutting sites. 
4.  Off-Site Parking. A maximum of twenty-five (25) percent of the required parking for a use may be located on a contiguous site, not more than three hundred (300) feet from the building entrance on the site for the use for which such parking will serve the use equally as effectively, safely and conveniently as providing such parking on the same site as the use for which it is required. For the purpose of this section, contiguous shall mean sharing a common lot line and shall not include parcels separated by a public right-of-way. The reviewing authority shall require an agreement to ensure utility, availability, and maintenance of joint use of off-site parking facilities. 
5.  On-Site Parking. The reviewing authority may authorize a maximum fifteen (15) percent reduction in the required number of parking spaces provided it will not result in a traffic hazard; however, no more than four spaces shall be eliminated. 
6.  Height. In any district, the reviewing authority may authorize a ten percent increase in the maximum height limitation for structures, not including signs. Such increases may be approved where necessary to significantly improve the site plan or architectural design, and where scenic views or solar access on surrounding properties are not affected. 
7.  Signs. In any district, the reviewing authority may authorize a twenty-five (25) percent increase in the maximum sign area, or in the height of a freestanding or monument sign, where it can be determined that such increases are needed for sign visibility, will improve the architectural design of a site, and will not result in unsafe conditions, within the site or abutting properties. 
8.  Accessory Buildings and Structures. In residential and agricultural designations the maximum allowable aggregate accessory building and accessory structure area may be increased in accordance with the allowable area increases outlined within Sections 16.20.395 and 16.20.405. The granting of a minor exception shall not constitute a grant of special privileges inconsistent with the limitations upon other properties in the vicinity and designation in which the property is situated. In reviewing a minor exception for any area increase, the reviewing authority shall also consider special circumstances relative to the proposal such as implementation of architectural elements, increased setbacks between the structure(s) and adjacent properties, use of landscape buffers and screening devices, and other similar devices. 
9.  Alternative Energy Systems. The maximum height and minimum yard regulations for windmills may be adjusted pursuant to Section 16.16.063. The granting of a minor exception shall not constitute a grant of special privileges inconsistent with the limitations upon other properties in the vicinity and designation in which the property is situated. In reviewing a minor exception, the reviewing authority shall balance the need for the proposed placement and additional height to increase the efficiency of the windmill with its impact potential upon the surrounding area. 
10.  Other Exceptions. Exceptions may be considered, where in the opinion of the reviewing authority, such exceptions may not have a cumulative effect greater than those exceptions previously listed. 
C.  In calculating percentages specified in Section 16.12.220(B), rounding up of fractions shall not be permitted, and only whole numbers shall be considered. 
D.  Any request not listed in Section 16.12.220(B) shall be deemed a variance and shall be reviewed by the Planning Commission at a public hearing, pursuant to Section 16.12.005(A)(1). The hearing shall be set and notice given as prescribed in Section 16.12.010. 
E.  The planning commission is authorized to grant variances as prescribed in accordance with the procedure in this Title 16, with respect to development standards which include but are not limited to the following: 
1.  Fences, walls and screening, where the requested height exceeds more than twenty (20) percent of the total length of the wall or other screening, or where the requested variance presents visual impacts to an area greater than the properties directly involved; 
2.  Site area, width and depth; 
3.  Front, rear and side yards; 
4.  Lot coverage; 
5.  Height of structures; 
6.  Landscaping; 
7.  Usable open space; 
8.  Performance standards; 
9.  Parking and loading facilities; 
10.  Sign height, number and location. 
(Ord. No. 2011-08, § 3(Exh. A), 8-2-11) 
(Ord. No. 2012-14, § 3(Exh. A), 8-7-12; Ord. No. 2019-01 , § 3(Exh. A), 2-5-19) 
16.12.225 - Application procedures. 
A.  An application for a minor exception or variance shall be filed with the planning division, along with the required fee. The application shall be signed by the property owner or his authorized agent. 
B.  An application for a minor exception or variance shall be accompanied by a site plan showing the subject property as well as the surrounding area. The site plan shall show all existing and proposed buildings and uses, and any other data required by the planning division to adequately review the application. 
(Ord. No. 2011-08, § 3(Exh. A), 8-2-11) 
(Ord. No. 2012-14, § 3(Exh. A), 8-7-12) 
16.12.230 - Approval requirements. 
    The following requirements may be placed upon the development project by the reviewing authority as conditions of approval. All such conditions shall be binding upon the applicants and their successors. 
A.  Requirements for special yards, open spaces, buffers, fences, walls and screening; 
B.  Requirements for installation and maintenance of landscaping and erosion control measures; 
C.  Requirements for street improvements and dedications, regulation of vehicular ingress and egress, and traffic circulation; 
D.  Requirements for maintenance of landscaping and other improvements; 
E.  Establishment of development schedules or time limits for performance or completion; 
F.  Requirements for periodic review by the reviewing authority; 
G.  Any other such conditions as the reviewing authority may deem necessary to ensure compatibility with surrounding uses, to preserve the public health, safety and welfare, and to enable the reviewing authority to make the findings required by Section 16.12.235. 
(Ord. No. 2011-08, § 3(Exh. A), 8-2-11) 
(Ord. No. 2012-14, § 3(Exh. A), 8-7-12) 
16.12.235 - Determination by the approval authority. 
    The reviewing authority will consider the merits of the proposed minor exception or variance, and its compliance with the principles, standards, policies and goals of the general plan and the development code. Approval of any minor exception or variance shall be based upon the following minimum criteria, which shall also constitute the findings to be made by the approval authority in approving or denying an application: 
A.  The strict or literal interpretation and enforcement of the specified regulation would result in practical difficulty or unnecessary physical hardship inconsistent with the objectives of the development code; 
B.  There are exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or conditions applicable to the property involved or to the intended use of the property that do not apply generally to other properties in the same land use designation; 
C.  The strict or literal interpretation and enforcement of the specified regulation would deprive the applicant of privileges enjoyed by the owners of other properties in the same designation; 
D.  The granting of the minor exception or variance will not constitute a grant of special privilege inconsistent with the limitations on other properties classified in the same designation; 
E.  The granting of the minor exception or variance will not be detrimental to the public health, safety, or welfare, or materially injurious to properties or improvements in the vicinity. 
(Ord. No. 2011-08, § 3(Exh. A), 8-2-11) 
(Ord. No. 2012-14, § 3(Exh. A), 8-7-12) 
16.12.240 - Findings for parking variances. 
    The planning commission may grant a variance in order that some or all of the required parking spaces be located off-site, or that in-lieu fees or facilities be provided instead of the required parking spaces, if both of the following conditions are met: 
A.  The variance will be an incentive to, and a benefit for, nonresidential development; 
B.  The variance will facilitate access to nonresidential development by patrons of public transit facilities. 
(Ord. No. 2011-08, § 3(Exh. A), 8-2-11) 
(Ord. No. 2012-14, § 3(Exh. A), 8-7-12) 
16.12.245 - New application following denial. 
    Following the denial or revocation of a minor exception or variance application, no application for the same or substantially the same application on the same or substantially the same site shall be filed within one year of the date of denial or revocation. 
(Ord. No. 2011-08, § 3(Exh. A), 8-2-11) 
(Ord. No. 2012-14, § 3(Exh. A), 8-7-12) 
16.12.250 - Appeal procedures. 
    A. Prior to its effective date, any decision made on a minor exception request by the reviewing authority may be appealed to the planning commission, pursuant to the provisions of Section 16.12.055. 
    B. Prior to its effective date, any decision made on a variance by the planning commission may be appealed to the city council, pursuant to the provisions of Section 16.12.055. 
(Ord. No. 2011-08, § 3(Exh. A), 8-2-11) 
(Ord. No. 2012-14, § 3(Exh. A), 8-7-12) 
16.12.255 - Voiding of variances or minor exceptions. 
A.  Any variance or minor exception granted under the provisions of this chapter shall become null and void unless: 
1.  The construction authorized by the variance or minor exception shall have been commenced within thirty-six (36) months after the granting of the variance or minor exception, and pursued diligently to completion. 
2.  The occupancy of land or buildings authorized by such variance or minor exception has taken place within thirty-six (36) months after the granting of such variance or minor exception. 
B.  Applications for renewal may be filed for additional twelve-month periods. Said renewal application must be filed prior to expiration of the application. 
C.  The reviewing authority may void any variance or minor exception for non-compliance with the conditions set forth in approving the variance or minor exception. The procedure shall be in accordance with Section 16.12.075 
(Ord. No. 2011-08, § 3(Exh. A), 8-2-11) 
(Ord. No. 2012-14, § 3(Exh. A), 8-7-12) 
ARTICLE VII. - DEVELOPMENT CODE AMENDMENTS 

16.12.260 - Purpose of provisions. 
    These provisions are intended to provide the city council with a procedure to amend the development code whenever required by public necessity, public convenience, general welfare, and good planning and zoning practice. Amendments to the regulatory provisions of any specific plan shall be governed by these provisions. 
(Ord. 192 Exh. A (§ 83.07.010), 1994) 
(Ord. No. 2012-14, § 3(Exh. A), 8-7-12) 
16.12.265 - General provisions. 
A.  A development code amendment may be initiated by any private person or agency. If the amendment is directly related to a parcel of land, the owner or the authorized agent of the owner of property must file the application. Further, if property that is the subject of an application is in more than one ownership, all of the owners or their authorized agents must join in filing the application. 
B.  A development code amendment may be initiated by the consensus of the planning commission or city council. 
C.  An application for a development code amendment may be filed concurrently with any other application(s) having a direct relationship to the proposed amendment. 
D.  Following the denial of an application for a development code amendment, an application for the same or substantially the same amendment shall not be accepted within one year of the date of denial, except as initiated by the planning commission or city council. 
E.  A development code amendment adopted by the city council shall be incorporated into the development code. 
(Ord. 192 Exh. A (§ 83.07.020), 1994) 
(Ord. No. 2012-14, § 3(Exh. A), 8-7-12) 
16.12.270 - Application procedure. 
A.  An application shall be made on a form provided for that purpose by the planning division. 
B.  The reviewing authority may require additional information if necessary to enable the commission and council to determine whether the amendment is consistent with the objectives of the city's adopted general plan. 
C.  An application initiated by a private person or agency shall be accompanied by a fee established by the city council. 
(Ord. 192 Exh. A (§ 83.07.030), 1994) 
(Ord. No. 2012-14, § 3(Exh. A), 8-7-12) 
16.12.275 - Action by planning commission. 
A.  The planning commission shall hold a public hearing on each application for a development code amendment. The hearing shall be set and notice given as prescribed in Section 16.12.010. The hearing may be continued from time to time. 
B.  The planning commission shall determine whether the development code amendment is consistent with the objectives of the adopted general plan, and shall recommend to the city council that the development code amendment be approved, approved as amended, or denied. 
(Ord. 192 Exh. A (§ 83.07.040), 1994) 
(Ord. No. 2012-14, § 3(Exh. A), 8-7-12) 
16.12.280 - Action by the city council. 
A.  Within forty (40) calendar days after the recommendation of the planning commission on a proposed development code amendment, the city council shall hold at least one public hearing. The hearing shall be set and notice given as prescribed in Section 16.12.010. The hearing may be continued from time to time. 
B.  Following the closing of a public hearing, the city council shall make specific findings as to whether the development code amendment is consistent with the objectives of the adopted general plan. If the council finds that the development code amendment is consistent, it shall introduce an ordinance amending the development code. 
C.  The city council may approve, modify or disapprove a recommendation of the planning commission on a development code amendment not previously considered by the planning commission; provided, it has requested and considered a report of the commission on the modification. Failure of the commission to report within forty (40) calendar days after receipt of the council request shall be deemed concurrence. 
(Ord. 192 Exh. A (§ 83.07.050), 1994) 
(Ord. No. 2012-14, § 3(Exh. A), 8-7-12) 
16.12.285 - Required findings for approval. 
    Prior to taking an action to approve or recommend approval of a development code amendment, the reviewing authority shall find as follows: 
A.  The proposed development code amendment is consistent with the objectives of the adopted general plan; 
B.  The proposed development code amendment is necessary to implement the adopted general plan and/or that the public convenience, the general welfare or good zoning practice justifies such action. 
(Ord. 192 Exh. A (§ 83.07.060), 1994) 
(Ord. No. 2012-14, § 3(Exh. A), 8-7-12) 
ARTICLE VIII. - USE DETERMINATION BY THE PLANNING COMMISSION 

16.12.290 - Purpose of provisions. 
    In order to ensure that the development code regulations will permit all similar uses in each designation, the planning commission, upon its own initiative or upon written request, shall determine whether a use not specifically listed as a permitted, conditional, or accessory use in any district shall be deemed a permitted use or conditional use in one or more designations on the basis of similarity to uses specifically listed or by the statement of intent for each land use designation. 
(Ord. 192 Exh. A (§ 83.08.010), 1994) 
(Ord. No. 2012-14, § 3(Exh. A), 8-7-12) 
16.12.295 - General provisions. 
A.  Where the term "similar uses permitted by commission determination" is mentioned within any land use designation, it shall be deemed to mean other uses which, in the judgment of the planning commission as evidenced by a written decision, are similar to and not more objectionable to the general welfare than those uses specifically listed in the same designation. 
B.  In no instance shall the planning commission determine, nor shall these regulations be so interpreted, that a use shall be permitted in a land use designation when such use is specifically first listed as permissible in a more restricted designation. 
C.  The procedures of this article shall not be substituted for the amendment procedure as a means of adding new uses to the list of permitted or conditional uses. Appeals of use determinations made by staff shall be governed by these procedures. 
D.  The planning commission may, on its own motion or at the request of any party affected thereby, reconsider and change a written decision regarding uses previously determined by the planning commission. 
E.  The planning commission's determination regarding conformance of a use to a land use designation may be appealed to the city council, upon filing of the required appeal form and a fee set by the city council, pursuant to Section 16.12.055 
(Ord. 192 Exh. A (§ 83.08.020), 1994) 
(Ord. No. 2012-14, § 3(Exh. A), 8-7-12) 
16.12.300 - Application procedure. 
    Application for a finding of substantial conformity within a land use designation shall be made in writing to the planning division, and shall include a detailed description of the proposed use and such other information as may be required to facilitate the determination, along with the required fee as set by the city council. 
(Ord. 192 Exh. A (§ 83.08.030), 1994) 
(Ord. No. 2012-14, § 3(Exh. A), 8-7-12) 
16.12.305 - Investigation and report. 
    The planning division shall compare the proposed use characteristics with the general plan goals and objectives, as well as the purposes of each of the land use designations, and may determine if the proposed use should be a permitted or conditional use in any of the designations, and shall make a report of his or her findings to the planning commission. 
(Ord. 192 Exh. A (§ 83.08.040), 1994) 
(Ord. No. 2012-14, § 3(Exh. A), 8-7-12) 
16.12.310 - Determination by the planning commission. 
A.  The planning commission shall base its decision upon meeting the following findings: 
1.  The use in question is of a similar intensity to other permitted or conditionally permitted uses in the same land use designation; 
2.  The use in question meets the purpose and intent of the designation in which it is proposed; 
3.  The use in question meets and conforms to the applicable goals and objectives of the general plan. 
B.  The determination of the planning commission by resolution shall be effective pursuant to Section 16.12.045(B), unless appealed to the city council. 
(Ord. 192 Exh. A (§ 83.08.050), 1994) 
(Ord. No. 2012-14, § 3(Exh. A), 8-7-12) 
ARTICLE IX. - NONCONFORMING USES, BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2010-09, § 3(Exh. A), adopted Sept. 7, 2010, amended Art. IX in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. IX, §§ 16.12.315-16.12.340, pertained to nonconforming uses and structures and derived from Ord. 2002-14, Exh. A(part), adopted 2002. 

16.12.313 - Purpose. 
    It is the intent of this development code to regulate the long-term continuance of nonconforming uses, buildings, and structures in order to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare and to bring them into conformity with the goals and policies of the general plan and any applicable specific plan. These provisions are not intended to legalize any use, building, or structure that were illegally established. 
(Ord. No. 2010-09, § 3(Exh. A), 9-7-10) 
16.12.315 - Provisions. 
A.  The definitions for a nonconforming use, building, and structure are located in Sections 16.08.555 thru 16.080.557. 
B.  Continuation, Maintenance, and Alterations. 
1.  Nonconforming Building and Structure: 
a.  A nonconforming building or structure may continue to be utilized, except as otherwise provided for in this article. 
b.  A nonconforming building or structure may be altered, structurally altered, or repaired provided that no alterations or repairs increase the degree of the nonconforming building or structure. Any exterior alteration changing the architecture or the look of the nonconforming building or structure shall be reviewed and approved by the reviewing authority. 
c.  Routine maintenance may be performed on a nonconforming building or structure. 
d.  No nonconforming building or structure shall be altered or restored so as to displace any conforming use, building or structure. 
2.  Nonconforming Use. Nonconforming uses may be allowed to continue, provided that the use does not substantially increase the levels of vehicular traffic and parking demand, except as otherwise provided in this section. 
C.  Expansions and Additions. 
1.  Nonconforming Buildings and Structures: 
a.  Expansions and additions to a nonconforming building or structure are not permitted, except as otherwise provided for in this article. 
b.  Any expansion or addition shall be subject to the process and requirements outlined in Article II (Site Plans and Revised Site Plans) and Article III (Conditional Use Permits) of this municipal code; and 
i.  The reviewing authority shall determine the extent the nonconforming buildings or structures must conform. The reviewing authority may permit an expansion and addition to the nonconforming building or structure, if all the findings in Section 16.12.320 can be made; and 
ii.  If circumstances in Section 16.12.085(5) do not exist, the expansion and addition shall be forwarded to the planning commission; and 
iii.  Expansions and additions not requiring a site plan review or conditional use permit shall comply with parking, landscaping, and trash enclosure requirements. Architectural improvements shall be required on existing buildings or structures. The extent of architectural improvements shall be proportional to what is being proposed; and 
iv.  The proposed expansion and addition shall conform to the provisions of this development code. 
c.  Additional development of any property on which a nonconforming building or structure exist shall require that all new buildings or structures conform to the provisions of this development code. 
d.  No nonconforming building or structure shall be expanded or added so as to displace any conforming use, building or structure. 
2.  Nonconforming Uses: 
a.  No expansions or additions shall be permitted for buildings or structures containing nonconforming uses otherwise not permitted in the zone, except as otherwise provided for in this article, and for uses with insufficient parking. 
b.  Additional development of any property on which a nonconforming use exist shall require that all new uses conform to the provisions of this development code. 
c.  In a multiple unit building containing conforming and nonconforming uses, the limitations in this article shall solely apply to the nonconforming uses and their unit when they are within an otherwise conforming building. 
D.  Abandonment of Use or Building. 
a.  If documented activity and continuous operations of a nonconforming use, building, or structure are not carried on, for a continuous period of twelve (12) months, the use, building, or structure, shall be used or occupied for a conforming use, building or structure, except as otherwise provided for in this article. Intent to resume active use or occupancy shall not affect the foregoing. 
E.  Repair of Damaged or Partially Destroyed Structures. 
1.  A nonconforming use, building or structure which has been damaged or partially destroyed by fire, natural disaster or some other calamity may be restored to its original condition and nonconforming use, building, or structure resumed provided that following criteria are met: 
i.  Such restoration shall be started within one year of such calamity and completed within two years from the time restoration commences; and 
ii.  Provided that the construction cost of restoration does not exceed seventy-five (75) percent of the assessed value of the entire building or structure; and 
iii.  The reviewing authority may grant a written extension of time on restoration not to exceed one additional year, upon application by the affected party. 
2.  Unsafe Uses of Buildings. Any nonconforming building or structure, or portion thereof, declared unsafe by the city may be strengthened or restored to a safe condition, provided that the cost of the improvement does not exceed seventy-five (75) percent of the replacement cost of the structure. 
F.  Completion. Any building or structure for which a building permit has been issued prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified herein may be completed and used in accordance with the plans, specifications and permits on which said building permit was granted, if construction is commenced within one hundred eighty (180) days, or prior to the expiration date of the project's land use permit, whichever comes later, after the issuance of said permit and diligently prosecuted to completion. 
G.  Enforcement. Failure to comply with this section is subject to the penalty provisions as outlined in Chapter 1.12 of the municipal code. 
H.  Exceptions. 
a.  The reviewing authority may permit an abandoned use to reestablish, or allow an expansion and addition to a building or structure containing a nonconforming use if all the findings in Section 16.12.320 can be made. If circumstances in Section 16.12.085(5) do not exist, the expansion and addition shall be forwarded to the planning commission; and 
b.  All expansions and additions shall be subject to Section 16.12.315(C)(1)(b). 
c.  All lawfully existing residential structures located in commercially designated or zoned property as of the effective date of this article shall be exempt from the restriction on reconstruction following the destruction of the structure. However, the reconstruction shall conform to Section 16.12.320(A) and (B). 
d.  A use, building or structure shall not be considered nonconforming solely on the basis of the lot not meeting the minimum lot size, width, and depth. Development on the lot may occur provided it meets all development code standards as well as sewage and water requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2010-09, § 3(Exh. A), 9-7-10) 
16.12.320 - Findings for approval. 
A.  Before any modification to a nonconforming use, building, or structure may be granted, the reviewing authority shall find that all of the following conditions shall exist in reference to the alteration, expansion, addition, and reestablishment of uses being considered: 
1.  The alteration, expansion, addition, and reestablishment of the nonconforming use, building, or structure shall not be detrimental to or prevent the attainment of objectives, policies, and programs specified in the general plan; 
2.  The granting of permission to alter, expand, add to, and reestablishment, the nonconforming use, building, or structure shall not be substantially detrimental to the public health, safety, or welfare, or injurious to the property or improvements in the vicinity and district in which the use is located; 
    The alteration, expansion, addition, and reestablishment of the nonconforming use, building, or structure shall not pose a substantially negative impact on traffic, circulation, and parking demand. 
3.  The existing nonconforming use, building, or structure shall comply with all other applicable city regulations, ordinances and codes. 
B.  Any alterations required by governmental or court action shall be exempt from these conditions. 
(Ord. No. 2010-09, § 3(Exh. A), 9-7-10) 
16.12.330 - Change of nonconforming use. 
    The planning commission may consider and approve, or conditionally approve, a request to change a nonconforming use to a different nonconforming use, provided that the following conditions are met: 
A.  There is no new structure; 
B.  The use is not of greater intensity with regard to traffic, noise, density, parking demand, odor, light, or other similar development or performance standard; and 
C.  A conditional use permit has been reviewed and approved by the city, in accordance with Article III (Conditional Use Permits) of the Development Code. 
D.  The decision may be appealed pursuant to Section 16.12.055. 
(Ord. No. 2010-09, § 3(Exh. A), 9-7-10) 
ARTICLE X. - SPECIAL USES 

16.12.355 - General provisions. 
    The uses described in this article shall be permitted in the specified land use designation, subject to the issuance of a special use permit in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. 192 Exh. A (§ 83.10.010), 1994) 
(Ord. No. 2012-14, § 3(Exh. A), 8-7-12) 
16.12.360 - Accessory dwelling units. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of these provisions is to establish procedures for permitting an accessory dwelling unit (ADU); to implement state law requiring consideration for such uses. 
B.  Accessory Dwelling Unit Defined. "Accessory dwelling unit (ADU)" means an additional detached or attached dwelling unit which provides complete independent living facilities for one or more persons. The unit shall include permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation on the same parcel as the primary unit is situated. 
C.  Application Procedure-Accessory Dwelling Units. Application for an ADU unit shall be made by applying for an accessory dwelling unit application, pursuant to this article. The review procedure shall be administrative review without notice (ministerial), pursuant to Section 16.12.005(A)(3). Permits for accessory dwelling units will be issued for a period not to exceed thirty-six (36) months. Applications for renewal may be filed for additional twelve (12) month periods. Said renewal application must be filed prior to expiration of the accessory dwelling unit permit. 
D.  Requirements for Approval. 
1.  A accessory dwelling unit may only be permitted on lots within an agricultural or single-family residential designation on which there is already built one owner-occupied single-family detached dwelling unit (primary unit). The primary unit may be considered the accessory dwelling unit only if the lot can accommodate the existing and proposed structure in accordance with the provisions specified herein. 
2.  One dwelling unit on the property shall be owner-occupied. 
3.  Only one accessory dwelling unit shall be permitted on any one lot. 
4.  The accessory dwelling unit shall provide complete and independent living facilities. 
5.  The accessory dwelling unit shall not be sold separately and may be rented. 
6.  The accessory dwelling unit shall have adequate water supply pursuant to specifications of the Uniform Plumbing Code. 
7.  Lots not connected to sewer facilities shall be a minimum of one gross acre in size. 
8.  The accessory dwelling unit may be either an attached or detached unit. A detached accessory unit shall not exceed seventy-five (75) percent of the area of the principal dwelling unit up to a maximum gross floor area of three thousand (3,000) square feet per structure on any parcel. Accessory dwelling units attached to the principal unit may be up to fifty (50) percent of the area of the principal unit, up to a maximum of one thousand (1,000) square feet. The area of an accessory dwelling unit is in addition to and shall not be considered as part of the allowable accessory building area authorized under Article X of Chapter 16.20. No accessory dwelling unit shall be less than four hundred (400) square feet in area. Further, a single-wide mobile home or recreational vehicle, does not qualify for use as a SDU. 
F.  Property Development Standards-Accessory Dwelling Units. 
1.  The lot upon which the accessory dwelling unit is to be established shall conform to all standards of the land use district in which it is located. 
2.  The yard standards for accessory buildings shall apply to a detached unit. 
3.  The yard standards for the primary unit shall apply to an attached unit. 
4.  The accessory dwelling unit shall be constructed in accordance with minimum standards for single-family residential uses on individual lots as specified in Section 16.20.160, unless otherwise specified herein. 
5.  Provision for emergency vehicle access to the accessory dwelling unit shall be addressed in the following manner: 
a.  Access roads shall be within one hundred fifty (150) feet of any portion of an exterior wall of the first story of the accessory dwelling unit and shall be measured in an approved route around the exterior of the structure. 
b.  Turning radius for emergency vehicles shall be a minimum of thirty-four (34) feet inside radius. 
c.  Emergency vehicle access roads in excess of one hundred fifty (150) feet in length shall be provided with a turnaround. 
d.  Maximum grade for the access road shall be twelve (12) percent for asphalt surfaces and fifteen (15) percent for concrete surfaces. 
e.  Emergency vehicle access roads shall have an unobstructed width of at least twelve (12) feet and an unobstructed vertical clearance of at least thirteen (13) feet six inches. 
f.  Addresses shall be posted with numbers measuring a minimum of four inches in height and shall be visible from the public right-of-way. In addition, during the hours of darkness the numbers shall be internally illuminated. 
    In cases where the accessory dwelling unit is located more than one hundred (100) feet from the public right-of-way, additional non-illuminated contrasting numbers measuring a minimum of six inches in height shall be displayed at the property entrance. 
6.  The entrance to an attached accessory dwelling unit shall be separate from entrance to the primary unit and shall be installed in a manner as to eliminate an obvious indication of two units in the same structure. 
7.  The maximum lot coverage provisions of the land use district shall apply. 
8.  At least one covered or uncovered parking space for the accessory dwelling unit shall be provided by a minimum interior size of nine feet in width and nineteen (19) feet in depth. Parking can be tandem on an existing driveway. The City shall not impose parking standards for an accessory dwelling unit if the accessory dwelling unit is located within one-half mile of public transit. No setback shall be required for an existing garage that is converted to an accessory dwelling unit, and a setback of no more than five feet from the side and rear lot lines shall be required for an accessory dwelling unit that is constructed above a garage. 
9.  The accessory dwelling unit shall be compatible with the design of the primary unit and the surrounding neighborhood in terms of landscaping, scale, height, length, width, bulk, lot coverage, and exterior treatment, and shall not cause excessive noise, traffic, or other disturbances to the existing neighborhood or result in significantly adverse impacts on public services and resources. 
10.  The construction of an accessory dwelling unit shall not be considered when calculating minimum distance requirements for animal uses on the subject lot or on adjacent lots. The accessory dwelling unit shall require a minimum twenty (20) foot setback for the rear and side yards, except as noted in Section 16.12.360(F)(8). 
(Ord. 2003-05 § 4 (part), 2003; Ord. 299 § 4 (Exh. A § 3 (part)), 2000; Ord. 250 (part), 1997; Ord. 192 Exh. A (§ 83.10.020), 1994) 
(Ord. No. 2009-08, § 3(Exh. A), 10-20-09; Ord. No. 2012-14, § 3(Exh. A), 8-7-12; Ord. No. 2017-12 , § 3(Exh. A), 6-20-17) 
16.12.365 - Exotic animals. 
    The keeping of exotic animals shall be permitted in a single-family residential or agricultural designation subject to the requirements of this section. 
A.  Exotic Animal Defined. "Exotic animal" means any warm or cold-blooded animal not normally maintained in a dwelling unit with people or considered domesticated within California. 
B.  Application Procedure. 
1.  An application to keep an exotic animal shall be filed with the planning division in a manner prescribed by the director of development services or his designee, along with a fee as established by resolution of the city council. 
2.  The review procedure shall be administrative review with notice, pursuant to Section 16.12.005(A)(2). Permits for an exotic animal will be issued for a period not to exceed thirty-six (36) months. Applications for renewal may be filed for additional twelve-month periods. Said renewal application must be filed prior to expiration of the exotic animal permit. 
C.  Requirements for Approval. 
1.  Prior to giving notice in accordance with the provisions of Section 16.12.010, the reviewing authority shall request that the applicant submit a statement from a city-approved veterinarian regarding the particular animal's mature behavior and personality characteristics. Notice given to adjacent property owners shall include a description of the type of animal, and its behavior characteristics. 
2.  Any action to approve a request for an exotic animal as an accessory use to a primary single-family residential use shall not be effective until written evidence is received by the director of development services or his designee that: 
a.  The applicant has applied for and obtained a permit from the county public health department; and 
b.  The applicant has applied for and obtained a permit from the State Department of Fish and Game. 
D.  Conditions of Approval. Any action to approve a request for an exotic animal as an accessory use to a primary single-family residential use shall include the following conditions, in addition to any conditions deemed appropriate by the reviewing authority: 
1.  The keeping of the animal must comply with all development code requirements, including setback from property lines and other dwellings; 
2.  The keeping of the animal must comply with all applicable federal and state requirements; 
3.  No more than two exotic animals over the age of six months may be kept as an accessory use to a single-family residence, unless a conditional use permit for a menagerie or zoo has been approved; 
4.  Each exotic animal must have sufficient area to be maintained and exercised in a normal healthy manner, as determined by a city-approved veterinarian; 
5.  Any noise, odor or activity associated with the exotic animal(s) shall be contained within the site. 
(Ord. 192 Exh. A (§ 83.10.040), 1994) 
(Ord. No. 2009-08, § 3(Exh. A), 10-20-09; Ord. No. 2012-14, § 3(Exh. A), 8-7-12) 
ARTICLE XI. - SPECIAL EVENTS AND TEMPORARY USES 

16.12.370 - Purpose of provisions. 
    The purpose of this article is to control and regulate special events and other land use activities of a temporary or recurring nature that may adversely affect the public health, safety, and welfare. The intent is to ensure that these events and uses will be compatible with surrounding land uses, to protect the rights of adjacent residences and landowners, and to minimize any adverse effects on surrounding properties and the environment. 
(Ord. 2002-11 Exh. A (part), 2002) 
(Ord. No. 2012-14, § 3(Exh. A), 8-7-12; Ord. No. 2017-04 , § 3(Exh. A), 3-21-17) 
16.12.375 - General provisions. 
A.  A temporary use or structure which does not have a valid and current use permit as specified herein is declared to be a public nuisance, subject to the enforcement provisions of the development code and other applicable laws. 
B.  A change in ownership or operator of a use or structure subject to a permit as specified in this article, or a change of structure or modification of the structure or use allowed on a parcel subject to such a permit, shall not affect the time periods established by this article to allow such temporary uses, special events or structures. 
C.  Noncompliance with the conditions set forth in approving the permit shall be grounds for the reviewing authority to cancel and void any use permit for a temporary use. Except in the case of a demonstrated emergency, the reviewing authority shall give prior notice of such an action to the permittee. The permittee may appeal such a decision by filing an appeal as allowed and specified in Section 16.12.055. The revocation shall be considered in accordance with Section 16.12.075. 
D.  Unless otherwise specified in this article, the development services director, or his or her designee, is authorized to approve, conditionally approve with reasonable conditions, or to deny a permit for a temporary use or special event. The approval may establish conditions and limitations, including but not limited to: days and hours of operation, provision of parking areas, signing and lighting, traffic circulation and access, temporary or permanent site improvements, and other measures necessary to minimize detrimental effects on surrounding properties. 
E.  The development services director, or his or her designee, may require a cash deposit or cash bond to defray the costs of cleanup of a site by the city in the event the applicant fails to leave the property in a presentable and satisfactory condition, or to guarantee removal and/or reconversion of any temporary use to a permanent use allowed in the subject land use designation. 
(Ord. 2002-11 Exh. A (part), 2002) 
(Ord. No. 2012-14, § 3(Exh. A), 8-7-12; Ord. No. 2017-04 , § 3(Exh. A), 3-21-17) 
16.12.380 - Special event permits. 
A.  All special events shall be subject to the following requirements, as applicable: 
1.  The approval period for any special event shall be for the time period specified on the approval but in no circumstances shall it exceed more than twenty-one (21) continuous days, or more than four consecutive weekends of operation in any ninety-day period. 
2.  Adequate provisions for traffic circulation, off-street parking, and pedestrian safety shall be provided to the satisfaction of the development services director, or his or her designee. 
3.  Sanitation facilities shall be provided for the duration of the event; the number and location to be determined by the reviewing authority. 
4.  Security personnel shall be provided as required by the city police department. 
5.  Parking accommodations for amusement enterprise workers and support vehicles shall be provided as required by the reviewing authority. 
6.  Noise attenuation for generators and carnival rides shall be provided as approved by the reviewing authority. 
7.  Adequate emergency access shall be provided as approved by the fire department. 
8.  A certificate of insurance shall be submitted to the planning division, naming the city as co-insured, for not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) of general liability coverage, prior to issuance of any permits. This requirement may be waived for small events entirely on private property with no impacts to public facilities. 
9.  Adequate staging area shall be provided as approved by the development services director, or his or her designee. 
10.  Any platforms, stages, tents, or screening devices erected for the event shall be constructed to the satisfaction of the building official and/or fire marshal. The structure shall be removed from the site immediately following the event. 
11.  If involvement by government personnel (public works, fire, and police) is required, a deposit to cover estimated costs shall be submitted prior to issuance of the permit. Upon completion of the event, the city will, within twenty (20) working days, either refund any unused portion of the initial deposit, or require payment of any additional expenses incurred. 
12.  In cases where food and/or alcohol products will be sold to the general public in conjunction with the event, proof that permits were obtained from the county department of environmental health services and other applicable agencies shall be submitted prior to issuance of any permits. 
13.  Portable searchlights may be permitted, provided that the beam, when lit, shall not be at an angle of less than sixty (60) degrees from the horizontal, and that no advertising is located on the searchlight or its supporting structure. 
14.  Inflatable signs, balloons or bounce houses may be permitted provided that they are securely tethered. Insurance as specified in subsection (9) shall be required for any event using such inflatable devices. 
B.  Special Event Permits. A special event permit shall be required for the following uses, including but not limited to: 
1.  Parking lot and sidewalk sales for businesses located within a commercially designated property. Any special event for the sale of automobiles, boats, recreational vehicles, pools, spas, trucks, heavy equipment, mobile homes, sheds, modular buildings or similar items shall be limited to businesses with their primary establishment within the Victor Valley, including the town of Apple Valley and the cities of Adelanto, Hesperia and Victorville. The city may, at its option, issue a permit to an applicant with a primary business establishment out of this area, should no special event to sell the proposed items have occurred within the previous three months. The applicant is required to establish the point of sale for the event to be within the city for sales tax purposes. Prior to approval of a permit, the city shall receive a copy of the seller's permit evidencing that the point of sale is within the city. 
2.  Swap meets, outdoor art and craft shows and exhibits. 
3.  Fairs, concerts, or festivals, held outdoors or in temporary enclosures. 
4.  Circuses, carnivals, rodeos, pony riding, or similar traveling amusement enterprises. 
5.  Parades and other events conducted within the public right-of-way. 
6.  Auctions or distress sales. 
7.  Special events for charitable organizations on facilities they occupy on a continual basis. 
(Ord. No. 2012-14, § 3(Exh. A), 8-7-12; Ord. No. 2017-04 , § 3(Exh. A), 3-21-17) 
16.12.382 - Temporary uses. 
A.  A temporary occupancy permit, temporary special event and/or building permit shall be required for the following uses: 
1.  A temporary special event permit is required for food and drink carts located on the property adjacent to established commercial or industrial uses hosting the event. In addition, the use shall have obtained permits from the county department of environmental health services. The regulations within Section 16.16.061 entitled "mobile food vehicle regulations" will apply if the cart meets the definition within Section 16.08.532. 
2.  Christmas tree lots or pumpkin patches shall obtain approval of a temporary special event subject to the following guidelines and conditions: 
a.  Christmas tree lots may operate during the week before Thanksgiving through December 25th. This time does not include reasonable setup or teardown activities. Pumpkin patches may operate during the last week of September through October 31st. Such uses shall be located on unoccupied portions of corner lots abutting at least one road designated on the city's master plan of arterial highways. The sale of Christmas trees may also occur on developed commercial sites occupied by existing retailers that sell trees and plants. 
b.  All lighting shall be directed away from and shielded from adjacent residential areas. 
c.  Adequate provisions for traffic circulation, off-street parking, and pedestrian safety shall be provided as approved by the development services director, or his or her designee. 
d.  All requirements of the city, fire and police departments shall be met for the duration of the use. 
3.  Trailer coaches, motor homes, or mobile homes may be placed on active construction sites, for use as temporary living quarters for security personnel, or as a temporary residence for the subject property owner with approval of a temporary occupancy permit. The following restrictions shall apply: 
a.  The development services director may approve a temporary vehicle for the duration of the construction project, or for a specified period, but not for more than one year. If exceptional circumstances exist, a one-year extension may be granted; provided, that the building permit for the first permanent dwelling or structure on the same site has also been extended. 
b.  Installation of these vehicles may occur only after a valid building permit has been issued by the building division. 
c.  Vehicles permitted pursuant to this section shall not exceed a maximum gross square footage of six hundred fifty (650) square feet in size (tongue not included), and shall have a minimum of two hundred fifty (250) square feet for one or two persons, or a minimum of six hundred (600) square feet for occupancy by three or more persons. The unit must have a valid California vehicle license. Pickup campers shall not be permitted. 
d.  The temporary vehicle installation must meet all requirements of the county department of environmental health services and the city building and safety division. 
e.  Any permit issued pursuant to this section in conjunction with a construction project shall become invalid upon cancellation or completion of the building permit for which this use has been approved, or the expiration of the time for which the approval has been granted. 
f.  The permitted vehicle shall be removed from the site within thirty (30) days of the final approval of the building permit. A motor home, fifth-wheel trailer, or other recreational vehicle permitted under this section shall be disconnected from all utilities at the time of final approval. 
g.  Any vehicle permitted under this section shall be connected to approved sewage, electrical and water facilities at all times when the vehicle is authorized by a temporary occupancy permit. 
h.  A building permit for the installation of a mobile home to be used as a temporary residence permitted under this section shall not be issued, if more than ten years have elapsed between the date of manufacture and the date of the application for the issuance of the permit to install the mobile home. 
4.  Temporary Office Modules. Temporary structures, such as office trailers or prefabricated structures for use as interim offices, classrooms or for security personnel shall require approval of a temporary occupancy permit. The temporary structure shall be allowed in any designation that allows the use pursuant to Section 16.12.085. Recreational vehicles, cargo containers, and mobile homes shall not be used for this purpose. The location of such structures shall be fully screened from the public right-of-way or adjacent residential properties. The city may limit the time allowed for the use of such temporary structures, where it is feasible for such offices, classrooms or security facilities to be integrated into permanent structures. 
5.  Model Homes. Model homes may be used as offices solely for the sale of homes within a recorded tract with approval of a temporary occupancy permit, subject to the following conditions: 
a.  The sales office may be located in the garage of one of the model homes, a temporary office trailer, or within the livable portion of one of the models. 
b.  Approval shall be for a three-year period, at which time the sales office shall be terminated, and if applicable, the structure remodeled to a single-family dwelling. Extensions may be granted by the building official in one-year increments, but no extension shall be granted if over ninety (90) percent of the development is sold. 
c.  A cash deposit, letter of credit, or other security approved by the city shall be submitted to the city, in an amount to be set by the city, to ensure the restoration or removal of the structure. 
d.  The sales office is to be used only for transactions involving the sale, rent, or lease of lots and/or structures within the tract in which the sales office is located, contiguous tracts, or a planned community. However, the planning commission may consider off-site model homes sales offices where permitted by the land use designation, subject to the granting of a temporary occupancy permit as specified in Section 16.12.382. 
e.  Failure to terminate the sales office and remodel the structure, or failure to apply for an extension on or before the expiration date, will result in forfeiture of the cash deposit, a halt in further construction or inspection activity on the project site, and enforcement action to ensure the remodeling of the structure. 
f.  Street improvements and temporary off-street parking at a rate of two spaces per model shall be completed as approved by the planning division, prior to commencement of sales activities or the display of model homes. Access to the parking area shall be prohibited from the rear of double frontage lots. Future street right-of-way along the front or street side yard, with a fully paved surface, may be used for no more than five of the required parking spaces, prior to the time that said right-of-way is accepted by the city for public use. 
g.  All fences proposed in conjunction with the model homes and sales office shall be located outside the public right-of-way. 
h.  Flags, pennants, or other on-site and off-site advertising shall be regulated pursuant to Chapter 16.36 of the development code. 
i.  Use of signs shall require submission of a sign permit application for review and approval prior to installation. 
6.  Off-Site Model Homes. A model home sales office, when not located within one of the three circumstances identified in item Section 16.12.382(A)(5)(d), shall be considered an off-site model home sales office, requiring approval of a temporary occupancy permit. The following criteria shall apply: 
a.  A sales office may only be located within the dwelling itself, or within the garage. Trailers, modular units, or any similar temporary structure shall not be permitted. 
b.  The structure shall be constructed pursuant to the minimum requirements of the land use designation in which it is located. 
c.  Paved parking areas shall provide for at least five spaces and shall be located in proximity to the model home sales office. This off-street parking area shall be completed prior to the commencement of activities or display of model homes and shall include applicable handicapped parking spaces, signs and pavement markings. 
d.  All fences proposed in conjunction with the model home sales office shall be located outside of the public right-of-way. 
e.  Adequate on-site lighting shall be provided to ensure a safe and secure environment, while at the same time being designed and placed in such a manner as to prevent stray light or glare from becoming a nuisance factor for adjacent residentially designated properties and abutting roadways. The lighting design employed shall be a low-level type of system and is not intended to provide the same level of lighting as a comparable commercial or office use. A detailed lighting plan shall be submitted for review and approval to the building division. 
f.  The temporary occupancy permit shall be for a five-year period. Time extensions may be granted up to a maximum of another two years. Any requests for extension of this temporary use permit beyond the maximum of seven years would require the approval of a conditional use permit, pursuant to Article III of this chapter. 
g.  Adequate access from a public right-of-way shall be provided to the structure. A twenty-six (26) foot wide driveway shall be provided as approved by the city engineer. 
h.  The structure shall meet all requirements of the city building division, including but not limited to the installation of handicapped accessible restroom facilities, and adequate utility facilities. 
i.  With the exception of the paved parking and signs, an off-site model home shall be developed and landscaped as a single-family residence. Full landscaping, utilizing drought-resistant type materials, shall include a permanent, underground irrigation system, specimen size trees, and the use of shrubbery, ground cover, non-plant landscape materials, to produce an efficient yet pleasing outdoor environment. 
j.  When the temporary occupancy permit allowing a model home has expired, the home shall be converted and/or remodeled to conform to all requirements for single-family homes, including a two-car garage. A detached garage may be constructed to meet this requirement. 
k.  A city business license shall be required. 
(Ord. 2002-11 Exh. A (part), 2002) 
(Ord. No. 2012-14, § 3(Exh. A), 8-7-12; Ord. No. 2017-04 , § 3(Exh. A), 3-21-17) 
16.12.385 - Application procedure. 
    Applications for temporary use permits and special event permits shall be filed with the planning division in a manner prescribed by the city, along with a fee as adopted by resolution of the city council at least fourteen (14) days prior to the event for minor events unless a shorter time frame is authorized by the director of development services. Any special event permit which requires a partial or complete street closure or which may be attended by approximately five hundred (500) people shall be considered a major event. Major special events may require approval of a traffic control plan and/or other study, use of police and/or fire personnel, and/or providing a surety as required by the review authority. Major events shall be filed with the city at least sixty (60) days prior to the event unless a shorter time frame is authorized by the director of development services. Special events with fewer attendees may also be considered a major event if the event requires that police and/or fire personnel be onsite or if the site or facilities may not accommodate the number of expected participants. 
(Ord. 2002-11 Exh. A (part), 2002) 
(Ord. No. 2012-14, § 3(Exh. A), 8-7-12; Ord. No. 2017-04 , § 3(Exh. A), 3-21-17) 
16.12.390 - New application following denial. 
    Following the denial of a permit application for a temporary use, no application for the same or substantially the same use on the same or substantially the same site shall be filed within one year of the date of denial. 
(Ord. 2002-11 Exh. A (part), 2002) 
(Ord. No. 2012-14, § 3(Exh. A), 8-7-12); Ord. No. 2017-04 , § 3(Exh. A), 3-21-17 
ARTICLE XII. - SUBDIVISION REVIEW PROCEDURES 

16.12.395 - Purpose of provisions. 
    These provisions are intended to establish guidelines for processing subdivision applications including, tentative tracts, tentative parcel maps, lot line adjustments and lot mergers. 
(Ord. 192 Exh. A (§ 83.12.010), 1994) 
(Ord. No. 2012-14, § 3(Exh. A), 8-7-12) 
16.12.400 - General provisions. 
A.  Subdivision applications shall be reviewed and approved in accordance with the provisions of Section 16.12.005. 
B.  No person shall subdivide, convey, lease or offer to subdivide, convey or lease a portion of real property within the city, unless exempted by Section 66412 of the Subdivision Map Act, without having first complied with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. 192 Exh. A (§ 83.12.020), 1994) 
(Ord. No. 2012-14, § 3(Exh. A), 8-7-12) 
16.12.405 - Approval processing procedure. 
A.  All subdivision applications shall require review and approval by the planning commission at a public hearing in accordance with Section 16.12.005(A)(1) except as listed in subsection (B) and (C) of this section. 
B.  The following applications shall require review and approval subject to administrative review with notice in accordance with Section 16.12.005(A)(2): 
1.  Parcel maps creating four and a remainder or fewer parcels; 
2.  Parcel maps subdividing commercially or industrially designated land where the parcel map is required as a condition of approval of a previously approved project; 
3.  Parcel maps creating lots no smaller than twenty (20) acres where legal access is provided to each lot; 
4.  Parcel maps creating lots no smaller than forty (40) acres or where each lot is at least a quarter of a quarter section; 
5.  An environmental subdivision as defined in Section 66418.2 of the Subdivision Map Act; 
6.  Projects which have been recommended for administrative approval by the development review committee, based upon the following criteria: 
a.  The project will not have significant or long-range impacts on surrounding properties, city services, or the environment, 
b.  The project will not establish a new or different pattern of land uses or intensities in the area, 
c.  The project has not generated controversy or opposition, and 
d.  The project is consistent with the city's general plan goals, policies and maps; 
e.  Subdivisions or parcel maps consistent with an approved specific plan or planned development. 
C.  The following applications shall require review and approval subject to administrative review without notice in accordance with Section 16.12.005(A)(3): 
1.  Lot line adjustments; 
2.  Lot mergers; 
3.  Certificate of compliance; 
4.  Certificate of corrections. 
D.  In approving a tentative map or a parcel map for which a tentative map was not required, the planning agency shall find and justify that all the following are true: 
1.  The site is physically suitable for the proposed type of development; 
2.  The site is physically suitable for the proposed density of development; 
3.  The design of the subdivision and the proposed improvements are not likely to cause substantial environmental damage or substantially and avoidably injure fish or wildlife or their habitat; 
4.  The design of the subdivision and any related types of proposed improvements are not likely to cause serious public health problems or cause threat to life and property in a wild land interface; 
5.  The proposed subdivision together with the provisions for its design and improvements are consistent with the general plan, community plan, and any applicable specific plan; 
6.  The proposed subdivision, its design, density and type of development and improvements conform to the regulations of the development code, and the regulations of any public agency having jurisdiction by law; 
7.  Land Project Determination. 
a.  The proposed subdivision is not deemed to be a land project; or 
b.  An adopted specific plan covering the area proposed to be included within the project has been adopted by the city council; and the proposed land project subdivision together with the provisions for its design and improvement are consistent with the adopted specific plan. 
8.  The design of the subdivision provides to the extent feasible, passive or natural heating and cooling opportunities to each of the proposed lots. Such opportunities may include, but are not limited to: placement of structures to take optimum advantage of passive cooling and heating opportunities, providing additional opportunities through land use controls for the use of solar energy systems, adjusting lot depth and width to provide for the future use of solar energy systems, and adjusting building setback lines to promote the optimum spacing of structures to create adequate solar access. 
    The planning agency shall also find and justify, where applicable, that the following are true: 
9.  In the event that the proposed subdivision is a conversion of residential real property into a condominium project, a community apartment project, or a stock cooperative project, the following shall be true: The proposed subdivision has complied with the requirements of California Government Code Sections 66427.1(a) and 66452.10. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; Ord. 192 Exh. A (§ 83.12.030), 1994) 
(Ord. No. 2012-14, § 3(Exh. A), 8-7-12) 
ARTICLE XIII. - CEQA GUIDELINES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2011-04, § 3(Exh. A), adopted May 3, 2011, amended Art. XIII in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. XIII, §§ 16.12.410-16.12.435, pertained to similar subject matter. See the Ordinance List and Disposition Table for full derivation. 

16.12.410 - General. 
A.  Incorporation of State CEQA Guidelines. The CEQA guidelines set for the procedures which shall be used by the lead agency in the implementation of the California Environmental Quality Act of 1970 (CEQA), as amended. The Public Resources Code Section 21000 et seq. ("CEQA") and the state CEQA guidelines as amended are incorporated herein by reference. These guidelines shall apply to any activity or action considered a project within city boundaries and its sphere of influence for proposed annexations. 
B.  Intent. The intent of CEQA is to ensure adequate consideration and analysis of potential environmental impacts anticipated to result from approval of discretionary actions, while streamlining the environmental review process to the extent allowed by law. 
    Local guidelines are intended to give decision makers and the public a general understanding of CEQA requirements. State guidelines are intended to be used in conjunction with local guidelines. If there is any discrepancy between local and state CEQA guidelines, the state guidelines shall rule. 
(Ord. 2011-04, § 3(Exh. A), 5-3-11) 
16.12.415 - CEQA regulations. 
A.  Determining if CEQA is Applicable. The director of development services or his/her designee shall determine whether or not the activity is a "project" subject to CEQA as defined in this article and Section 15378 of the state CEQA guidelines. 
B.  Determining Project Exemption. If the activity is a project under CEQA, the director of development services or his/her designee shall determine if the project is exempt from environmental review. Exemptions shall be determined pursuant to Article 18 and 19 of the state CEQA guidelines. In addition, the following activities or actions shall be exempted from CEQA: 
1.  Lot mergers for two or more parcels; 
2.  Lot line adjustments not resulting in the creation of any new parcel; 
3.  Minor exceptions and variances; 
4.  Applications for second dwelling units, educational animal projects, certificates of correction, and certificates of compliance; 
5.  Extension requests for approved projects, provided the extension request seeks no increase in previously approved entitlements; 
6.  An infill project which is consistent with the general plan and zoning or specific plan and on a project site of no more than five acres which is substantially surrounded by existing development. 
7.  Parcel maps involving four or fewer parcels for residential uses, or parcel maps for commercial, and industrial uses provided the parcel map is consistent with the general plan and zoning or specific plan; 
8.  Temporary special events involving less than one thousand (1,000) attendees; and the event is consistent with the general plan, and zoning or specific plan. 
9.  Discretionary land use approvals that are consistent with an approved specific plan or planned development, for which an environmental finding has already been adopted by the city; 
10.  Development code and specific plan amendments which do not propose to increase the density or intensity allowed in the general plan. 
C.  Submission of Data by Applicant. The lead agency may require the applicant to submit any data or information which may be necessary for the lead agency to determine whether the project may have a significant effect on the environment and to assist in the preparation of an initial study, negative declaration, mitigated negative declaration, or EIR by the lead agency. 
D.  Reviewing Authority. 
1.  The reviewing authority authorized by the development code to act on the project shall be responsible for making the environmental determination, except the planning commission or city council shall decide to certify an environmental impact report (EIR). Decisions by the director of development services or his/her designee, the development review committee, or the planning commission may be appealed pursuant to Section 16.12.055. 
2.  Prior to approving the project, the reviewing authority shall independently review and analyze the negative declaration and any comments received by the lead agency concerning the negative declaration and adopt or disapprove the negative declaration, mitigated negative declaration or EIR. 
E.  Public Notice. Notices shall be published at least one time by the lead agency in a newspaper of general circulation in the area affected by the proposed project. Public notice of the proposed negative declaration may also be given at the same time and in the same manner as the public notice of the project required by Section 16.12.010. 
F.  Preparation of required documentation and supported technical studies may be done by the city, consultant hired by the city, or consultant hired by the project proponents. All documentation shall be prepared under direct supervision of the city. All documentation will be reviewed by and completed to the satisfaction of the city, and shall reflect the city's independent judgment and analysis. 
(Ord. 2011-04, § 3(Exh. A), 5-3-11) 
16.12.420 - Initial study. 
A.  The planning division shall conduct an initial study based on available information and any special analysis or study necessary to fully evaluate impacts. All phases of project planning, implementation, and operation must be considered in the initial study of the project. The initial study will determine if the project may have a significant effect on the environment. 
B.  If the initial study shows that there is no substantial evidence that the project may have a significant environmental effect, a negative declaration shall be prepared. If the project would cause significant environmental effects, but mitigation measures are available to reduce impacts to a less than significant level, a mitigated negative declaration shall be prepared. If the initial study shows that the project would cause significant environmental effects that cannot be reduced to a less than significant level with mitigation, an environmental impact report ("EIR") shall be prepared. 
C.  The initial study questions attached to the state CEQA guidelines as an appendix shall be the initial study used by the lead agency. 
(Ord. 2011-04, § 3(Exh. A), 5-3-11) 
16.12.425 - Determining significant effect. 
    The reviewing authority shall determine, based on substantial evidence, if a project may have a significant effect on the environment. 
(Ord. 2011-04, § 3(Exh. A), 5-3-11) 
16.12.430 - Negative declaration or mitigated negative declaration. 
    A proposed negative declaration shall be prepared for a project when the initial study shows that there is not substantial evidence that the project may have a significant effect on the environment. 
    A proposed mitigated negative declaration shall be prepared for a project when the initial study identifies potentially significant effect, but can be reduced to a less than significant level or eliminated by requiring mitigation measures. 
(Ord. 2011-04, § 3(Exh. A), 5-3-11) 
16.12.435 - Environmental impact report (EIR). 
    If the lead agency finds after an initial study, and despite any mitigation measures that, in light of the whole record, there is substantial evidence that the project may have a significant effect on the environment the lead agency shall prepare or cause to be prepared an environmental impact report. 
    An EIR shall be prepared whenever it can be fairly argued on the basis of substantial evidence that the project may have a significant effect on the environment. The existence of a public controversy over the environmental effects of a project shall not require preparation of an EIR if there is no substantial evidence, in light of the whole recorded before the lead agency, that the project may have a significant effect on the environment. Arguments, speculation, unsubstantiated opinion or narrative, evidence which is clearly inaccurate or erroneous, or evidence of social and economic impacts which do not contribute to, or are not caused by, physical impact on the environment, is not substantial evidence. Substantial evidence shall include facts, reasonable assumptions predicated upon facts, and expert opinion supported by facts. 
(Ord. 2011-04, § 3(Exh. A), 5-3-11) 
16.12.440 - Mitigation measures. 
    Mitigation or mitigation measures required as part of any adopted mitigated negative declaration or certified EIR shall be enforced by the lead agency as law. 
(Ord. 2011-04, § 3(Exh. A), 5-3-11) 
16.12.445 - Tiering. 
    Tiering refers to using an analysis in an EIR previously certified such as for the general plan or specific plan. Tiering is encouraged in order to focus the analysis of the later EIR or negative declaration solely on the issues specific to the later project. Tiering shall be limited to situations where the project is consistent with the general plan, zoning or specific plan of the city in which the project is located. 
(Ord. 2011-04, § 3(Exh. A), 5-3-11) 
16.12.450 - Notice of determination. 
    A notice of determination shall be filed with the county clerk immediately after the approval of the project. The applicant shall be responsible for paying the county clerk and California Department of Fish and Game fees. A notice of determination is not required for categorically or statutory exempt projects. 
(Ord. 2011-04, § 3(Exh. A), 5-3-11) 
Chapter 16.16 - LAND USE DESIGNATIONS 
Sections: 
ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2011-10, § 3(Exh. A), adopted Aug. 16, 2011, amended Article I in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. I, §§ 16.16.010-16.16.040, pertained to general provisions and derived from the 1997 codification, SBCC §§ 86.0105-86.0130. 

16.16.010 - Establishment of land use designations. 
    Any zone or land use designations previously existing under county standards prior to any annexation shall be determined under the standards most applicable to the existing general plan land use designation. 
    The provisions of the development code are applied to the following land use designations: 
R1, R1-4500, or R1-18000 Single-family residence R3 Multiple-family residence RR-20000, RR-1, RR-21/2, or RR (SD) Rural-residential A1 or A1-21/2 Limited agricultural A2 General agricultural AP Administrative and professional office C1 Neighborhood commercial C2 General commercial C3 Service commercial I1 Limited manufacturing I2 General manufacturing P-I Public/institutional P-Gov Government facility 1 P-School Public school 1 P-Park/Rec Park and recreation 1  
Note: 
;b1; 1 Same as P-1. 
(Ord. No. 2011-10, § 3(Exh. A), 8-16-11) 
16.16.020 - Designation boundaries on land use map. 
A.  The boundaries of established designations are shown and delineated on the map entitled "official general plan land use map," as amended and as certified by the city clerk and on file with the city, which are adopted as the official general plan land use map. In addition, the official general plan land use map incorporates specific plans, including the Main Street and Freeway Corridor Specific Plan. These specific plans are identified on the general plan land use map by name or number. 
B.  Changes, additions and amendments to the official general plan land use map shall be determined and defined from time to time by resolution adopting a land use map which shall become, upon final adoption and certification by the city clerk, a part of the official general plan map. 
C.  Unless otherwise noted, general plan land use designation boundaries shall extend to street right-of-way centerlines. 
(Ord. No. 2011-10, § 3(Exh. A), 8-16-11) 
16.16.025 - Land use maps as part of code. 
    The land use map showing the official general plan land use map, classifications and boundaries of land use designations and all notations, references and other information shown thereon, after final adoption in the manner required by law, shall thereafter be as much a part of the development code as if all the matters and information set forth by the map were fully described herein. 
(Ord. No. 2011-10, § 3(Exh. A), 8-16-11) 
16.16.030 - Designation boundary uncertainties. 
    Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of any designations shown on the land use map, the following rules shall apply: 
A.  Where such boundaries are indicated as approximately following street and alley lines or lot lines, such lines shall be construed to be such boundaries. 
B.  In unsubdivided property and where a designation boundary divides a lot, the locations of such boundaries, unless indicated by dimensions, shall be determined by use of the scale appearing on the map. 
C.  Where any uncertainty exists, the planning commission shall determine the location of boundaries. 
D.  Where a public street or alley is officially vacated or abandoned, the regulations applicable to the property to which it reverts shall apply to such vacated or abandoned street or alley. 
(Ord. No. 2011-10, § 3(Exh. A), 8-16-11) 
16.16.035 - General plan land use designations. 
    The boundaries of such designations are shown on the general plan land use map. The regulations of the development code governing the uses of land, buildings, structures, the height of buildings and structures, the sizes of yards about buildings and structures and other matters as hereinafter set forth, are established and declared to be in effect upon all land included within the boundaries of each and every designation shown upon the general plan land use map. 
(Ord. No. 2011-10, § 3(Exh. A), 8-16-11) 
16.16.040 - General use provisions. 
A.  Except as otherwise provided in the development code, buildings or structures shall be erected, reconstructed, structurally altered, enlarged, moved or maintained, and buildings, structures or land shall be used or designed to be used only for uses permitted in the land use designation in which such building, structure or land is located, and then only after applying for and securing all permits and licenses required by all laws and ordinances. 
B.  Where the term "other uses similar to the above" is mentioned, it shall be deemed to mean other uses which, in the judgment of the reviewing authority as evidenced by a written decision, are similar to and not more objectionable to the general welfare than the uses listed in the same section. In no instance, however, shall the reviewing authority determine, nor shall these regulations be so interpreted, that a use shall be permitted in a land use designation when such use is specifically listed as first permissible in a less restricted land use designation. The planning commission may, on its own motion or at the request of any party affected thereby, reconsider and change a written decision regarding other uses previously determined by the reviewing authority. Upon requesting such reconsideration, an unsuccessful applicant may appeal to the city council in the same manner and upon payment of the same fee as if the applicant were appealing from denial of a deviation. 
C.  Prior to taking an action to find a use similar to and not more objectionable to the general welfare than the uses listed within the text of a land use designation of this chapter, the planning commission or reviewing authority shall find all of the following: 
1.  That the use is not first listed as a permitted use in a less restrictive land use designation; 
2.  That the proposed use is compatible with the intent of the land use designation and is applicable throughout the city in that land use designation; 
3.  That the proposed use is consistent with the general plan and any applicable community plan or specific plan; 
4.  That the use is capable of meeting the standards and requirements of the land use designation; 
5.  That the use will not be more objectionable to the general welfare than the uses listed within the land use designation. 
D.  Uses of a more restrictive land use designation when listed as "permitted uses" in a less restrictive land use designation shall not be applied cumulatively with the same uses in the less restrictive land use designation. 
(Ord. No. 2011-10, § 3(Exh. A), 8-16-11) 
ARTICLE II. - ACCESSORY USE REGULATIONS 

16.16.045 - Purpose of provisions. 
    The provisions of this article shall be known as the "Accessory Use Regulations." The purpose of these provisions is to establish the relationship among the principal and accessory uses and the criteria for regulating accessory uses other than those specified within a zone, land use district or the use classification. 
(SBCC § 87.0901) 
16.16.050 - Additional accessory uses. 
A.  In addition to the accessory use types and accessory uses specifically provided for elsewhere within the development code, each land use type and listed land use shall be deemed to include such other accessory uses which are necessarily and customarily associated with and are clearly incidental and subordinate to said land use type or land use. Whenever such accessory uses are questioned, it shall be the responsibility of the building official to determine if a proposed accessory use meets the criteria set forth in this section. Prior to making a determination whether or not a proposed accessory use meets the criteria set forth in this section, the building official shall give notice to all contiguous property owners. 
B.  Whenever a conflict exists between the provisions of this section and specified accessory use types as described in a base district or land use district, the land use district shall prevail; moreover, whenever a conflict exists between the provisions of this section and a specified accessory use as called out within a zone district, the provisions of the zone district shall prevail. 
(SBCC § 87.0905) 
16.16.055 - Control of accessory uses. 
    Accessory uses shall be controlled in the same manner as the principal uses within each district, except as otherwise provided by these regulations. 
(SBCC § 87.0910) 
ARTICLE III. - ADDITIONAL USES 

16.16.060 - Uses provided for in any zone or land use district. 
A.  Land uses listed in Section 16.16.060(A)(2) may be permitted or conditionally permitted in any zone or land use designation subject to the land use entitlement established in Table 1 and when one or more of the conditions cited in Section 16.16.060(A)(1) have been met. Land uses approved with a site plan review (SPR) shall be in accordance with the provisions in Chapter 16.12, Article II; and land uses approved with a conditional use permit (CUP) shall be in accordance with the provisions in Chapter 16.12, Article III. 
1.  Condition of Uses. 
a.  The location of land use is determined by other land uses which are directly supported by the proposed use; or 
b.  The land use is part of the community or regional infrastructure; or 
c.  The location of the proposed use is determined by the location of raw materials in their natural state such as mineral deposits, natural vegetation and energy sources; or 
d.  The character of the proposed use is such that it requires a remote location away from other land uses; or 
e.  The land use is deemed essential or desirable to the public convenience or welfare. 
2.  Land Uses Permitted Subject to Land Use Approval. The additional uses in this section are provided in a table format and apply to all land use designations or districts in the city, including specific plan areas. Land uses are listed in the first (vertical) column of the table and required land use entitlements in the top (horizontal) row. An "X" in the corresponding column represents the required entitlement process. Footnotes are also provided and considered part of this Development Code. 
Table 1 
SPR CUP GENERAL USES: Cemeteries, including pet cemeteries 1 X Solid waste disposal sites, rubbish incinerators and recycling centers X Sewer treatment plants and sewage disposal sites X Electrical generating stations, as defined in Section 16.08.208 2 X X Solar or wind farms, as defined in Section 16.08.771 3 & 4 X Radio and television stations or towers providing broadcast services X Racetracks or stadiums X Campgrounds, not exceeding a density of four sites per acre X Natural resources (i.e. mineral deposits and natural vegetation together with the necessary buildings, apparatus or appurtenances incidental thereto) X Transportation facilities principally involved in the movement of people together with the necessary buildings, apparatus or appurtenances incidental thereto, including, but not limited to, train stations and bus stations 5 X Carpool facilities X Testing ranges, airports, landing strips, launching/testing facilities and other aerospace-type uses 4 X Self-storage facilities 8 X INSTITUTIONAL USES: Schools and universities 2 & 6 X X Conference centers 2 X X Hospitals X Churches X Rehabilitation centers 7 X Organizational camps 7 X PUBLIC UTILITIES AND PUBLIC SERVICE USES: Temporary and permanent governmental facilities and enterprises (federal, state and local) where buildings and/or property are publicly owned or leased X Reservoirs, pumping plants X Temporary support facilities associated with the construction of highways and other public facilities including, but not limited to, batch plants and equipment storage yards X Electrical substations, as defined in Section 16.08.209 2 X X Central communication office X Microwave and repeater huts X Towers and satellite receiving stations X SPORT ORIENTED RECREATIONAL USES: Sky diving jump sites, and recreational camps X Rifle and archery ranges (indoor/outdoor) X Off-road vehicle parks X Golf courses, country clubs X Hunting and fishing clubs X  
Notes: 
1.  Cemeteries shall not be allowed in the R3 land use designation. 
2.  Projects in nonresidential designations shall require approval of a SPR. Projects in residential and agricultural designations shall require approval of a CUP. 
3.  Solar or Wind farms shall be subject to Section 16.16.036, Alternative Energy Technology Standards. 
4.  These uses shall not be allowed in residential and agricultural land use designations or districts. 
5.  Bus stations shall not be allowed in the PC District of the Main Street and Freeway Corridor Specific Plan. 
6.  A CUP shall be required in areas specified by the Main Street and Freeway Corridor Specific Plan. 
7.  These uses shall be subject to Section 16.16.072, Residential care facilities, group homes, and sex offender residency. 
8.  Shall be subject to Section 16.16.365(H). Self-storage facilities, also known as mini-storage facilities, shall not be allowed in zones prohibited by the Main Street and Freeway Corridor Specific Plan. 
B.  Unless preempted by state or federal law, the specific land uses listed in Section 16.16.060(B)(2) shall be permitted or conditionally permitted in any zone or land use designation when, in the opinion of the reviewing authority, the conditions cited in Section 16.16.060(B)(1) have been met. 
1.  Condition of Permitted Uses. 
a.  The land use has been approved at public hearing by a state or federally appointed body or commission empowered to approve or license the land use; 
b.  Notice has been given so as to provide an opportunity for those interested or affected by the proposed use to take part in local public hearings conducted by the state or federal body or commission approving the land use; 
c.  The review process used by the approving agency has substantially addressed the same issues and concerns that would be addressed in applicable city review and approval process; 
d.  The approving state or federal body or commission has made a reasonable effort to respond to concerns expressed by the City of Hesperia. 
e.  The approval of the land use would not have a substantial detrimental effect on the public health, safety and welfare; 
f.  Approval of the land use has complied with applicable provisions of the California Environmental Quality Act; 
g.  The land use is consistent with the city's general plan. 
2.  Permitted Uses. 
a.  Projects approved by the State Energy Commission; 
b.  Projects approved by the U.S. Forest Service; 
c.  Projects approved by the Bureau of Land Management; 
d.  Projects approved by the State Lands Commission; 
e.  State or federal water projects. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; Ord. 208 Exh. A (part), 1995; SBCC § 87.1901) 
(Ord. No. 2012-07, § 3(Exh. A), 6-19-12; Ord. No. 2019-03 , § 3(Exh. A), 2-5-19) 
16.16.061 - Mobile food vehicle regulations. 
A.  Purpose and intent. The city expressly finds that mobile food vehicles have the potential to pose traffic hazards and special dangers to the public health, safety and welfare. It is the purpose and intent of the city, in enacting this section, to provide responsible companies and persons, which engage in the operation of a mobile food vehicle, with clear and concise regulations to prevent safety, traffic and health hazards, as well as to preserve the peace, safety and welfare of the community. 
B.  Regulations for all mobile food vehicles. It is unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale, or operate any vehicle or conduct any business for the purpose of causing the sale of, or offering for sale, any hot and/or cold foods and related goods or merchandise, from any mobile food vehicle parked, stopped or standing upon any public street, alley, parkway, sidewalk or public/private property in the city, except in accordance with all applicable provisions of this section. All mobile food vehicles and their operators conducting business in the city shall comply with the following: 
i.  Shall obtain a business license for each mobile food vehicle before vending in the city. In addition, the mobile food vehicle shall possess a mobile food services permit, a temporary use permit or a temporary special event permit. 
ii.  Shall have a decal and letter grade posted on the vehicle issued by the county health department; 
iii.  Shall obtain property owner authorization when temporarily or permanently vending on private property; 
iv.  Shall carry evidence of written property owner authorization at all times; 
v.  Shall not be stationed within a street or a public way or within the clear sight triangle; 
vi.  Shall not be stationed within five hundred (500) feet from any operating commercial restaurant building in the City of Hesperia, unless the mobile food vehicle is operated by said restaurant; 
vii.  Shall not be stationed in any location that blocks or otherwise interferes with the free movement of vehicles, pedestrians, or accessible (handicap) parking or path of travel; 
viii.  Shall not back up in a street or a public way to make or attempt to make a sale; 
ix.  Shall be equipped with refuse containers large enough to contain all refuse generated by the operation of such vehicle, and the operator of the food vehicle shall pick up all refuse generated by such operation within a fifty-foot radius of the vehicle before such vehicle is moved; 
x.  Shall be subject to other regulations in the Hesperia Municipal Code, including but not limited to noise and light/glare regulations; 
xi.  A commercial property or shopping center, which has three or more mobile food vehicles at the same time, shall be required to obtain a temporary use/special event permit; 
xii.  It is unlawful and a public nuisance for any person to operate a mobile food vehicle upon any private property within the city, where notice of such prohibition has been posted and is clearly visible from at least two entrances to the prohibited area or in the immediate area where such activity is prohibited. If the property has a single (sole) entrance, posting a notice at one entrance shall be sufficient. This provision shall not apply to mobile food vehicles participating in any event for which a temporary use/special event permit has been granted or for a community event. 
xiii.  If there is a dispute that the property owner cannot resolve, the director may order the signs to be posted consistent with Section 16.16.062(B)(xii) and the property owner to obtain a temporary use permit/special event permit. 
xiv.  Other mobile food vending apparatuses, not classified as mobile food vehicles, shall be regulated by Chapter 5.24, Peddling, Soliciting and Hawking and/or subsequent amendments; 
xv.  Upon applying for a permit, evidence shall be submitted demonstrating that the operator or vendor has obtained a sellers permit from the state board of equalization; 
xvi.  No person shall drive or operate or cause or permit to be driven any mobile food vehicle in the city unless the operator or the vendor thereof shall have obtained a liability insurance policy from a responsible and solvent corporation, authorized to issue such policies under the laws of the state, insuring such operator or vendor and covering the mobile food vehicle. The City of Hesperia shall be named as an additional insured under the policy. The director of development services or his/her designee may waive the insurance requirement for minor events or temporary use permits; 
xvii.  The director of development services or his/her designee is responsible for interpreting this section and determining which permit is applicable to a particular circumstance; 
xviii.  Shall pay license or permit fees in an amount established by the city council. 
C.  Roaming mobile food vehicles: All mobile food vehicles that roam throughout the city, as defined in this Code, shall comply with the following: 
a.  Shall possess a mobile food services permit before vending in the city. The mobile food services permit shall be an annual permit; 
b.  Prior to the city issuing a business license and a mobile food service permit, the applicant of a mobile food vehicle shall submit the following information: 
i.  Name of company and person(s) responsible for the vehicle; 
ii.  Address and telephone of company and person(s) responsible for the vehicle; 
iii.  A copy of a California driver's license of person(s) responsible for the vehicle; 
iv.  License plate number, evidence of the vehicle's current registration, and vehicle identification number for the vehicle; 
v.  Two pictures of the vehicle from two sides; 
vi.  A brief description of the business; 
vii.  A list of properties on which the mobile food vehicle will be stationed, as well as property owner authorizations that correspond to those properties. The properties may be listed by address or parcel number (APN); 
viii.  Upon business license renewal and subsequent renewals, vendors shall provide an updated list of sites on which the mobile food vehicle has been, or will be, stationed throughout the previous and upcoming year, as well as owner authorizations that correspond to those properties; 
c.  Shall comply with regulations in Section 16.16.062(B); 
d.  Mobile food vehicles shall not be stationary on any site for a period exceeding sixty (60) minutes, unless a readily available toilet and handwashing facility are provided within two hundred (200) feet of the vehicle. After the allotted time, vehicles shall not vend on the same property, or within five hundred (500) feet of that property, for a period of two hours; 
e.  Shall not operate between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. within any residential designated area and shall not operate within one hundred fifty (150) feet from any residential designated property; 
f.  Shall prominently display the company's name, address and phone number with two-inch-minimum letters and numbers on both sides of the vehicle; 
g.  One portable sign, not to exceed twenty (20) square feet and a height of four feet, may be displayed outside of a mobile food vehicle when displayed in conjunction with an operating mobile food vehicle. The sign shall be considered part of the mobile food vehicle and cannot be placed where the vehicle would otherwise be prohibited. The sign shall be removed upon the mobile food vehicle leaving the property; 
h.  The mobile food service permit shall not be transferrable to a different vehicle, person, company, operator or vendor. The city shall be notified in writing if there are changes in the contact information for the person(s) responsible or company; 
i.  Upon the applicant demonstrating compliance with these regulations, a mobile food service permit may be issued by the director of development services or his/her designee. 
D.  Temporary Use/Special Event Permit. Mobile food vehicles may be permitted with a temporary use permit or temporary special event permit consistent with Sections 16.12.370 thru 16.12.390 of the Development Code and subject to the following: 
a.  Temporary Use Permit. Food trucks that are stationary for a period of more than sixty (60) minutes on a property, and not part of a special event, shall obtain a temporary use permit. 
b.  Temporary Special Event Permit. Mobile food vehicles may operate as part of a special event or festival only when a temporary special event permit has been granted for such event. Special events with one or more mobile food vehicles shall obtain a temporary special event permit. 
c.  Mobile food vehicles allowed with a temporary use permit or temporary special event permit shall be subject to the following: 
i.  Mobile food vehicles shall be subject to the regulations in Section 16.16.062(B); 
ii.  Shall not conflict with site features, including but not limited to parking and access requirements, required by the Development Code; 
iii.  All mobile food vehicles that are situated on a property for a period exceeding sixty (60) minutes shall maintain adequate restrooms and hand washing facilities within two hundred (200) feet consistent with state law; 
iv.  May require a conditional use permit where the magnitude or longevity of the use requires the permit and/or approval in the discretion of the director; 
v.  A parcel shall be limited to six special events with mobile food vehicles per calendar year. An event which takes place on Friday, Saturday and Sunday on one weekend will be considered one event, for the purposes of calculating the number of events per property. If Monday occurs on a legal holiday, it will be considered part of a weekend. 
d.  The applicant for a temporary use permit or temporary special event permit shall supply a site plan and other information the city may reasonably require based upon the location, intensity, and level of services required for each proposed use or event. 
i.  The applicant must show or provide, at a minimum, the following information: 
(1)  Location(s) of vending/staging area(s); 
(2)  Existing site features (e.g. property lines, buildings/structures, parking areas, drive aisles, drive approach, etc.); 
(3)  Provisions for adequate ingress/egress and adequate parking; 
(4)  Trash receptacles; 
(5)  Restrooms; 
ii.  For special events, with anticipated attendance of over five hundred (500) persons, the applicant must show or provide, in addition to the above, the following information: 
(1)  Sanitary facilities; 
(2)  Noise impact(s); 
(3)  Site lighting; 
(4)  Special traffic control measures, including the use of traffic enforcement officers, barricades, cones, signs, maps and any other traffic control devices of any type; 
(5)  Fire protection, including location of fire hydrants and supplemental water: sources; 
(6)  Medical/first aid facilities; 
(7)  Water facilities. 
e.  Upon the applicant demonstrating compliance with the regulations, a temporary use permit or a temporary special event permit may be issued by the director of development services or his/her designee; 
E.  Community Events. Mobile food vehicles operated in conjunction with a community event are not required to obtain a mobile food services permit, a temporary use permit or a temporary special event permit. A community event means an event that is of civic, public, or educational nature, including city festivals, circuses, farmer's market, and other public gathering events, that is sponsored by a public agency or occurs on public premises. Authorization from the public agency shall be required; 
F.  Actions as a Result of Violations: 
a.  Denials. The director of development services or his/her designee may deny an application for a mobile food services permit, a temporary use permit, a temporary special event permit or renewal thereof, if there is evidence on the record that the mobile food vehicle has operated, or the event operator has operated an event, within the city, in violation of the law; and/or poses a threat to the public's health, safety or welfare. 
b.  Conditions of approval. The director of development services or his/her designee may place operating conditions as a condition of approving the permit. It shall be unlawful and a public nuisance to violate any condition of approval associated with a permit issued pursuant to this section. 
c.  Appeals. Denial of a mobile food service permit, temporary special use permit or temporary special event permit or conditions of approval thereof, may be appealed consistent with the provisions in Section 16.12.055 of the Development Code. 
d.  Revocation of a permit. Any mobile food service permit, temporary use permit, or temporary special event permit for a mobile food vehicle may be revoked consistent with the provisions in Section 16.12.075 of the Development Code. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01, § 3(Exh. A), 2-5-13) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2013-01, § 3(Exh. A), adopted February 5, 2013, amended the Code by adding provisions designated as a new § 16.16.062. Inasmuch as there already exist provisions so designated, the provisions of Ord. No. 2013-01, § 3(Exh. A) have been included herein as a new § 16.16.061 at the discretion of the editor. See also the Code Comparative Table and Disposition List. 
16.16.062 - Wireless communications facilities. 
A.  Definition. For the purpose of this section the following definitions apply: 
1.  "Facility" means any facility, device or apparatus, including, but not limited to, telecommunications towers, satellite dishes, antennae and buildings or other types of communication array for the transmission or receipt of wireless telecommunications, radio communications or radio-transmission of energy. However, "facility" shall not include, and this section will not apply to, any satellite dish or parabolic antenna of two meters or less in diameter or diagonal measurement. 
2.  "Telecommunications tower" means a freestanding mast, pole, monopole, guyed tower, lattice tower, free standing tower or other structure designed and primarily used to support wireless telecommunications facility antennas including but not limited to monopoles, monopines, monopalms and similar monopoles camouflaged to resemble faux trees or other faux objects (e.g. water towers). 
B.  The placement, construction, modification and use of a facility may be permitted subject to the prior approval of a conditional use permit by the planning commission. 
C.  In addition to those items required to be submitted with an application for a conditional use permit as provided in the code, the applicant shall submit the following with its application: 
1.  A proposed service plan for the city and sphere area to justify the location, design and height of any proposed facility, including but not limited to a propagation map and alternative site analysis; 
2.  Proof that the applicant has obtained all necessary approvals for the facility from the Federal Communications Commission, the California Public Utilities Commission, or other governmental agency having jurisdiction over the facility and that the proposal is consistent with such approvals; 
3.  A statement of the term during which the facility will be put to use and a bond or irrevocable letter of credit in an amount to cover the reasonable cost of removing the facility in the event of abandonment. Such bond or irrevocable letter of credit shall be made payable to the city upon demand in the event of abandonment and shall not expire before the end of the term during which the facility is to be used. 
D.  The planning commission shall decide to approve or deny an application for a conditional use permit for the placement, construction, modification and use of a facility in consideration of the following: 
1.  The placement of each facility shall be consistent with the applicable land use district in which the facility is proposed; 
2.  Each facility shall not be taller than the maximum height allowed in the land use district in which the facility is proposed, without concurrent approval of a variance by the planning commission; 
3.  Any telecommunications tower proposed to be taller than fifty (50) feet in height shall be designed to accommodate the co-location of at least one other facility. A co-location agreement, valid for the life of the telecommunications tower, shall be recorded as approved by the city attorney; 
4.  A facility shall be located at least one thousand (1,000) feet from the nearest legally established facility. This requirement shall be reduced to five hundred (500) feet for any new facility that is proposed to be located on any of the following land uses, provided that the site is at least five acres: 
a.  Any park site; 
b.  Any site that is designated as "public" on the city's general plan land use map; 
c.  Any public or private school campus; 
d.  Any church that is the sole occupant of a site; 
e.  Any site that is designated as "commercial" or "industrial" on the city's general plan land use map with a minimum of thirty thousand (30,000) square feet of developed structures on-site; 
f.  Any golf course; and 
g.  Within a designated "utility corridor" as shown on the city's general plan land use map (this provision is not subject to the five acre minimum). 
5.  The design features and height of each facility shall be consistent with the applicable land use district in which the facility is proposed. In determining the appropriateness of design features and height of a proposed facility, the planning commission shall consider: 
a.  The intended service area of the facility, 
b.  The reasonable possibility of co-locating the facility with another existing facility, 
c.  The reasonable possibility of locating the facility on an existing structure, 
d.  The reasonable possibility of locating the facility on any of the land uses identified in Section 16.16.062(D)(4) of this article, 
e.  The reasonable possibility of designing the facility to conceal its intended purpose and minimize the potential visual impacts. At a minimum, the location and design of the facility must be in concert with its surroundings, 
f.  The facility to the greatest extent feasible shall be designed so that it is aesthetically and architecturally compatible with the surrounding use, 
g.  A facility mounted on a building or structure shall be aesthetically and architecturally compatible with the building or structure or shall be screened with materials that are aesthetically and architecturally compatible with the building, 
h.  The facility shall have subdued colors and be covered with non-reflective materials, 
i.  The facility as proposed shall have been approved by the Federal Communications Commission, California Public Utilities Commission or other governmental agency having jurisdiction over the facility and the facility shall be consistent in matters with such approvals, and 
j.  The availability of alternate sites proposed to be located within the same land use district within which the facility is proposed to be located and the availability of reasonably and functionally equivalent alternate sites located in land use districts other than that within which the facility is proposed to be located. 
E.  In the event a facility is abandoned, the holder of the conditional use permit for the facility shall remove the facility at its sole cost and expense. A facility shall be considered abandoned if it ceases to be used as allowed in the conditional use permit for more than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days. 
F.  In the event the planning commission denies an application for a conditional use permit for a facility, it shall render its decision in writing and shall support its decision by substantial evidence in the written record. 
(Ord. 290 § 4 (Exh. A), 2000) 
( Ord. No. 2015-13 , § 3(Exh. A), 1-19-16) 
16.16.063 - Alternative energy technology standards. 
A.  Windmills, as defined by Section 16.08.890, shall be permitted in accordance with Section 16.16.064 and subject to the provisions as provided herein. 
1.  The structure and all appurtenant equipment for all tower-mounted windmills shall be located behind the primary building, not within the front or street side yard, and a minimum setback of equivalent to the overall structure height from the side and rear property lines. Guy wires may encroach into the minimum setbacks, but shall not encroach over property lines. 
a.  Windmill(s) may be located up to twenty-five (25) percent closer to the front property line than the primary building when the primary building is located within the rear twenty-five (25) percent of the lot if approved under a minor exception application pursuant to Article VI of Chapter 16.12. 
b.  To allow the setback reduction above, it shall be demonstrated that the windmill(s) meet the minimum noise requirements within Section 16.16.063(A)(3) and under no circumstances shall a windmill be located within the minimum front yard setback or a recorded building setback line. 
2.  The structure may need to be farther from the property lines based upon the required specifications regarding noise identified in Section 16.16.063(A)(3). 
3.  Specifications on the noise produced by the windmill shall be submitted for windmills within all zone districts, identifying the distance from the structure to the property line to meet the city's noise ordinance. The setback shall be increased should the manufacturers' specifications evidence that the windmill would exceed the evening noise standard at any property line. 
4.  Tower-mounted windmills shall not exceed the height limitation of the zone district in conjunction with the special height increases of Section 16.20.060 except for developed properties in residential and agricultural designations as defined below. The height shall be measured to the top of the blades or rotors or any other portion of the windmill, which extends farthest above ground level. The blades and rotors of the windmill shall be a minimum of fifteen (15) feet above ground level at the lowest point to ensure the safety of persons and property beneath. 
a.  The height of windmills on lots less than ninety thousand (90,000) square feet in net area may be equivalent to one-half the lot width. 
b.  Windmills on lots ninety thousand (90,000) square feet or larger in net area may be up to eighty (80) feet in height. 
c.  Windmills on lots exceeding 2.5 gross acres and less than five gross acres in size may be up to one hundred (100) feet in height. 
d.  Windmills on lots five gross acres or larger in area may be up to one hundred twenty (120) feet in height. 
e.  Approval of additional height beyond the limits described in Section 16.063(A)(4) shall require approval of a variance. 
5.  Multiple tower-mounted windmills are allowed subject to compliance with the minimum setback and accessory structure lot coverage limitations as well as in conformance with the noise ordinance. The area of a windmill is defined as the circular area measured horizontally at the farthest spread of the rotors/blades of the windmill from the pole in determining accessory structure lot coverage. 
6.  Roof-mounted windmills shall not exceed fifty (50) feet or the height regulation of the zone district, whichever is greater. Approval of a minor exception is needed to exceed the height restriction by up to ten percent and approval of a variance shall be required to exceed the allowed height beyond ten percent. Roof-mounted windmills do not qualify for the special height increases of Section 16.20.060. The height shall be measured from the ground to the top of the blade/rotor or any other portion of the windmill. 
7.  Specifications on the noise produced by the windmill shall be submitted pursuant to Section 16.16.063(A)(3), identifying the distance from the structure to the property line necessary to meet the city's noise ordinance. The windmill shall be located so that it does not exceed the evening noise standard at any property line. 
8.  All windmills shall be a light gray, white, or other city-approved non-reflective color to minimize visual disruption of the area. Use of conspicuous colors is prohibited. Windmills shall not contain signs or be illuminated, unless required by state or federal law. 
9.  Nothing in this development code amendment shall be construed to affect the structural requirements for any windmill, as enforced by the building and safety division. All windmills shall require issuance of a building permit prior to installation. 
10.  All mechanical equipment associated with the windmill located outdoors shall be secured by a minimum five-foot high fence to prevent unauthorized access. Ladders or step bolts on the side of towers shall be a minimum of nine feet above ground level or shall be equipped with an approved method to prevent unauthorized access. 
11.  Windmills shall be equipped with manual and automatic controls to limit the operational speed of the blades/rotor to the design limits of the windmill. An automatic braking, governing or feathering system shall also be provided to prevent uncontrolled rotation. 
12.  No windmill shall cause any electromagnetic interference. 
13.  Windmills shall be kept in good working order and shall be maintained in an aesthetic state. All windmills which are in a nonoperational state for one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days or more shall be considered abandoned and shall be dismantled and removed from the property at the owner's expense. 
14.  Wind farms shall be allowed in, institutional and industrial designations or districts with approval of a conditional use permit. 
a.  Wind farms shall not be permitted within six hundred sixty (660) feet of a railway spur, any interstate, highway, or major arterial, arterial, or Secondary Arterial roadway; or any agricultural or residentially designated property. 
A.  In addition to those items required to be submitted with an application for a conditional use permit as provided in the code, the applicant shall submit the following with its application: 
1.  A proposed service plan for the city and sphere area to justify the location, design and height of any proposed facility; 
2.  Prior to issuance of a building permit, the applicant shall obtain all necessary approvals for the facility from Southern California Edison, the California Public Utilities Commission, or other governmental agency having jurisdiction over the facility and that the proposal is consistent with such approvals; 
3.  A statement of the term during which the facility will be put to use and a bond or irrevocable letter of credit in an amount to cover the reasonable cost of removing the facility in the event of abandonment. Such bond or irrevocable letter of credit shall be made payable to the city upon demand in the event of abandonment and shall not expire before the end of the term during which the facility is to be used. 
B.  In the event a facility is abandoned, the holder of the conditional use permit for the facility shall remove the facility at its sole cost and expense. A facility shall be considered abandoned if it ceases to be used as allowed in the conditional use permit for more than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days. 
B.  Solar systems which exceed fifteen (15) percent of the lot area shall not be considered an accessory use and shall be defined as a solar farm. Roof-mounted solar systems may cover the entire roof of the primary dwelling unit, excluding the area of the roof needed for fire accessibility. Solar farms shall only be allowed on nonresidential and nonagricultural designated properties with approval of a conditional use permit by the planning commission. Solar farms shall not be permitted within six hundred sixty (660) feet of a railway spur, any interstate, highway, or major arterial, arterial, or secondary arterial roadway; or any agricultural or residentially designated property. 
1.  In addition to those items required to be submitted with an application for a conditional use permit as provided in the code, the applicant shall submit the following with its application: 
a.  A proposed service plan for the city and sphere area to justify the location, design and height of any proposed facility; 
b.  Prior to issuance of a building permit, the applicant shall obtain all necessary approvals for the facility from Southern California Edison, the California Public Utilities Commission, or other governmental agency having jurisdiction over the facility and that the proposal is consistent with such approvals; 
c.  A statement of the term during which the facility will be put to use and a bond or irrevocable letter of credit in an amount to cover the reasonable cost of removing the facility in the event of abandonment. Such bond or irrevocable letter of credit shall be made payable to the city upon demand in the event of abandonment and shall not expire before the end of the term during which the facility is to be used. 
d.  A decorative screening fence or wall shall be installed along the perimeter of the solar farm. The type and height of the fencing shall be subject to review and approval. 
2.  In the event a facility is abandoned, the holder of the conditional use permit for the facility shall remove the facility at its sole cost and expense. A facility shall be considered abandoned if it ceases to be used as allowed in the conditional use permit for more than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days. 
(Ord. No. 2009-12, § 3, 2-16-10; Ord. No. 2011-08, § 3(Exh.A), 8-2-11; Ord. No. 2012-07, § 3(Exh. A), 6-19-12) 
16.16.064 - Alternative energy permitting requirements. 
Alternative 
Energy 
Technology Zone District Single-family residential, rural residential and agricultural districts 1 Multiple-family residential districts Commercial districts 2 Industrial and institutional districts 3 Tower-mounted windmill Allowed as an accessory structure on developed 15,000 square foot and larger lots. Allowed as an accessory structure on a developed lot if approved by a Revised Site Plan Review application. Allowed as an accessory structure on a developed lot if approved by a Revised Site Plan Review application. Allowed as an accessory structure on developed lots. Roof-mounted windmill Allowed as an accessory structure on developed 15,000 square foot and larger lots. Not permitted. Allowed as an accessory structure on a developed lot if approved by a Revised Site Plan Review application. Roof-mounted solar energy systems Allowed as an accessory structure on a developed lot. Roof-mounted solar systems should be designed approximately parallel to the roof plane or integral to the roof material. The angle may be reduced from the optimal angle provided it does not cause greater than a 20% reduction in efficiency or increase its cost more than $2,000 over the original design's cost. Satisfactory scientific evidence providing the optimal angle and specific costs shall be submitted to the City. Allowed as an accessory structure on a developed lot. Ground-mounted solar energy systems Allowed as an accessory structure within the rear yard of a developed lot if a roof-mounted system is deemed infeasible. Approval shall be subject to the determination that the configuration and location of buildings, orientation of the roof planes, tree locations, or other factors which negatively affect system efficiency, prevent installation on the roof. Allowed as an accessory structure on a developed lot provided the system does not interfere with required parking, landscaping, and other improvements.  
1 This includes rural residential, as well as single-family residential, rural residential and agricultural districts within Specific Plan and Planned Development districts. 
2 This includes similar commercial districts within Specific Plan and Planned Development districts. 
3 This includes similar industrial and institutional districts within Specific Plan and Planned Development districts. 
(Ord. No. 2009-12, § 3(Exh. A), 2-16-10; Ord. No. 2011-08, § 3(Exh. A), 8-2-11) 
16.16.065 - Bed and breakfast uses. 
A.  Bed and breakfast uses as defined in Section 16.08.080, shall be permitted in all residential zone/land use districts and all zone/land use districts where residential uses are permitted. 
B.  Requirements. 
1.  Only one family dwelling structure, including habitable accessory structures shall be considered for bed and breakfast uses. 
2.  This use shall be conducted as an accessory use only; the residential structure shall serve as the primary residence of the owner. If a corporation is the owner, a majority shareholder of the corporation shall reside in the residential structure where the said use is proposed. 
3.  Permits-Taxes. 
a.  All bed and breakfast uses shall be subject to: 
i.  Special use permit as specified in Chapter 16.12. The special use permit is renewable annually; 
ii.  Health permit as required by county and state requirements; and 
iii.  Transient occupancy tax (bed tax). 
b.  Application for a permit shall be made by the resident property owner or his legal agent having power of attorney to make such application. 
4.  Where deemed appropriate by the building official, owners/operators of bed and breakfast uses shall be required to sign and record a certificate of land use compliance and abide by the provisions outlined therein. 
C.  Findings. Prior to acting upon an application for a special use permit for a bed and breakfast use, the reviewing authority shall find that all the following are true: 
1.  That the site upon which the bed and breakfast use is to be established, shall conform to all standards of the zone/land use district in which it is located, and that the site for the proposed use is adequate in size and shape to accommodate said use and all yards, building coverage, setbacks, parking areas and other applicable requirements of the code; 
2.  That the residential character of the neighborhood in which the use is located shall be maintained and preserved and that the issuance of the permit shall not be significantly detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare or injurious to the vicinity and district in which the use is located. 
D.  Conditions. 
1.  Structural Features. 
a.  All dwelling units proposed for bed and breakfast use must comply with standards and specifications of the Uniform Building Code, and shall also be subject to the room occupancy standard outlined in the State Housing Law (as amended). 
b.  Each guest room shall be equipped with a fire extinguisher and a smoke detector conforming to Uniform Building Code Standards (UBC No. 43-6), and exit/egress and an emergency evacuation map must be displayed in a prominent location in each guest room. 
2.  Accesses and Driveways. The owner shall ensure that all required accesses, driveways and parking spaces remain clear and unobstructed, and are available and ready for the occupants' use at all times. 
3.  Parking. In addition to the required parking standards for residential uses, one parking stall nineteen (19) feet in length and nine feet in width shall be provided on-site for each guest room. Such additional parking spaces shall comply with the location and design standards established by the applicable zone/land use district and the provisions of this title. Neither on-street parking nor tandem parking shall be used to satisfy this on-site parking requirement. Additional parking spaces may be required when deemed necessary by the reviewing authority. 
4.  Design Standards. 
a.  A bed and breakfast use shall not be permitted in a dwelling that is located on a site that has less than the applicable net lot area specified by the underlying zone/land use district. 
b.  Alterations and modifications may be made to the structures and the site but such alterations shall be compatible with the character of the neighborhood. Such alterations and modifications shall also comply with all applicable provisions, requirements and standards of the municipal code. 
c.  Additional landscaping may be required to screen parked vehicles from direct view of the neighbors, particularly where such parking is located within the front yard setback. 
d.  Any lights used to illuminate the site shall be designed so as to reflect away from adjoining properties and public thoroughfares. 
e.  A nonilluminated identification sign, not to exceed six square feet in area is permitted. If not attached to the residence, such sign shall not exceed six feet in height and must blend with the architectural style of the structure and the neighborhood. 
f.  No bed and breakfast use shall be permitted where more than two such uses currently exist within one thousand (1,000) feet of the perimeter of the proposed site. 
5.  Kitchen Facilities. 
a.  There shall be no cooking facilities permitted in guest rooms. 
b.  The sale of food or other materials is limited to guests who are currently residing on the premises where the use is located and not to the general public. 
6.  Records of Patrons. Records of all guests who patronize the bed and breakfast establishment shall be preserved for a minimum period of three years before such records are discarded. 
7.  Miscellaneous Conditions. 
a.  Pedestrian and vehicular traffic will be limited to that normally associated with residential districts. 
b.  The use shall not involve the use of commercial vehicles for the delivery of materials to or from the premises beyond those commercial vehicles normally associated with residential uses. 
c.  There shall be no outdoor storage of materials or equipment, nor shall merchandise be visible from outside the home. 
d.  The appearance of the structure shall not be altered nor the occupation within the residence be conducted in a manner which would cause the premises to differ from its residential character either by the use of colors, materials, construction, lighting, signs, or the emission of sounds, noises and vibrations. 
e.  The uses of utilities and community facilities shall be limited to that normally associated with the use of the property for residential purposes. 
E.  Penalty for Noncompliance. The reviewing authority may void any special use permit for a bed and breakfast use for noncompliance with the conditions set forth in approving the permit, and shall give notice of such action to the permittee. 
F.  Types of Bed and Breakfast Uses. Bed and breakfast uses shall be classified into three types: 
1.  Host Home (having one or two guest room[s]). 
a.  Such use shall not be permitted on a site that is less than five thousand (5,000) square feet of net lot area. A minimum net lot area of seven thousand two hundred (7,200) square feet is required for host homes with two guest rooms. 
b.  Such homes shall have a minimum of two bathrooms. 
2.  Bed and Breakfast Home (having three to five guest rooms). 
a.  In addition to the special use permit, such use shall be subject to site approval as specified by Section 16.12.080 of this code. 
b.  This use shall not be permitted on a site that has less than the net lot area specified below: 
No. of Guest Rooms Minimum Lot Size (Net) 3 8,200 4 9,200 5 10,200  
c.  Such home shall have a minimum of three bathrooms. 
3.  Bed and Breakfast Inn/Lodge having a minimum of six and a maximum of ten guest rooms. 
a.  Structures of Historical, Architectural and Cultural significance. 
i.  Only residential structures that have been determined to be of historical, architectural or cultural significance by the planning commission, or properties which are on the state or national listing of structures of historical significance shall be permitted to be used as a bed and breakfast inn/lodge. 
ii.  The planning commission may establish historic and scenic preservation standards and shall review the proposal for a determination of historical, architectural or cultural significance. In making such determination, the planning commission shall consider the: 
(A)  Architecture of the structure noting the history, uniqueness and style of the design; 
(B)  Historical and/or cultural value(s) of the property and/or the site; 
(C)  Age of the structure and its physical and structural condition. 
iii.  After such determination, the structure shall be placed on the city's register of historic and scenic properties. 
b.  The planning commission may require the preservation and maintenance of significant permanent landscaping features and significant historical, architectural and/or cultural features of the structure and/or property. 
c.  A residential building that has been declared a historical structure shall be subject to prealteration inspection by a designated city official prior to application for bed and breakfast use and report of such inspection must accompany the application. 
d.  All historical structures proposed for bed and breakfast uses shall comply with all current applicable Uniform Building Code standards, including those regarding historical building and those pertaining to the physical and structural conditions of the building and the site. 
e.  In addition to the special use permit, this use shall be subject to site approval as specified by Section 16.12.080 of the this code. 
f.  This use shall not be permitted on a site that has less than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet of net lot area and one thousand (1,000) square feet of additional net lot area shall be required for each additional guest room over six. 
g.  Such home shall have a minimum of four bathrooms. The owner shall provide access for the physically handicapped. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; Ord. 75 § 2 (part), 1990; SBCC § 87.2120) 
16.16.070 - Recycling facilities. 
A.  Requirements. No person, corporation or legal entity shall place or permit the placement and/or operation of any recycling facility, including a reverse vending machine, collection facility or processing facility without first obtaining any permits required pursuant to the provisions set forth in this chapter. Recycling facilities may be permitted as set forth in the following table. 
Type of Facility Permitted Zones/Land Use Districts Permit Required Reverse Vending Machine(s) up to 50 sq. ft. All Commercial and All Industrial None Small Collection Facility up to 500 sq. ft. All Commercial and All Industrial Special Use Permit Large Collection Facility over 500 sq. ft. All I-1, I-2, CIBP, & GI CUP Processing Facilities I-1, I-2, & GI CUP  
    All facilities including reverse vending machines having an area of fifty (50) square feet or less may in addition to other designated permits be subject to the special use permit as specified in Section 16.12.005(A)(3) and/or health permits as may be required by city or county laws. 
B.  Criteria and Standards. Recycling facilities subject to conditional use permit/or special use permit, shall meet the applicable criteria and standards listed below; provided, that the development services director, planning commission or city council, as the case may be, may relax such standards or impose stricter standards at their discretion upon a finding that such modifications are reasonably necessary in order to implement the general intent of this chapter and the purposes of this title. The criteria and standards for recycling facilities are as follows: 
1.  Reverse Vending Machines. Reverse vending machines do not require any permits under this title. 
2.  Small Collection Facilities. 
a.  Facility shall be established in conjunction with a fixed base host business which is in compliance with the zoning, building and fire codes and shall not occupy more than five hundred (500) square feet of floor space and within a convenience zone; 
i.  One recycling facility, capable of redeeming all forms of recyclable materials as provided herein shall be permitted in each convenience zone. A "convenience zone" is defined as the area within one-half mile of a supermarket. In the event two or more permit applications are received for a convenience zone which does not possess a recycling facility, the development services director or his/her designee, in his/her discretion, may choose to allow a second facility based on other factors such as convenience of use for pedestrian and vehicular traffic safety, aesthetic and site compatibility. 
b.  Recycling facilities shall be conveniently accessible to pedestrians and vehicles and shall be designed to include safety provisions for separating pedestrian and vehicular traffic (i.e., special walkways, drive aisles, bollards, safety lighting, etc.); 
c.  Recycling facilities shall be designed in a manner consistent with the architecture and site and it is encouraged to use existing planters and site features when choosing a location; 
d.  Containers shall be constructed and maintained with durable, waterproof and rustproof material and shall be covered and secured from unauthorized removal of material, and shall be of a capacity sufficient to accommodate materials collected and the collection schedule; 
e.  Containers shall be clearly marked to identify the type(s) of recyclable(s) which may be deposited and shall accept only CRV labeled glass, metal or plastic containers, paper and reusable items. Scrap material is not allowed at any small collection facility; 
f.  The facility shall be clearly marked to identify the name and telephone number of the facility operator; 
g.  Recycling facilities shall be maintained in good repair and the area immediately surrounding the recycling facility shall be maintained in a litter-free condition. All storage of recyclable material shall be within the recycling facility or related enclosed structure; 
h.  The facility shall be set back at least fifty (50) feet from any arterial street and twenty-five (25) feet from any other street and shall not obstruct pedestrian or vehicular circulation; 
i.  The facility shall not impair the landscaping required for any concurrent use by this title or any permit issued pursuant thereto; 
j.  The noise level shall not at any time exceed sixty (60) dBA as measured at the property line of residentially zoned or occupied property; and shall not exceed seventy (70) dBA at any portion of the property line; 
k.  Small collection facilities shall not include power-driven sorting and/or consolidation equipment, such as crushers or bailers, except reverse vending machines; 
l.  In addition to the signs and certificates issued by the local enforcement agency for the California Integrated Waste Management Board, which must be displayed by the operator/processor and the informational signs required by this chapter: 
i.  Recycling facilities may have identification signs with a maximum area of fifteen (15) percent per side of a structure or sixteen (16) square feet, whichever is larger. In the case of a wheeled facility, the side shall be measured from the ground to the top of the container; 
ii.  Signs shall be painted or attached. No banners, flags, or streamers are permitted; 
iii.  Directional signs with no advertising message, may be installed with the approval of the Director if necessary to facilitate traffic circulation or if the facility is not visible from the public right-of-way. 
m.  Use of the facility for collection of scrap metal, solid wastes, yard waste, or hazardous wastes, as defined in Section 16.08.775 is prohibited; 
n.  If the permit expires without renewal, the collection facility shall be removed from the site on the day following permit expiration; 
o.  Attended facilities located within one hundred (100) feet of a property zoned or occupied for residential use shall be in operation during the hours between nine a.m. and seven p.m., and otherwise during the hours of operation of the host business; 
p.  Containers for the twenty-four-hour donation of materials shall be at least thirty (30) feet from any property zoned or occupied for residential use unless there is a recognized service corridor or acoustical shielding between the containers and the residential use; 
q.  The facility shall conform to all development regulations for the zoning/land use district in which it is located; 
r.  Mobile recycling units shall have an area clearly marked to prohibit other vehicular parking during the hours when the mobile unit is scheduled to be present; 
s.  Occupation of parking spaces by the facility and by the attendant may not reduce available parking spaces below the minimum number required for the primary host use unless all of the following conditions exist: 
i.  The facility is located in a convenience zone or a potential convenience zone as designated by the California Department of Conservation; 
ii.  Existing parking capacity is not already fully utilized during the time the recycling facility will be on the site; and 
iii.  The permit will be reconsidered at the end of twelve (12) months. If parking issues or conflicts exist, the collection facility may be moved to another location within the convenience zone. 
    Parking credits in an established parking facility may then be granted as follows: 
    For a commercial host use: 
Number of Available Parking Spaces Maximum Reduction 0-25 0 26-35 2 36-49 3 50-99 4 100+ 5  
    For a community facility host use: 
    A maximum five spaces reduction will be allowed when not in conflict with parking needs of the host use. 
3.  Large Collection Facilities. A large collection facility is one that is larger than five hundred (500) square feet, or is on a separate property not appurtenant to a host use, and may have a permanent building. A large collection facility is permitted in designated industrial zone/land use districts with approval of a conditional use permit; provided the facility meets the following standards: 
a.  Facility is located at least one hundred fifty (150) feet from the property line of any lot zoned or planned for residential use; 
b.  Facility shall be screened from the public right-of-way by operating in an enclosed building or within an area enclosed by an opaque fence at least six feet in height with landscaping and shall meet all applicable noise standards specified in this chapter; 
c.  Setbacks and landscape requirements shall be those provided for the zone/land use district in which the facility is located; 
d.  All exterior storage of material shall be in sturdy containers which are covered, secured, and maintained in good condition, or may be baled or placed on pallets. Storage containers for flammable material shall be constructed of nonflammable material. Oil storage must be in containers approved by the building and safety department. No storage, excluding truck trailers and overseas containers, shall be visible above the height of the fencing; 
e.  Site shall be maintained free of litter, dust, flies and any other undesirable materials, and shall be cleaned of loose debris on a daily basis; 
f.  Space shall be provided on-site for six vehicles or the anticipated peak customer load, whichever is higher, to circulate and to deposit recyclable materials, except where the planning agency determines that allowing overflow traffic above six vehicles is compatible with surrounding businesses and public safety; 
g.  One parking space shall be provided for each commercial vehicle operated by the recycling facility. Parking requirements shall be as provided for in the zone/land use district in which the facility is located; except, that parking requirements for employees may be reduced when it can be shown that parking spaces are not necessary such as when employees are transported in a company vehicle to a work facility; 
h.  Noise levels shall not exceed sixty (60) dBA as measured at the property line of residentially zoned property, and shall not exceed seventy (70) dBA at any portion of the property line; 
i.  If the facility is located within five hundred (500) feet of property zoned, planned or occupied for residential use, it shall not be in operation between seven p.m. and seven a.m.; 
j.  Any containers or enclosures provided for after-hours donation of recyclable materials shall be at least fifty (50) feet from any property zoned, planned or occupied for residential use, shall be of sturdy, rustproof construction, shall have sufficient capacity to accommodate materials collected, and shall be secured from unauthorized entry or removal of materials; 
k.  Donation areas shall be kept free of litter and any other undesirable material and the containers shall be clearly marked to identify the type of material that may be deposited; facility shall display a notice stating that no material shall be left outside the recycling containers; 
l.  Facility shall be clearly marked with the name and phone number of the facility operator and the hours of operation; identification and informational signs shall meet the standards of the zone; and directional signs may be installed with the approval of the planning officer if necessary, to facilitate traffic circulation or if the facility is not visible from the public right-of-way; 
m.  Power-driven processing, including aluminum foil and can compacting, baling, plastic shredding, or other light processing activities necessary for efficient temporary storage and shipment of material, may be approved at the discretion of the planning agency if noise and other conditions are met. 
n.  Use of the facility for collection of scrap metal, solid wastes or hazardous wastes, as defined in Section 16.08.775 is prohibited: 
4.  Processing Facilities. 
a.  Facility shall be located at least one hundred fifty (150) feet from property planned, zoned or occupied for residential use unless operations take place within a fully enclosed building. If outdoor storage area is proposed it must be located one hundred fifty (150) feet from any residential use and shall be in an area enclosed by a solid wood or masonry fence at least six feet in height. 
b.  Setbacks from property lines shall be those provided for the zoning/land use district in which the facility is located, but if less than twenty-five (25) feet, the facility shall be buffered by a landscape strip at least ten feet wide along each property line; 
c.  If the facility is located within five hundred (500) feet of property planned, zoned or occupied for residential use, it shall not be in operation between seven p.m. and seven a.m. The facility shall be administered by on-site personnel during the hours the facility is open; 
d.  Noise level shall not exceed sixty (60) dBA as measured at the property line of residentially zoned or occupied property, and shall not exceed seventy (70) dBA at any point; 
e.  Sign criteria shall be those provided for the zoning district in which the facility is located and the provisions specified in Chapter 16.36. In addition, the facility shall be clearly marked with the name and phone number of the facility operator and the hours of operation; 
f.  Any containers or enclosures provided for afterhours donation of recyclable materials shall be at least fifty (50) feet from any property zoned or occupied for residential use; shall be of sturdy, rustproof construction; shall have sufficient capacity to accommodate materials collected; and shall be secured from unauthorized entry or removal of materials; 
g.  Donation areas shall be kept free of litter and any other undesirable material. The containers shall be clearly marked to identify the type of material that may be deposited. Facility shall display a notice stating that no material shall be left outside the recycling containers; 
h.  No dust, fumes, smoke, vibration or odor above ambient level may be detectable on neighboring properties; 
i.  Power-driven processing shall be permitted; provided, all noise level requirements are met. Light processing facilities are limited to baling, briquetting, crushing, compacting, grinding, shredding and sorting or source-separated recyclable materials and repairing of reusable materials; 
j.  Reserved. 
k.  A processing facility may accept used motor oil for recycling from the generator in accordance with Section 25250.11 of the California Health and Safety Code; 
l.  All exterior storage of material shall be in sturdy containers or enclosures which are covered, secured, and maintained in good condition or may be baled or placed on pallets. Storage containers for flammable material shall be constructed of nonflammable material. Oil storage must be in containers approved by the building official. No storage excluding truck trailers and overseas containers shall be visible above the height of the fencing; 
m.  Site shall be maintained free of litter and any other undesirable materials, and shall be cleaned of loose debris on a daily basis, and shall be secured from unauthorized entry and removal of materials when attendants are not present; 
n.  Space shall be provided on-site for the anticipated peak load of customers to circulate, park and deposit recyclable materials. If the facility is open to the public, space shall be provided for a minimum of ten customers except where the reviewing authority determines that allowing overflow traffic above six vehicles is compatible with surrounding businesses and public safety; 
o.  One parking space shall be provided for each commercial vehicle operated by the processing center. Parking requirements shall otherwise be as mandated by the zone in which the facility is located. 
C.  Site Clean-Up Required. The operator and host business of any recycling collection or processing facility shall, on a daily basis, remove any and all recyclable materials or solid wastes which have accumulated or are deposited outside the containers, bins, or enclosures intended as receptacles for such materials. Upon the failure to remove said materials, the city may deem them to be abandoned and may enter the site to remove the materials. The property owner(s) of the premises and the operator of the facility shall be liable for the full cost of any such clean-up work done by the city. 
(Amended during 1997 codification; Ord. 75 § 2 (part), 1990; SBCC § 87.2125) 
(Ord. No. 2009-14, § 3(Exh. A), 1-5-10; Ord. No. 2013-08, § 4(Exh. A), 8-20-13 ) 
16.16.072 - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2017-06 , § 4, adopted March 21, 2017, repealed § 16.16.072, which pertained to residential care facilities, group homes, and sex offender residency and derived from Ord. No. 2007-07, 2007 and Ord. No. 2014-15 , adopted August 19, 2014. 
16.16.073 - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2017-15 , § 4(Exh. A), adopted December 5, 2017, repealed § 16.16.073, which pertained to medical marijuana dispensary and derived from Ord. No. 2005-12, § 5, 11-16-05) 
16.16.074 - Commercial community enhancement ordinance. 
    The following uses are prohibited because it has been determined that such uses contribute to the decline of the health, safety and welfare of city residents and create blight, deter quality businesses from operating or otherwise create a sense of economic decline in commercial neighborhoods. This section is applied city-wide, including areas within the Main Street and Freeway Corridor Specific Plan. 
    The uses listed below are not a comprehensive list of all prohibited uses. Other uses not listed as either permitted and conditional permitted or within this prohibited use section, may be determined permitted or prohibited by the director development services or designee based upon the similarity of other uses. Any use which violates local, state or federal laws is also prohibited: 
A.  Prohibited Uses. 
1.  Gold exchange businesses (unless accessory to a jewelry store). 
2.  Hydroponic shops (unless accessory to a home improvement store). 
3.  Money service businesses. 
4.  Pawn shops. 
5.  Smoking lounges. 
6.  Smoke shops. 
7.  An internet sweepstakes café. 
B.  Tobacco Product and Paraphernalia Sales Requirements. 
1.  No license may be issued to authorize retail tobacco product and paraphernalia sales at any location that is not licensed under state law to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption off the premises (e.g. an "off-sale" license issued by the California Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control). 
2.  The display area of tobacco products, including paraphernalia, shall not exceed ten percent of the total floor area of a business establishment. 
3.  The display area devoted to tobacco paraphernalia shall not exceed a two foot in depth by four-foot in length section of a single shelf space. 
4.  The display of tobacco products and paraphernalia shall be located behind a service counter in a manner that prohibits self-service by the customer. 
5.  It shall be a violation of this municipal code for any licensee or any of the licensee's agents or employees to violate any local, state, or federal law regulating controlled substances or drug paraphernalia, such as, for example, California Health and Safety Code Section 11364.7. 
6.  No smoking or vaping shall be permitted on the premises at any time. 
7.  The sale of tobacco products and paraphernalia to a minor is prohibited. 
8.  No sales may be solicited or conducted on the premises by minors. 
9.  No distribution of free or low-cost tobacco, tobacco products or tobacco paraphernalia, as well as coupons for said items, shall be permitted. 
( Ord. No. 2017-10 , 3(Exh. A), 6-6-17) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2017-10 , § 3(Exh. A), adopted June 6, 2017, amended § 16.16.074 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 16.16.074, pertained to internet sweepstakes café prohibited, and derived from Ord. No. 2013-06, adopted June 18, 2013. 
ARTICLE IV. - RESIDENTIAL LAND USE DESIGNATIONS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2011-10, § 3(Exh. A), adopted Aug. 16, 2011, amended Article IV in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. IV, §§ 16.16.075-16.16.135, pertained to single-family residence districts. See the ordinance list and disposition tables for full derivation. 

16.16.075 - Residential land use designations. 
A.  All residential land use designation regulations in this chapter are intended to be used concurrently with the general plan and other chapters in this development code. The residential land use designations are as follows: 
1.  Single-Family Residence (R1): The R1 designation is intended for single-family residences characterized by a more suburban setting. This designation is intended to generally limit equestrian uses and other animals, unless they are permitted through the lot size requirements identified in the development code. R1 designation regulations in this development code shall apply to R1-4500 and R1-18000 designations, unless specifically stated. 
2.  Multiple-Family Residence (R3): The R3 designation is intended for multiple-family uses in an urban setting. Housing types may include townhouses, condominiums, duplexes, triplexes, apartments, or manufactured housing developments. Active and passive recreational facilities shall be provided within new development. Sewer will be required for all new dwelling units developing within this density. Horses and other large animal uses are not intended within this designation. 
3.  Rural Residential (RR): The RR designation is intended for detached single-family residential uses. This designation is appropriate in areas characterized by rural residential uses and is intended to protect animal keeping. RR designation regulations shall apply to RR-20000, RR (SD), RR-1, and RR-21/2 designations, unless specifically stated. 
4.  Limited Agricultural (A1): The A1 designation is intended to continue the current rural lifestyle for residents living in A1-and A1-21/2 designated areas. This designation is intended to support limited agricultural uses. A1 designation regulations shall apply to the A1-21/2 designation, unless specifically stated. 
5.  General Agricultural (A2): The A2 designation is intended to protect agricultural uses. This designation is appropriate in areas characterized by large lot sizes, varying topography, proximity to the Mojave River, or distance from public services such as sewer. 
(Ord. No. 2011-10, § 3(Exh. A), 8-16-11) 
16.16.080 - Permitted uses and permit requirements. 
A.  The permitted uses and permit requirements in this article are provided in a table format. Land uses are provided in the first (vertical) column of the table and residential land use designation in the top (horizontal) row. In order to determine which permit process is applicable, the use must be matched up with the corresponding land use designation. Once the land use and land use designation are matched, the symbol in the box represents the applicable process. The following key legend demonstrates which symbol corresponds with the applicable permit process. Footnotes are also provided and considered part of the development code. 
Key to Permit Requirements 
Symbol Applicable Process A Accessory Use CUP Requires a Conditional Use Permit NP Not Permitted P Permitted Use S Requires a Site Plan Review  
B.  "See Section(s)" located on the right hand side of the table is intended to reference other code sections that are required to establish the use. This does not excuse proposed land uses from other requirements in this development code if said section is not provided. 
(Ord. No. 2011-10, § 3(Exh. A), 8-16-11) 
16.16.085 - Residential and ancillary uses. 
Residential and Ancillary Uses R1 R3 1 RR A1 A2 See Section(s) A. Single-family dwelling P P P P P B. Multiple-family dwellings NP S NP NP NP C. Second dwelling unit A NP A A A 16.12.360 D. Guest house 2 A NP A A A E. Home Occupation A A A A A Chapter 5.44 (Municipal Code) F. Board and room, not to exceed two persons, without kitchen privileges A A A A A G. Accessory buildings and structures 3 A A 4 A A A 16.20.385-16.20.425 H. Buildings or structures to store agricultural vehicles, food, and equipment (i.e. barn or outbuilding) A NP A A A 16.20.385-16.20.425 I. Buildings or structures to keep animals (i.e. stable, corral, pen or coop) A NP A A A 16.16.115 and 16.20.385-16.20.425 J. Small, community, or handicapped residential care facilities, senior housing, intermediate care of six or less and licensed by the state P P P P P 16.16.072, 16.08.332 and 16.08.333 K. Large or community residential care facilities, senior housing, intermediate care of seven or more and licensed by the state and Single Room Occupancy Development (SRO) 7 C C C C C 16.16.072, 16.08.332 and 16.08.333 L. Group homes not licensed by the state with two or more residents C C C C C 16.16.072, 16.08.332 and 16.08.333 M. Parking of commercial vehicles, as defined in the California Vehicle Code A NP A A A 16.20.090(H) N. Mobile home parks S S 5 S S S 16.28.010-16.28.070 O. Hotels and Motels NP S 6 NP NP NP P. Other similar uses, as interpreted by the Development Services Director or his/her designee P P P P P  
Notes: 
1.  Prohibited uses shall be uses not specifically authorized or determined by the development services director or his/her designee to be detrimental to public welfare. 
2.  Guest house shall not exceed a building area of four hundred ninety-nine (499) square feet and shall not include kitchen facilities. 
3.  An accessory building, which includes a restroom facility and insulation, shall be considered a guest house and subject to area and kitchen limitations for a guest house. 
4.  Accessory structures and uses shall be customarily incidental to any permitted uses when located on the same site with the main building and use. 
5.  Shall include recreational vehicle parks. 
6.  Business may be conducted for the convenience of the residents of the building; there shall not be an entrance to such place of business, except from the inside of the building; and no sign visible from the outside advertising such business. 
7.  SRO developments are subject to Section G 4.15 of the Main Street and Freeway Corridor Specific Plan-Standards for Single Room Occupancy for all residential zones. 
(Ord. No. 2011-10, § 3(Exh. A), 8-16-11; Ord. No. 2014-02, § 3(Exh. A), 2-18-14 ) 
16.16.090 - Public, institutional, and resource uses. 
Public, Institutional, and Resource Uses R1 R3 RR A1 A2 See Section(s) A. Cultivating and farming of Plants 1 P 2 A 2, 3 P 2 P 4 P 4 B. Conference centers S S S S S C. Alternative energy technologies A A A A A 16.16.063-16.16.064 D. Civic or community clubs S S S S S E. Country club together with golf course, excepting miniature course, and similar commercial enterprises S S S S S F. Public facilities S S S S S G. Public utilities S S S S S 16.16.060(2)(i) H. Institutional uses S 5 S S S S 16.08.340 I. Schools S 5 S S S S J. Parks and playground S S S S S K. Church, excluding rescue missions or temporary revival S S S S S 16.16.060 L. Cemeteries S NP S S S M. Museums, not operated for profit S S S S S N. Conference centers S S S S S O. Lakes, private S S S S S P. Airport, helicopters, aircraft landing field NP NP NP NP NP Q. Water storage not to exceed 20,000 gallons capacity NP NP NP P P R. Water storage exceeding 20,000 gallons capacity NP NP NP S S S. On-site serving of alcohol beverages for public consumption associated with a permitted or conditionally permitted use C C C C C  
Notes: 
1.  Shall include: Truck gardening; nurseries and greenhouses; orchards; tree, field, berry and bush crops; mushroom farms; hydroponic growing; commercial flower and vegetable gardens; flower gardens; vines and other horticulture stocks. This does not include cultivating or growing of medical marijuana. 
2.  Uses shall be allowed on a minimum twenty thousand (20,000) square foot residential lot, provided: 
a.  Retail sales on the premises of plants, products or commodities propagated and/or cultivated on the property; and, 
b.  The use of one sign that does not exceed two square feet in size, and is in compliance with Sections 16.36.010 through 16.36.130. 
3.  Shall be accessory uses limited to private yards and common areas. This use shall be permitted in common areas with an approved site plan review. 
4.  One stand for display and sale of products produced on the same premises shall be allowed, provided: 
a.  The floor area of the stand shall not exceed two hundred (200) square feet. 
b.  The location of the stand shall be approved pursuant to Chapter 16.12, subject to the parking requirements of Sections 16.20.080 through 16.20.120. The required parking does not need to be paved. 
5.  Colleges and universities shall not be permitted. 
(Ord. No. 2011-10, § 3(Exh. A), 8-16-11; Ord. No. 2012-07, § 3(Exh. A), 6-19-12) 
16.16.095 - Agricultural uses. 
Agricultural Uses A1 A2 A. Silo P P B. Public stable, riding academy, or boarding stable 1 P 2 P C. Establishment engaged in the washing, candling, grading and packaging of eggs S S D. Wholesale distributor and processor of nursery-plant stock; retail nursery, where incidental and contiguous to propagation of nursery stock or wholesale distributor. Outdoor storage and display are prohibited except for nursery-plant stock S S E. Beeswax and honey processing building A A F. Room for incidental poultry and rabbit-killing and dressing P P G. Rabbit or similar animal killing and dressing house when such animals are raised on the premises S S H. Feed mill for rancher's own use NP S I. Scales NP S J. Farm labor camp S S K. Community auction and sales yard principally for the sale of farm animals NP S L. Dog kennel, dog training schools, catteries, small animal shelter and dog breeding establishments with outside runs S S M. Animal hospital or clinic with outside runs S S N. Grange hall, community halls, and similar uses incidental to the promotion and development of agriculture S S O. Dude or guest ranch 2 S S P. Winery for processing grapes produced on the same premises S S Q. Livestock Feed Yard. Stock Yard, Cattle Sales Yard 3 NP S R. Cattle or goat dairies on parcels of at least ten gross acres which shall comply with county public health department and building and safety department requirements NP P S. Calf-growing Facility 2 NP S T. Farms for grazing, breeding, boarding, raising, maintaining or training horses, cattle and similar animals, unless permitted elsewhere in this code NP P U. Manure, the stockpiling, spreading, drying, sacking and sale of manure, tree bark and wood chips including shake, screening, mechanical drying and pulverizing with the permitted use of inorganic chemical additives not to exceed ten percent of the raw material inventory, on parcels of at least ten gross acres NP S V. Hay yards 4 NP S W. Worm and frog farms P P X. Hog ranches NP P Y. Alligator, ostrich, mink and fox farms NP P Z. Menageries, zoos, and aquariums NP P AA. The raising of chinchilla, hamsters, guinea pigs, cavy, rats and similar small animals P P BB. Fish-raising involving lakes of twenty thousand (20,000) gallons or less P P CC. Fish-raising involving lakes of twenty thousand (20,000) gallons or more S S DD. Commercial poultry ranches 6 P P EE. Commercial rabbit-raising enterprises 7 P P FF. Raising, grazing, breeding, boarding or training of large or small animals, except concentrated lot feeding, subject to quantity limitations P P GG. Fruit and vegetable packing plants for products raised on the premises S S HH. Apiaries 5 NP, unless exempted NP, unless exempted  
Notes: 
1.  Stables and structures shall be in conformance with the building and safety requirements determined at the time of approval. 
2.  Lot size shall be a minimum of five gross acres. 
3.  The maximum number of animals on each parcel of land shall not exceed one animal for each five hundred (500) square feet of corral area. Soil, drainage or other conditions peculiar to the site may cause a reduction in allowable density as determined by the city. 
4.  Hay yards, including minor hay truck maintenance, provided however, that all wholesale hay yards shall meet the following conditions: 
a.  Minimum parcel size of four acres; 
b.  Parcel shall either front or side on a primary or secondary highway as designated on the circulation element; 
c.  Parcel shall be at least three hundred (300) feet from existing residences other than that of the property owner; 
d.  Area used for movement or storage of vehicles, trucks or hay shall be paved and right-of-way improvements shall be installed to city standards; 
e.  Commercial buildings on parcel shall be limited to one office building not to exceed two hundred (200) square feet in area and one ramada or pole shed. 
5.  Apiaries shall not be permitted, except as provided in Section 6.12.080 of the municipal code. 
6.  Commercial poultry ranches. Such ranches shall be subject to the following site improvements: 
a.  Noncommercial poultry raising limited to one hundred fifty (150) chickens, ducks, quail, or similar fowl for each one acre of parcel area; or 
b.  Noncommercial small animal raising limited to one hundred fifty (150) rabbits, chinchillas or similar small animals; 
c.  Poultry cages shall be maintained in open-type houses not to exceed one story in height unless approved by the building and safety department. This limitation shall also apply to all other approved types of poultry enclosures. 
7.  Commercial Rabbit-raising Enterprises. Such enterprises shall locate on parcels of at least one gross acre, with a minimum frontage of one hundred fifty (150) feet; 
(Ord. No. 2011-10, § 3(Exh. A), 8-16-11; Ord. No. 2017-19 , § 3(Exh. A), 10-17-17) 
16.16.100 - Other uses in residential land use designations. 
    Other uses similar to those listed in Sections 16.16.090 through 16.16.105 if approved by the planning commission at a public hearing, as provided in Section 16.16.040(B) and (C). 
(Ord. No. 2011-10, § 3(Exh. A), 8-16-11) 
16.16.105 - Ancillary commercial and industrial uses in A2 designation. 
A.  Agriculturally derived, industrial or commercial uses which are directly supported by or which are accessory to established agricultural uses within the general vicinity of the proposed industrial or commercial use may be permitted subject to a site plan review or conditional use permit in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 16.12 provided: 
1.  The proposed use is of an appropriate size and scale that will not create a conflict with existing or planned uses of adjacent properties; 
2.  The proposed use is incidental and subordinate to existing agricultural uses located within the general vicinity; 
3.  The methods of operation are compatible with existing and planned uses of adjacent properties; 
4.  The methods of solid waste and sewage and wastewater disposal are safe, practical and will not adversely affect surrounding properties, and underground water supplies; 
5.  The approval of the proposed use will not serve to detract from the agricultural character of the area; and 
6.  The proposed use will not have a substantial adverse effect on the service support capacity of the area's infrastructure including groundwater supply. 
B.  Any use approved in accordance with the provisions of this section may be made subject to the issuance of a conditional use permit. 
(Ord. No. 2011-10, § 3(Exh. A), 8-16-11) 
16.16.110 - Animal buildings and structures. 
A.  Buildings and structures for fowl and livestock, small or large, placed on any given parcel of land. Such buildings or structures shall be erected a minimum of seventy (70) feet from any other place used for human habitation, public park or school, on adjoining properties, except that: 
1.  For properties designated A1 or A2, these buildings and structures shall be kept thirty-five (35) feet from any "R" designation boundary or exterior lot line, including abutting streets. However, this shall not apply to the pasturing of animals within the above-mentioned thirty-five (35) foot setbacks. Pasturing in this paragraph shall mean the grazing of animals on grasses, stubble and natural growth; 
2.  In the R1 land use designation, buildings and structures for small livestock, fowl, cows, and goats shall be kept fifty (50) feet from property line, except for pasturing of animals. 
(Ord. No. 2011-10, § 3(Exh. A), 8-16-11) 
ARTICLE V. - RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2011-10, § 3(Exh. A), adopted Aug. 16, 2011, amended Article V in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. V, §§ 16.16.140-16.16.205, pertained to the multiple-family residence district. See the ordinance list and disposition tables for full derivation. 

16.16.115 - Residential lot area and density. 
    In all residential land use designations, the general plan shall be used to determine the required density. Densities in the general plan are calculated using gross lot area. However, in determining lot size minimums, net lot area shall be used in the R1 and R3 designations and for properties below one acre in the RR designation; and gross lot area shall be used in the A1 and A2 designations and for properties one acre or more in the RR designation. 
(Ord. No. 2011-10, § 3(Exh. A), 8-16-11) 
16.16.120 - Development standards. 
    The development standards in this table shall be required within each land use designation: 
Type of Standard Land Use Designation R3 R1 
(SLS 1 ) R1 RR A1 A2 A. Height 2 35 30' 3 35' (max. 2.5 stories) B. Minimum lot area 5 acres 4 The minimum lot area is identified on the General Plan Land Use Map 5 C. Minimum lot width dimension 300' 4 50' 6 60' (at setback) 100' 300' D. Minimum lot depth dimension 500' 4 75' 6 100' none E. Minimum lot dimension - Width for Corner Lots 300' 4 60' 6 70' (at setback) 100' 300' F. Front Yard Setback 7,8 25' 10'; or 20' if garages open parallel to the street Section 16.20.025 through 16.20.030 G. Front Yard Setback - Corner Lot 7,8 H. Side Yard Street Setback 7,8 25' 10' I. Interior Setback 8 8' The sum of the side yards shall not be less than 10' 10 5' and 10' 10% of lot width, but not more than 15' or less than 6' J. Lot Created before Jan. 9, 1969 10% of lot width, but not less than 3' and more than 5' K. Rear Setback 8,9 15' L. Lot Coverage 60% 50% 11 40% Not to exceed regulations in Article X M. Signs Section 16.16.095 N. Parking Sections 16.20.080 through 16.20.120  
Notes: 
1.  SLS shall stand for small lot subdivision. 
2.  Exceptions are noted in Section 16.20.060. 
3.  The maximum building height shall be eighteen (18) feet to a depth of twenty (20) feet from the street property line. For corner lots, all street-facing sides shall meet this requirement. 
4.  Minimum lot size and width/depth requirements shall not apply to townhome and condominium units. 
5.  The minimum lot area shall be designated by a number following the designation symbol on the general plan land use map; numbers less than one hundred (100) shall indicate acres, and numbers more than one hundred (100) shall indicate minimum square feet of area required per lot. 
6.  Exception in Section 16.16.130(B). 
7.  Adequate visibility for vehicular and pedestrian traffic at all ninety (90) degree angle intersections of public rights-of-way and private driveways shall be maintained by limiting the height of any walls, fences, monument signs or other man-made visual obstructions to less than thirty-six (36) inches within a clear sight triangular area at the corner as illustrated in Section 16.20.045. 
8.  The setback shall be open and unobstructed from finished grade or from such other specified level at which the yard is required, to the sky, except for buildings/structures allowed in the yard by the table in Section 16.20.075. The architectural projections listed in this section must be attached to the principal building allowed on the lot. 
9.  In computing depth of a rear yard where such yard opens into an alley, one-half of the width of such alley may be assumed to be a portion of the required rear yard. 
10.  A zero setback on one of the interior sides with shared party walls between adjacent attached units and the creation of usable yard space on the other side shall be permitted. 
11.  Lot coverage shall mean the percentage of lot surface area occupied by any building or structure. 
(Ord. No. 2011-10, § 3(Exh. A), 8-16-11; Ord. No. 2017-11 , § 3(Exh. A), 6-20-17) 
16.16.125 - Additional development standards for small lot subdivisions in the R1 designation. 
A.  Purpose and Intent. Small lot subdivisions are permitted in the R1 designation by which densities are supported in the general plan. These subdivisions are primarily developed and constructed by a single development entity as for-sale housing and provide an important housing type for first-time home buyers, empty nesters, and small families. Variation in building form and massing will play a significant role in making such developments attractive and positive contributors to the residential neighborhoods in Hesperia. 
B.  Minimum Lot Size and Dimensions. For projects less than ten acres, the minimum lot size and dimensions for new small lot subdivisions are as listed below: 
1.  The minimum width of an interior lot shall be fifty (50) feet, a minimum depth of seventy-five (75) feet and a minimum net area of four thousand five hundred (4,500) square feet. 
2.  The minimum width of a corner lot shall be sixty (60) feet, a minimum depth of seventy-five (75) feet and a minimum net area of four thousand five hundred (4,500) square feet. 
    For projects ten acres or more, the minimum lot size and dimensions for new small lot subdivisions are as follows: 
1.  A minimum net area of three thousand (3,000) square feet and an average net area of four thousand (4,000) square feet among the proposed lots within the project. 
2.  The minimum width of an interior lot shall be forty (40) feet, a minimum depth of sixty (60) feet and 
3.  The minimum width of a corner lot shall be fifty (50) feet, a minimum depth of sixty (60) feet. 

C.  Usable Private Yard Space. 
1.  A minimum of two hundred (200) square feet per dwelling unit with no dimension less than ten feet shall be provided. 
2.  Ten percent of the lineal length of the total perimeter wall area of dwelling units accessible to a side and rear yard shall contain penetrable openings such as sliding glass doors that open into usable, private open space. 
D.  Common Usable Open Space. 
1.  A minimum of five hundred (500) square feet per residential unit within the small lot subdivision shall be designated and permanently reserved as usable common open space for use by residents of the small lot development. This required open space shall be suitably improved for its intended purposes and all landscaped areas shall be provided with a permanent irrigation system to maintain such areas. 
2.  Common usable open space area amenities include, but are not limited to the following: swimming pool, spa, community recreation room, sports courts for tennis, basketball, racquetball, volleyball, barbecue areas, community gardens or play areas with a slope of less than five percent. Areas used for providing site drainage and water retention cannot be used as part of the common usable open space area requirements described herein. 
E.  Driveways and Garages. In addition to the off-street parking requirements and standards set forth in Chapter 16.20, Article IV (Parking and Loading Standards), the following shall apply: 
1.  Garages shall be located to prevent vehicles from projecting into the street/sidewalk right-of-way. In order to prevent vehicles from blocking sidewalk areas, the driveway shall have a depth minimum of twenty (20) feet and width minimum of sixteen (16) feet. 
2.  The following exception to the above-mentioned standards shall apply: No overnight parking (during the hours of ten p.m. and seven a.m.) is allowed within the street yard setback(s), except on the approved driveway. 
F.  Streets. 
1.  All streets within a small lot subdivision shall be fifty-four-foot right-of-way and thirty-foot curb-to-curb. 
2.  A four-foot sidewalk between back of curb and utility easement shall be provided. 
3.  A three-foot utility easement between the sidewalk and property line shall be provided. 
4.  No signs, vaults, utilities, hydrants, etc. may be located on the sidewalk. 
5.  All streets within small lot subdivisions shall be public. 
G.  Walls, Fences and Hedges. Decorative walls and fences are permitted in the setbacks as follows: 
1.  In no event shall any fence, wall or hedge obscure any clear sight triangle. 
2.  In the street yard setback, a wall, fence or hedge shall not exceed thirty-six (36) inches in height above grade when view-obscuring. However, non-view-obscuring estate-type decorative fences may be constructed in the street yard setback up to a maximum height of seventy-two (72) inches. A non-view-obscuring estate-type fence is defined as a fence with solid masonry pillars with ornamental metal fencing between. The masonry pillars shall not be more than thirty (30) inches in width and shall not be placed less than eight feet apart. 
3.  The wall or fence height shall not exceed six feet in the rear and interior side yard setbacks. 
4.  Both sides of all perimeter walls should be architecturally treated. Appropriate materials include ornamental metal grillwork, decorative masonry, stone and brick. Chain link is not considered a decorative material and shall not be used. 
H.  Homeowner Associations. Homeowner associations shall maintain small lot subdivisions that provide common amenities. 
I.  Miscellaneous. 
1.  Connection to sewer is required; 
2.  No undeveloped residential lot sales will be allowed, developer shall construct all homes within small lot subdivisions; 
3.  Small lot subdivisions are subject to Article VI in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2011-10, § 3(Exh. A), 8-16-11) 
16.16.130 - Additional development standards for the multiple-family residence (R3) designation. 
A.  Multiple-family Residence (R3) Designation. The multiple-family residence designation is established to provide areas for multi-family housing in a garden setting such as courtyard apartments, condominiums and walk-up townhomes. 

B.  Development Standards. All property in the R3 designation shall be developed according to the following standards: 
1.  Residential Density. The gross residential density range permitted in this zone is eight to fifteen (15) units/acre. 
2.  Minimum Living Area. The minimum living area for residential units shall be as follows: 
Minimum Floor Area Requirements for Multiple-family Units Studio 1 BDR 2 BDR/1 
bathroom* 3 BDR 4 BDR+ Market rate units: 550 650 850 1,150 1,300  
    *Units with two bathrooms shall be nine hundred fifty (950) square feet. 
3.  If the development contains multiple buildings, the minimum distance between buildings shall be as follows: 
Distance Between Single-Story Buildings Distance Between Multiple-Story Building and Any Other Building No Openings 1 With Openings No Direct Line of Sight Direct Line of Sight 6' 8' 2 10' 2 15'  
Notes: 
1.  The sides of buildings that face each other shall not include openings. Openings in this case shall mean windows and doors. 
2.  Windows, doors, as well as patios/balconies or similar features shall be oriented so as not to have a direct line-of-sight into adjacent units. 
    No minimum distance shall be required for accessory structures, such as carports. 
4.  Private Usable Open Space. The required amount of private and common open space is as follows: 
a.  Private Usable Open Space: Each dwelling unit shall have a minimum private usable open space of one hundred (100) square feet, accessible directly from the living area of the unit. A rectangle inscribed within each private usable open space shall have no dimension less than eight feet. Private usable open space for ground floor units shall be in the form of a fenced yard or patio, or an uncovered deck, with no more than fifty (50) percent of ground level space covered by an overhang balcony or patio roof. Private usable open space for above ground level units shall have at least one exterior side open above the level of railing or fencing. All balconies and patios that front a public street shall have opaque balcony/railing enclosures to screen items being stored on the balcony or patio. 
b.  Common Usable Open Space: At least two hundred (200) square feet of common usable open space shall be provided per dwelling unit. Common usable open space may be divided into more than one area, however, each area shall be a minimum of one thousand (1,000) square feet and a rectangle inscribed within each shall have no dimension less than twenty-five (25) feet. All required common open space shall be suitably improved for its intended purposes and all lawn and landscaped areas shall be provided with a permanent irrigation system to maintain such areas. Each multi-family development shall include, but not be limited to, two of the following recreational amenities, or equivalent, as approved by the reviewing authority: 
i.  Tot lot with multiple play equipment. 
ii.  Pool and spa. 
iii.  Barbecue facility equipped with grill, picnic benches, etc. 
iv.  Exercise room. 
v.  Court facilities (e.g., tennis, volleyball, basketball, etc.). 
vi.  Clubhouse. 
vii.  Common gardening area. 
viii.  Other recreational amenities not listed above, may be considered in lieu of those listed subject to reviewing authority review and approval. 
c.  All recreation areas or facilities required by this section shall be maintained by private homeowners' associations, property owners, or private assessment districts subject to the reviewing authority's approval. 
C.  Parking. In addition to the off-street parking requirements and standards set forth in Chapter 16.20, Article IV (Parking and Loading Standards), the following apply: 
1.  Except for required landscaped areas, parking and loading is permitted in the interior side yard and rear yard setbacks. 
2.  Driveways, drive aisles and interior streets shall not be used for any purpose that would prevent vehicle access to parking spaces, inhibit vehicular circulation, or emergency response. 
3.  Parking areas should be designed in a way to allow room for turnarounds and prevent backing onto public streets. 
D.  Trash Collection Areas. 
1.  Centralized trash/recyclable materials collection areas shall be provided for all multi-family residential development projects. All such required areas shall be enclosed and screened pursuant to the requirements of this section and in accordance with city standards. 
2.  All trash/recyclable materials collection enclosure areas shall be easily accessible to residents and tenants, including easy pedestrian access for the disposal of materials and collection by refuse vehicles. 
3.  The collection area(s) shall be enclosed on three sides by a minimum six-foot tall decorative masonry wall. The wall materials used shall be complementary in color and style to architectural components of the development they serve. The fourth side of the enclosure shall be enclosed with an opaque, self-latching gate. 
E.  Miscellaneous. 
1.  All new construction shall be subject to the general and specific standards contained in Chapter 16.20, Article V (General Performance Standards). 
2.  Connection to sewer is required. 
3.  Decorative walls and fences shall be subject to Section 16.16.125(G). 
4.  Refer to Article VII of this chapter for site and architectural design standards and guidelines for residential uses. 
(Ord. No. 2011-10, § 3(Exh. A), 8-16-11; Ord. No. 2016-06 , § 4(Exh. A), 10-4-16; Ord. No. 2017-11 , § 3(Exh. A), 6-20-17) 
ARTICLE VI. - SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DESIGN GUIDELINES[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2011-10, § 3(Exh. A), adopted Aug. 16, 2011, amended Article VI in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. VI, §§ 16.16.210-16.16.270, pertained to the rural residential district. See the ordinance list and disposition tables for full derivation. 

16.16.135 - General provisions and administration. 
    All projects that require approval of a new or revised tentative tract map or extension of time for a tentative tract map after the effective date of this ordinance [Ordinance No. 2011-10] shall provide and maintain design standards and guidelines in compliance with the provisions of this article. 
    It is the duty of the development services department to enforce all permitting and entitlement provisions of this article. The director or his/her designee may impose such conditions deemed necessary to achieve the purpose of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2011-10, § 3(Exh. A), 8-16-11) 
16.16.140 - Architectural design standards and guidelines. 
    While there is no specific architectural style required for residential buildings and structures in the city, high quality, innovative architecture is strongly encouraged. The primary focus is to develop a high quality residential environment. The architectural style and design of building elements should be consistent within itself and complementary with the neighborhood. The building design should take advantage of the site's unique natural amenities and surroundings, and consider compatibility with adjacent houses and the overall streetscape appearance. Human scale form and proportions are encouraged. 
    All projects that require approval of a new or revised tentative tract map or extension of time for a tentative tract map, including small lot subdivisions, should meet or exceed the standards of quality that have been set by surrounding development. New design, additions, and alterations to existing homes in tracts that were subject to this article should complement the surroundings and also contribute to the improvement of the area. 
A.  Facades and Architectural Detailing. 
1.  Residential facades should be articulated to add visual interest and minimize the mass of a building by breaking up the appearance of the facade. Facades should help to provide a sense of human scale. Elements of articulation include change of wall plane, door and window placement, facade details (moldings, material changes, etc.), and other appropriate architectural treatment. 

2.  Architectural details such as decorative moldings, windows, dormers, chimneys, balconies and railings, and landscaped elements such as lattices, can also add detail to a facade and are strongly encouraged. 
3.  Facade treatment and architectural detailing should be relevant to the home's architectural style and should be carried throughout the entire house with each facade and any accessory building/structure. 
4.  Flat, blank walls, particularly along the front and side elevations, which are viewed from the street, are strongly discouraged and should be avoided. Also, excessive facade treatment and architectural detailing should be avoided as it can create a chaotic appearance. 
B.  Height and Roof Lines. 
1.  The roof is one of the most important elements contributing to the sense of scale and proportion of the building. Depending on the height and roof line, it could be the most visible architectural feature as viewed from the street. Height and roof lines should be consistent with the style of architecture of the house, and complement qualities of neighboring residential buildings such as type, slope, size, material and color. 
2.  The use of expansive, predominantly flat roofs (with a slope of less than two in twelve) is discouraged. On the other hand, the use of too many different roof angles or roof types on a building should also be avoided as this can create a disjointed, chaotic appearance. 
3.  Additions should maintain the same floor-to-floor height of the original building. Roof lines for additions should match the original slopes and ridgelines of the roof of the primary building. 

C.  Front Entries. 
1.  A front entry consists of the front door and its surrounding architectural elements. Front entries are important as they serve as the primary focal point of a residence. Front entries shall be visible from the street and well illuminated. 
2.  Smaller, understated entries are strongly encouraged because they help create a more human scale to a home. Large, massive entries that are double height and appear two-story are strongly discouraged. Recessed entries can also add a human scale to a home and create an intimate feel and are encouraged. 
3.  Front entry doors and decorative elements such as moldings, columns, posts, lighting, and built-in benches and planters should be architecturally consistent with the style of the house. 
4.  Front porches are strongly encouraged as they provide a clear sense of entry, design interest, shade, weather protection for the front door, and help foster community interface. To ensure usability, a minimum porch depth of eight feet is required. 

D.  Doors and Windows. 
1.  The placement and relationship of doors and windows is important in creating a unified building composition. Wherever possible, window sizes should be coordinated vertically and horizontally and window design should be consistent in terms of style and general arrangement on all building sides. 
2.  All doors and windows should be related with the chosen architectural style. Windows with widely varying styles are strongly discouraged. For additions, all new doors and windows should match those that are on the existing building/structure. All doors and window frames should be composed of the same material as those found on the existing building. 
3.  For additions and remodels, match the existing windows of the house. Double glazing is encouraged, if not required by Title 24 standards. 
4.  Knockers or door bells should be provided on doors. Entrance doors should provide viewers for safety and security. 
5.  Shutters, trim and moldings on windows are encouraged. Proposed window mullion widths, window trim or surrounds, material, and type should complement all existing windows. Mullion widths should be in scale with the windows and the building. Wider trim, such as 1 × 4 and 1 × 6, is preferred to narrower trim, such as 1 × 2. 
6.  Raw or clear anodized aluminum window frames are strongly discouraged. 
7.  Operable windows should have screens so they can be used for ventilation. 
E.  Garage Doors. Garage doors should not dominate the streetscape. Multiple paneled doors, windows, or other architectural detailing should be used on garage doors to reduce their visual impact from the street and better fit the scale of the house. Any architectural detailing should be compatible with the architectural style of the house. 

F.  Awnings. 
1.  Awnings should be used only when compatible with the existing architectural style of the house. The same type and color awnings shall be used for the entire building. Awning color should accent the colors on the building. 
2.  Awning frames shall be designed to withstand the minimum wind speed as required in the adopted building code. 
3.  Canvas, vinyl or polyester awnings are preferred. Awnings shall be regularly maintained and deteriorating awnings shall be replaced promptly. 
G.  Dormers. 
1.  Dormers provide light and ventilation to the top floor of a building and can provide a means to increase livable area. They are highly visible elements of a roof. The dormer style should be consistent with the overall architectural style of the building. New dormers should be designed to match those already existing on the building. 
2.  Dormers should align with, or be centered between, the windows found on the main body of the building. 
3.  Dormer trim work should be painted to match the main body trim. Dormer sidewalls should be made with the same wall materials, finish, and color found on the main building. 
H.  Chimneys. 
1.  If chimneys are provided, they should be designed to reflect the architectural style of the building and be appropriate in scale with the building. Chimneys should use materials and detailing compatible with those found on the building. For remodels and additions, new chimneys should match the scale, design, and materials of any existing chimneys. 
2.  Spark arresters shall be provided with all chimneys and be architecturally compatible with the building. 
I.  Materials and Finishes. 
1.  The choice and mix of materials on residential facades and garage doors has a significant visual impact. Materials and finishes should be of high quality, appropriate for the style and scale of the house, and consistently applied. Piecemeal embellishment with frequent changes in materials should be avoided. 
2.  The use of at least one strong accent material is encouraged. The number of materials and finishes should be limited to those appropriate for the style of the house. Each style of house calls for a different mixture of finishes. For some architectural styles, only one or two finishes are appropriate, while others can support more. Too many materials are discouraged and can result in a chaotic, unpleasant facade. 
3.  For new buildings, the repetition of textures and color found in the neighborhood can help tie the new building to its surroundings. In remodels and additions, new materials should match those of the existing buildings. Accessory buildings/structures should match materials, finishes, and colors, found on the primary building. 
4.  Architectural design and exterior materials should be applied consistently on all sides of the building to provide continuity. Materials tend to appear substantial and integral to the building when material changes occur at changes in plane. Material changes not accompanied by changes in plane appear "tacked-on" and are strongly discouraged. When using wood siding or masonry as a primary or accent material in the front, extend it along the sides, or at least to an inside corner. Do not stop at an outside corner. 
5.  Exposed gutters and downspouts should be colored to match fascia or wall materials, unless designed as an outstanding architectural feature of the overall theme. 
6.  Materials that are responsive to climate, adjacent context and site orientation are encouraged. Natural materials suitable to the High Desert environment include stone, brick, and metals such as copper and are encouraged. Synthetic materials made to simulate natural wood and masonry are discouraged. 
7.  Stucco and plaster finishes should be consistent with the architectural style of the building. The use of very rough, "knock-down" stucco finishes is discouraged. 
8.  The use of sustainable building materials is strongly encouraged. This includes using quality materials with a long lifespan, selecting materials that are not energy-intensive to manufacture, using building products made from recycled materials, and repairing and maintaining well-built existing buildings to the fullest extent possible. 
J.  Color and Texture. 
1.  For most architectural styles, the number of colors on the exterior should be limited to a maximum of three, with an additional contrasting color for accent. In general, the lighter colors should be used for the main body, with darker shades for trim and accent. The larger and simpler the house design, the more subtle the color should be to reduce the massiveness of large wall planes. 
2.  Earth tones are best suited and are appropriate for most of the architectural designs found in the city. The use of strong or bright, unnatural colors, including the bright "white-on-white" color schemes for exterior stucco, wood siding, trim doors and shutters, should be avoided. However, the use of strongly contrasting, natural colors can be appropriate for accent use, such as for shutters and doors. 
3.  Details such as trim, shutters, posts, etc. should be articulated by the use of color, texture or both. 
4.  Color palettes and texture palettes should be kept relatively simple so that clashes and very dramatic contrasts are avoided. 
K.  Roofing Materials. 
1.  Roofing materials should be compatible with the architectural style and design of the building. Permanent roof materials, such as concrete and clay tile, are encouraged because of their low maintenance and consistent appearance over time. Metal roofing, wood shake or shingle roof is acceptable. 
2.  Natural barrel clay tile roofs should be replaced with the same material. For repairs, remodels, and additions, care should be taken in the selection of material and installation to match as closely as possible the color of the "aged" tiles, so that the finished roof does not have a patched look. 
3.  The use of composition shingles shall be prohibited. 
4.  The colors of natural roofing materials, such as barrel tiles and slate should be left natural and not be altered by staining or painting. Colors of synthetic roofing materials should simulate natural materials and should be consistent with the architectural style of the house. 
5.  Roofing materials with glossy surfaces appear unnatural and are strongly discouraged. 
(Ord. No. 2011-10, § 3(Exh. A), 8-16-11) 
16.16.145 - Site design standards and guidelines. 
    The appearance of a residential property as it is viewed from the street or sidewalk is important to the overall appearance of a neighborhood. How well a house fits with its site and its surrounding environment contributes to the public view of the streetscape and to the success of the project. All forms of residential development including additions, new accessory buildings and new homes should first take into account the site on which the building will be built and the streetscape pattern of the neighborhood. In well-established neighborhoods, it is especially important to maintain the character of the neighborhood by respecting the pattern of the streetscape. 
    New homes should be compatible with the setback, proportion, and sale of the houses in the neighborhood. They should also be compatible with the existing on-site relationships of the surrounding neighborhood such as front facade orientation, scale of front entries, front porches, and front yard landscaping. Effective site planning should reflect the natural attributes of the site, while maintaining compatibility with the neighborhood. 
A.  Setbacks. 
1.  While respecting the minimum front and side yard setback as established in this code, a new dwelling's front and side yard setbacks should generally approximate that of adjacent residences. The front and side yard setback pattern on the block should be identified and respected to help unify the neighborhood. 

2.  While some variation in setbacks can add interest and diversity to the street view, particularly in subdivisions, a setback that significantly differs from an established pattern may be disruptive to the character of the neighborhood. 
B.  Orientation. Dwellings should orient themselves to the street with a clearly identifiable front door and windows that face the street. Front windows and the front door contribute to "eyes on the street" which helps neighborhood security. 

C.  Scale, Mass and Form. 
1.  The scale and mass of a new dwelling should blend well with neighboring houses and not overwhelm them with disproportionate size or a design that is out of character. Buildings that are out of scale with the neighborhood, with large, blank, flat surfaces, and insufficient open space and mature landscaping can appear out of place and incompatible with their surroundings. 
2.  A two-story building should not be constructed in a one-story neighborhood unless it is carefully designed to be similar in scale and mass with surrounding buildings. In such instances, the second story should be setback from the front of house to make the second story less visible from the street. Second floor balconies and small decks accented with landscaping can also reduce the visual impact of two-story buildings. 
3.  The size, mass, and height of a building should also be in proportion with the size of the property. It is not necessarily desirable to maximize the allowable lot coverage, but to provide ample open space and setbacks and preserve the character of the neighborhood. 

4.  Architectural elements, such as simple roof forms, facade articulation, roof breaks, walls with texture materials and ornamental details, and incorporation of landscaping, are encouraged because they add visual interest and reduce the appearance of mass and scale. 
5.  If allowed, accessory buildings/structures and second dwellings should have comparable massing and form as the primary residence. 
D.  Environmental Considerations. 
1.  A house should be designed to be sensitive to its natural surroundings and compatible with the natural slope of the land, reflecting its contours. Grading should be minimized to follow the natural contours to the greatest extent possible. A house should be sited to maximize views of the High Desert environment and surrounding mountains. 
2.  Significant existing trees, vegetation and any other natural site attributes should be preserved to the greatest extent possible in the design and development of the house. Site design that requires altering landforms and removing trees is strongly discouraged. 
3.  A new house or addition should be designed to make best use of available sun, light and shade. This can be accomplished in the following ways: 
a.  Use windows for natural light as much as possible. Design windows for through airflow to promote natural cooling. 
b.  Use trees or roof with large overhangs to shade the house, particularly over south facing windows. 
c.  Use patios and porches to buffer the building from heat gain. 
d.  Incorporate attic turbines for ventilation and energy-efficient heating and air conditioning systems. 
e.  Locate open space in a manner to maximize use of sun and shade patterns, natural drainage and existing trees and vegetation. 

4.  Maximize vegetative ground cover on the lot to absorb rainwater, provide drainage to large trees on the site, and reduce runoff. Extensive paving in the front, side and rear yards is strongly discouraged. Consideration should be given to the reduction of landscape maintenance and water consumption when selecting landscape materials. 
E.  Relationship to Adjacent Properties. 
1.  The visual impact of a new house and/or accessory buildings on adjacent properties should be minimized. Taller sections of buildings should be located where they will not obstruct sunlight to adjacent gardens, patios, pools, or rooms. Carefully positioning or limiting the width, depth, or height of proposed building elements is encouraged to preserve a neighbor's privacy and view. Privacy issues are extremely important on flag lots, where neighboring houses could abut a flag lot on four or five sides. 
2.  New windows should be placed where they promote privacy between properties. Windows should be offset or staggered from neighboring windows to maintain privacy between houses. Clerestory windows can be placed high on a wall to allow natural light and air, but no view to the adjacent property. Where a second story addition is planned, the new windows and walls should be positioned to promote visual and sound privacy between houses. 

3.  Second floor balconies should be located to minimize the loss of privacy for neighboring properties. Avoid locating balconies so that they directly overlook a neighboring patio or yard. 
4.  Appropriate landscaping should be provided for privacy between neighboring properties in the rear and side yards. The use trees and shrubbery is encouraged to provide screens and buffers between neighbors and to shape spaces. Protect and care for any existing trees in the rear or side yards. 
5.  Outdoor lighting should be positioned so that no direct light extends onto neighboring properties. Take care in choosing and locating outdoor lighting fixtures so that privacy is maintained between properties. 
F.  Additions, New Accessory Buildings and Second Dwelling Units. 
1.  Additions and new accessory buildings/structures, and second dwelling units should maintain the look and appearance of the existing primary buildings so that they do not appear as an addition or new building. They should respect the architectural style, scale, and rhythm of the existing primary building. Building elements, such as roof pitch and style, building proportions, exterior siding and roofing materials, door and window style and materials, color, and texture, should match the existing primary building. 
2.  An addition should complement and balance the overall form, mass, and composition of the existing primary building on the property. 
3.  Additions are strongly encouraged to be located behind the house away from public view. Additions in the front yard are strongly discouraged. 
4.  When building an addition, efficient use of floor area is encouraged. Maximize floor area by combining uses of space, eliminating unnecessary rooms, and organizing rooms to eliminate hallways. 
G.  Garages. 
1.  Garages should not dominate the front elevation. The visual impact of garage doors along street frontages can diminish the character of the neighborhood. Garages should be located and designed in one of the following ways: 
a.  Access the garage from the side or rear of the lot. Where there is a rear alley and auto access is feasible, rear detached garages with alley access should be used. 
b.  Offset the garage behind the front facade of the house. The frontage of any garage should be setback a minimum of three feet from the dwelling's first story frontage. 
c.  If a garage must be located closer to the street than the front facade of the house, provide usable open space, such as a balcony or deck, above the garage with a trellis or roof along the frontage of the garage to reduce the visual impact. Also, designing an entry porch or trellis located in front of the living area to meet the setback of the garage can improve the visual appearance from the street. 
d.  Provide a side entry garage: locate the garage so that it faces the side of the lot, rather than the fronting the street. 

2.  Recreational vehicles, boats, trailers, etc. shall not be located in view from the public right-of-way. They add visual clutter and detract from the appearance of the neighborhood. They shall be stored inside or rear yards, screened from street by fences or landscaping. 

H.  Driveways and Walkways. 
1.  Large expanses of paving for driveways and walkways should be avoided to reduce visual impact and impervious coverage in the front yard. Minimizing the width of driveways where feasible is encouraged. 
2.  Driveways are encouraged to incorporate natural materials into their design with the use of stone or colored concrete. The use of decomposed granite is limited to small expanses such as the center portion of a driveway. 
3.  The walkway to the front entry should be designed at a human scale - between three to five feet in width - and not be excessively wide. Natural materials such as brick pavers or stone, tiles, and textured or stamped concrete for walkways are strongly encouraged. 
4.  The use of asphalt for driveways and walkways is prohibited. 
I.  Fences, Walls, Gates and Hedges. 
1.  Front yard fences and walls are strongly discouraged, particularly in neighborhoods where the predominant streetscape pattern has no existing fences in the front yard. This provides a quality of openness that contributes to an attractive overall streetscape in residential neighborhoods. Where permitted, front yard fences and walls shall not dominate the streetscape or reduce compatibility of the home with adjacent residences. 
2.  Fences, walls, gates and hedges for privacy may be used in side and rear yards. 
3.  The materials, design, height, and length of the fence or wall should be compatible with the architectural style, materials and overall size of the primary building. Landscaping should be provided adjacent to fences along street frontages to soften their appearance. 
4.  Fences and gates should be designed with simplicity to complement the house. Avoid ornate fences and gates, which draw attention, and detract from the main building. 
5.  Front yard fences and walls should provide a decreasing level of opaqueness as the height of the fence or wall increases to the maximum permitted. 
6.  Columns and other architectural features such as posts should be architecturally compatible with the primary building. 
7.  Gates should be designed to reflect the architecture of the primary building and the style and design of the fence or wall. 
8.  Hedges that are intended to provide screening and privacy should be planted so as not to encroach over the sidewalk or front property line if no sidewalk exists. 

9.  Fences and walls should be constructed with materials such as masonry, metal, wood, or a combination thereof. The use of true wrought iron is preferred to hollow metal tubing. Barbed wire and chain link fencing are prohibited. 
10.  "Good neighbor" fences (fences that look equally good from both sides) are encouraged in side and rear yards. 
J.  Exterior Lighting. 
1.  Exterior lighting includes all lighting fixtures on front facades, security lighting, and landscape lighting. Adequate exterior lighting shall be provided on the front of the house to ensure neighborhood safety and security. Exterior lighting that accentuates architectural and landscape elements of the property is encouraged. 
2.  Recessed porches must be lit. 
3.  Light fixtures should complement the design of the house. 
4.  Photo-sensitive off/on switches are strongly encouraged for energy conservation and safety. 
5.  Exterior lighting should be positioned so that no direct light extends into neighboring properties or public rights-of-way. Illumination should be screened from adjacent properties. Cut-off luminaries should be used to prevent nighttime light pollution. 
K.  House Address Numbers. 
1.  Address numbers should be located near the front entry door or front entry porch in a location that is visible from the street. 
2.  Address numbers shall be a minimum of four inches in height or as required by the building code. The design of the numbers should be simple in shape so that they can be read easily from a distance. 
3.  Number colors should provide a strong contrast with background color. Address number illumination is required. 
L.  Utility and Mechanical Equipment. 
1.  All mechanical equipment shall be screened from view. Utility meters, transformers, backflow devices and equipment should be placed in locations that are not exposed to view from the street or they should be suitably screened. All screening devices should be compatible with the architecture and color of the house and should not look like a "tacked on" addition. 
2.  Roof mounted equipment should be avoided. 
3.  All antennas should be placed in building attics or interiors. All new units should be prewired to accommodate cable reception. Satellite dishes shall be located away from public view and should be considered early in the design process in terms of location and screening from view from the street and from common recreation areas. 

(Ord. No. 2011-10, § 3(Exh. A), 8-16-11) 
16.16.150 - Additional design standards and guidelines for small lot single-family developments. 
    Small lot single-family developments shall be developed according to the provisions and standards of this code. In addition to the aforementioned design standards and guidelines in this article, the following additional standards and guidelines should be incorporated into the design of projects for small lot, detached single-family development to create functionality and visual variety along local residential streets: 
1.  The architectural design, scale and mass of the development should blend well with the surrounding neighborhood and complement the character of the neighborhood. 
2.  Variation should be provided in unit types, architectural design and building massing to provide visual interest within the development. 
3.  Where possible, there should be some variation in setbacks, unit placement, and orientation to achieve efficient and unique site design and avoid a monotonous street scene. 
4.  Both active and passive open space and recreational amenities for private and common use by the residents shall be provided. 
5.  Decorative elements, such as architectural details, intensified landscaping, pedestrian paths, decorative lighting, etc. are encouraged to complement and enhance the development and create variety and interest. 
6.  Gated entries into small lot single-family developments are prohibited. 

(Ord. No. 2011-10, § 3(Exh. A), 8-16-11) 
ARTICLE VII. - MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DESIGN GUIDELINES[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2011-10, § 3(Exh. A), adopted Aug. 16, 2011, amended Article VII in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. VII, §§ 16.16.275-16.16.300, pertained to the limited agricultural district. See the ordinance list and disposition tables for full derivation. 

16.16.155 - General provisions and administration. 
    All new multiple-family or multi-family developments constructed in the R3 designation shall provide and maintain design standards and guidelines in compliance with the provisions of this article. It is the duty of the development services department to enforce all permitting and entitlement provisions of this article. The director or his/her designee may impose such conditions deemed necessary to achieve the purpose of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2011-10, § 3(Exh. A), 8-16-11) 
16.16.160 - Architectural design standards and guidelines. 
    While there is no specific architectural style required for buildings in the multiple-family residence (R3) designation, high quality, innovative architecture is strongly encouraged. The primary focus is to develop a high quality residential environment. The architectural style and design of building elements should be consistent within the development and complementary with the neighborhood in terms of scale, materials, and color, but it does not need to copy or duplicate existing buildings. Variation of building styles produces healthy design diversity and is encouraged. New projects should meet or exceed the standards of quality that have been set by surrounding development and contribute to the improvement of the area. 
A.  Building Articulation and Detailing. 
1.  Individual units should be articulated to diminish the massing of large buildings and be compatible with the scale of surrounding development. Building design shall avoid large monotonous facades, long straight line building fronts, plain box shapes, and barren exterior treatment. 
2.  Avoid designing buildings that are longer than one hundred twenty-five (125) feet. Facades of multi-family buildings should be divided into shorter modules a maximum of thirty (30) feet in width to give the appearance of an assemblage of smaller buildings, with each of the units individually recognizable. This can be accomplished through the use of porches, balconies and architectural projections; varied unit setbacks within the same building; staggered or jogged building planes; and a mix of different unit types within the same unit cluster. Units can be further articulated by the rhythm and pattern of windows and doors. The use of mansard roofs or segments of pitched roof applied at building's edge is not an acceptable method to provide articulation. 

3.  When located adjacent to lower-density residential zones, the bulk of multi-family developments can be imposing on adjacent residential uses. This necessitates that the scale of projects be considered within the context of their surroundings. Buildings of greater height may require additional setbacks so as not to dominate the character of the neighborhood. Buildings of greater mass should be separated into smaller, units that better resemble single-family homes. 
4.  For projects that front arterial streets, the street floor building level should be raised between two and four feet to protect the privacy of ground floor units. 
5.  Distinctive architectural elements, materials and colors should be used to denote primary building entries or individual unit entries. 

6.  Awnings, moldings, pilasters and comparable architectural embellishments are encouraged. 
7.  The incorporation of balconies, porches and patios within multi-family buildings is encouraged to break up large wall masses, provide offsets between floors on multi-level buildings, and add human scale to buildings. 
8.  Exterior stairways should be designed as an integral part of the architecture of a project and should incorporate solid wall portions, columns, and/or a decorative balustrade. They should be of the same materials, color and detail of the building. Thin-looking, open metal, prefabricated stairs shall not be used. Design of railings and steps should be varied from unit to unit if possible, but must maintain continuity. 
B.  Height and Roof Lines. 
1.  Roof lines should be segmented and varied within an overall horizontal context. Varying heights are encouraged. Combinations of one, one and a half, and two-story units create variation and visual interest, and are encouraged. Flat roof design should be avoided. 
2.  In some cases, it may be desirable to "step back" the upper stories of new multi-family buildings to "scale down" facades that face the street, common space, and adjacent residential buildings. 
3.  Hipped or gabled roofs covering the entire building are preferable to mansard roofs and segments of pitched roofs applied at the building's edge. 
4.  The roof pitch for a porch may be slightly lower than that of the main building. 
5.  Carport roofs visible from buildings or streets should incorporate roof slope and materials to match adjacent buildings. Flat carport roofs are discouraged. 

C.  Doors and Windows. 
1.  The placement and relationship of doors and windows is important in creating a unified building composition. Wherever possible, window sizes should be coordinated vertically and horizontally and window design should be consistent in terms of style and general arrangement on all building sides. 
2.  All doors and windows should be related with the chosen architectural style. Windows with widely varying styles are strongly discouraged. All doors and window frames should be composed of consistent material. 
3.  For new multi-family developments, double glazing should be used consistent with energy code requirements. 
4.  Knockers or door bells should be provided on doors. Entrance doors should provide viewers for safety and security. 
5.  Shutters, trim and moldings on windows are encouraged. Proposed window mullion widths, window trim or surrounds, material, and type should complement all existing windows. Mullion widths should be in scale with the windows and the building. Wider trim sizes, such as 1 × 4's and 1 × 6's, is preferred to narrower trim sizes, such as 1 × 2's. 
6.  Raw or clear anodized aluminum window frames are strongly discouraged. 
7.  Operable windows should have screens so they can be used for ventilation. 

D.  Materials and Finishes. 
1.  The building and its elements should be unified by textures, colors and materials. Materials should be consistently applied and should be chosen to work harmoniously with adjacent materials. Piecemeal embellishment and frequent changes in materials should be avoided. 
2.  Building should be treated as a whole and finished appropriately on all sides to provide continuity. Materials tend to appear substantial and integral to the building when material changes occur at changes in plane. Material changes not accompanied by changes in plane appear "tacked-on" and are strongly discouraged. 

3.  Exterior columns for trellises, porches or colonnades should utilize materials and colors that are compatible with the adjacent building. 
4.  Exposed gutters and downspouts should be colored to match fascia or wall materials, unless designed as an outstanding architectural feature of the overall theme. 
5.  Accessory and service buildings/structures, such as carports, detached garages, recreational buildings, laundry facilities, and storage buildings/structures, should be designed as an integral part of the project architecture and should be similar in material, color, and detail to the primary buildings. 
6.  Building materials should be high quality, durable, and require low maintenance. 
7.  Materials that are responsive to climate, i.e. those suitable to the High Desert environment, adjacent context and site orientation are encouraged. Natural materials are encouraged. Materials such as brick, stone, copper, etc. should be left in their natural colors. Synthetic materials made to simulate natural wood and masonry are discouraged. Other suitable materials include textured concrete, trowel-finish concrete, metal cladding, and glass curtain or glass block walls. 
8.  Stucco and plaster finishes should be consistent with the architectural style of the building. A smooth trowel or fine sand float finish is desirable while the use of rough, "knock-down" stucco finishes is discouraged. 
9.  The use of sustainable building materials is strongly encouraged. This includes using quality materials with a long lifespan, selecting materials that are not energy-intensive to manufacture, using building products made from recycled materials, and repairing and maintaining well-built existing buildings/structures to the fullest extent possible. 
E.  Color and Texture. 
1.  For most architectural styles, the number of colors on the exterior should be limited to a maximum of three, with an additional contrasting color for accent. In general, the lighter colors should be used for the main body, with darker shades for trim and accent. The larger and simpler the building design, the more subtle the color should be to reduce the massiveness of large wall planes. 
2.  Earth tones are best suited and are appropriate for most of the architectural designs found in the city. The use of strong or bright, unnatural colors, including the bright "white-on-white" color schemes for exterior stucco, wood siding, trim doors and shutters, should be avoided. However, the use of strongly contrasting, natural colors can be appropriate for accent use, such as for shutters and doors. 
3.  Color and finishes on exterior of all elevations of a building should be coordinated to provide a total continuity of design. Unusual patterns and color schemes should be avoided. Garish, non-harmonious, or out-of-character colors should not be used. 
4.  The blending of compatible colors in a single facade or composition is a good way to add character and variety, while reducing, or breaking up the mass of a building. Lower wall wainscots and built-up or recessed reveals may be employed to add interest and break up vertical monotony. 
5.  Details such as trim, shutters, posts, etc. should be articulated by the use of color, texture or both. 
F.  Roofing Materials. 
1.  Roofing materials should be compatible with the architectural style and design of the building. Permanent roof materials, such as concrete and clay tile, are encouraged because of their low maintenance and consistent appearance over time. Asphalt shingle roof is not allowed. 
2.  Natural barrel clay tile roofs should be replaced with the same material. For repairs, remodels, and additions, care should be taken in the selection of material and installation to match as closely as possible the color of the "aged" tiles, so that the finished roof does not have a patched look. 
3.  The colors of natural roofing materials, such as barrel tile and slate should be left natural and not be altered by staining or painting. Colors of synthetic roofing materials should simulate natural materials and should be consistent with the architectural style of the project. 
4.  Roofing materials with glossy surfaces appear unnatural and are strongly discouraged. 
G.  Noise Impacts. 
1.  Units within the project should be adequately insulated to protect residents from noise intrusion from adjoining units. In addition to insulation between common walls, vertical insulation on exterior walls and from floor-to-floor should be provided. 
2.  Loading docks, service entries, mechanical equipment and recreational play areas should be sited as far away from adjoining single-family properties as reasonably possible. 
3.  Projects adjacent to major arterials or railroad tracks should incorporate additional noise mitigation measures to protect residents. Mitigation measures include, but are not limited to, double-glazed windows, sound walls, and earth berms. 
(Ord. No. 2011-10, § 3(Exh. A), 8-16-11) 
16.16.165 - Site design standards and guidelines. 
    Multiple-family or multi-family developments are characterized by higher density residential buildings comprised of attached units and common facilities such as parking, open space and recreation areas. If not properly designed, multi-family development can result in projects surrounded by high walls, projects with monotonous blank facades, or projects dominated by large parking areas with minimal landscaping and open space areas. The primary goal of these guidelines is to help mitigate the effects of these situations and to provide a pleasant residential environment within multi-family developments. New projects should meet or exceed the standards of quality set by surrounding development and contribute to improvement of the area. 
A.  Setbacks. 
1.  While respecting the minimum front and side yard setbacks as established in Article V (Residential Development Standards) of this development code, the front and side yard setbacks of a new multi-family residential development should generally approximate that of adjacent development, with some variation in setbacks to provide visual interest and varying shadow patterns. 
2.  The setback area should be used for planting landscape screens to protect the privacy of the ground floor units. 
B.  Building Orientation, Siting and Entrances. 
1.  Multi-family developments should have a strong street presence with public entrances oriented towards the street. The majority of unit entrances must be accessed from the street or from the main open space. Where there is a common building entrance for all units, it should be accessed from the street or main open space. 
2.  Multi-family units in large projects should be clustered, or broken up into groups of buildings. The use of long access balconies and corridors should be avoided. Access points to individual units in large projects should be clustered in groups of four or less. 
3.  The use of distinctive architectural elements and materials to denote entrances is encouraged. Weather protection, such as a porch covering or canopy, should be provided for individual entry doors. 
4.  New projects shall have transitional spaces in the form of stoops, overhangs and porches between public areas and entrances to the units. Front porches are encouraged on all street front units. 

5.  Multi-family developments should be distinguished by entry and edge design features such as ornamental landscaping, open space areas, natural features, architectural monumentation and enhanced paving. 
6.  Multi-family residential uses should be buffered from incompatible development. Intensified landscaping, increased setbacks and appropriate building orientation should be utilized as a means of providing adequate separation between such land uses. In addition, where possible, residential projects should utilize parking areas, in addition to landscaping, as a buffer along edges common with commercial or industrial uses. 
C.  Buildings Fronting Arterial Streets. 
1.  Some multi-family developments within the city will be located on shallow lots along major arterial streets. These streets will need to be taken into account in the project design. The perceived front yard will be created by parkways and street trees, together with landscaped setbacks, and should be considered in providing appropriate buffer for the street facing units from traffic. 
2.  Raising the ground floor level by up to three feet can provide additional privacy and noise buffer for street-facing ground floor units. Another means is to provide transitional spaces in the form of raised stoops and entry porches. 
3.  Additional landscaping with taller shrubs and groundcover in the front setbacks will also contribute to the privacy and sound-buffering objective for these units. 
D.  Scale and Mass. 
1.  The scale and mass of a new multi-family residential development should be consistent with neighboring developments and not overwhelm them with disproportionate size or a design that is out of character. 
2.  Larger multi-family projects should avoid massive apartment-type buildings. Windows shall be provided facing the street for all units adjacent to the street to break up massing and to contribute to "eyes on the street" which helps neighborhood security. 

3.  Heights of individual buildings should be varied to reduce building mass by using a combination of single-level and two-story units, as well as varying the roof pitch within a project. 
4.  As the vertical height of a building increase, it should increasingly step back from the street (i.e. when possible, the second story of a building should be set back further than the first floor). 
5.  Buildings located on properties directly adjacent to a residential and agricultural designated properties shall be designed to provide a transition between the two designations; i.e. the units directly adjacent to the street should be of a single story design if the adjacent residential neighborhood is developed primarily with single-story homes. 
E.  Environmental Considerations. 

1.  To the extent possible, site grading should relate to the natural surroundings and be designed to minimize grading by following the natural ground contours and recognizing existing drainage patterns. Graded slopes should be rounded to blend with existing terrain. 
2.  Multi-family developments should be designed to be sensitive to their natural surroundings and should be sited to maximize views of the High Desert and surrounding mountains, particularly from common and private open space areas. 
3.  Significant existing trees, vegetation and any other natural site attributes should be preserved to the greatest extent possible in the project's design and development. Site design that requires altering land forms and removing trees is strongly discouraged. 
4.  A new multi-family development should be designed to make best use of available sun, light and shade. This can be accomplished in the following ways: 
a.  Use windows for natural light as much as possible. Design windows for through airflow to promote natural cooling. 
b.  Use trees or roofs with large overhangs to shade the units, particularly over south facing windows. 
c.  Use patios and porches to buffer the units from heat gain. 
d.  Locate private and common open space in a manner to maximize use of sun and shade patterns, natural drainage and existing trees and vegetation. 
5.  Maximize vegetative ground cover on the lot to absorb rainwater, provide drainage to large trees on the site, and reduce runoff. Extensive paving is strongly discouraged. Consideration should be given to the reduction of landscape maintenance and water consumption when selecting landscape materials. 
F.  Privacy Between Buildings. 
1.  Buildings should be oriented to promote privacy to the greatest extent possible. 
2.  Windows, balconies or similar openings above the first story should be oriented so as not to have a direct line-of-sight into adjacent units within the development. In addition, units above the first story should be designed so that they do not look directly onto private patios or backyards of adjoining residential property or units. 
3.  Landscaping should be used to aid in privacy screening. 
4.  Outdoor lighting should be positioned so that no direct light extends onto neighboring properties. 
G.  Vehicle Circulation and Access. 
1.  Site access and internal circulation in multi-family developments should promote safety, efficiency, and convenience. Vehicular traffic should be adequately separated from pedestrian circulation. Vehicular entrances should be clearly identified and easily accessible to minimize pedestrian/vehicle conflict. 
2.  Principal vehicular access into multi-family developments should be through an entry drive rather than a parking aisle. 
3.  The number of site access points or driveway aprons shall be minimized for aesthetic purposes, to achieve efficient and productive use of paved accessways, and to eliminate traffic hazards. They should be located as far as possible from street intersections (a minimum distance of one hundred (100) feet is recommended) and should be coordinated with existing or planned median openings and driveways on the opposite side of the roadway. Common driveways that provide vehicular access to more than one site are encouraged. 
4.  When possible, and especially for properties containing more than one hundred fifty (150) feet of street frontage, landscaped islands shall be incorporated into the driveway entry area to separate driveway lanes for ingress and egress. Continuous driveways, uninterrupted by landscaping are not permitted. 
5.  Continuous circulation should be provided throughout the site to the greatest extent possible. Dead-end driveways should be minimized. Adequate areas for maneuvering, stacking, and emergency vehicle access should be provided. 
6.  Project entries and driveway areas should contain design features, including landscaping and textured paving, to break up the expanse of paving in a project. Paving materials should complement the architectural design. The use of stamped concrete, stone, brick, pavers, exposed aggregate or color concrete is encouraged. Long, uninterrupted broom finished concrete should be avoided. The use of asphalt for driveways and walkways is prohibited. 

7.  Alley improvements should coincide with site planning to minimize alleyway deterioration and address problems such as debris, safety, and any nuisance odors or hazards. 
H.  Pedestrian Circulation. 

1.  Multiple-family developments shall include pedestrian walkways. Pedestrian circulation should be adequately separated from vehicular traffic. Pedestrian entrances and walkways should be clearly identified and easily accessible to minimize pedestrian/vehicle conflict. 
2.  Pedestrian walkways should link dwelling units with common open space and recreation areas, parking areas, and the street at the project entries. Where possible, multi-family developments should incorporate pedestrian connections to adjoining residential and commercial projects, and other compatible land use facilities. 

3.  Pedestrian walkways should be safe, visually attractive, and well defined by landscaping and lights. Use of varied surfaces and decorative pavement is encouraged. At a minimum, decorative paving should be used to delineate crossings at circulation drives and parking aisles. 
4.  Curvilinear and off-set paths provide a more inviting and interesting experience and are generally preferred over long, straight alignments. Paths that traverse open space areas are encouraged. 
5.  Pedestrian walkways should be a minimum of four feet in width. If combined with a bicycle path, as a part of a dedicated public path/paseo, the minimum total walkway width shall be fourteen (14) feet. 
6.  Pedestrian access to the first floor units should be via traditional residential front doors. Entry walks from the sidewalk to the front door should reflect the residential character of the project. The width of entry walks should not exceed five feet. 
7.  Transit shelters should be provided near major concentrations of residents. As far as feasible, where a transit stop is planned adjacent to a project of at least five acres in size, the developer should coordinate with the transit district to determine a suitable location for a transit shelter onsite. Freestanding shelters should be integrated architecturally with the project with respect to color, materials and architectural style to the extent allowed by the transit provider. 
I.  Parking. 
1.  Parking for multi-family developments shall be provided on site in on-grade or underground structures, parking courts, carports, or attached garages. Adverse visual impacts from parking areas, carports, structures, and garage doors on the residential character of the street or project site should be minimized through proper siting and design. 
2.  Parking shall be located within close proximity to the building and located to the rear of the parcel wherever possible. Parking shall be designed to avoid awkward turning maneuvers and the backing of vehicles into public streets. 
3.  Pedestrian walkways should be safe, visually attractive, and well defined by landscaping and lights. Use of varied surfaces and decorative pavement is encouraged. At a minimum, decorative paving should be used to delineate crossings at circulation drives and parking aisles. 
4.  Curvilinear and off-set paths provide a more inviting and interesting experience and are generally preferred over long, straight alignments. Paths that traverse open space areas are encouraged. 

5.  Parking should not occupy more than thirty (30) percent of any linear street frontage and parking in the front setback areas is discouraged. 
6.  Except for townhome projects with attached garages, all multi-family parking should be in efficient, multiple stall configurations. Large multi-family parking areas should be divided into a series of connected smaller parking courts. Long runs of parking spaces are discouraged. 
7.  Parking courts should be treated as important spaces whose character is clearly defined by landscaping, lighting, building massing, and pedestrian/vehicular circulation areas. Parking courts should be separated from buildings by a walkway (minimum four feet wide) and landscape strip (minimum seven feet wide). 
8.  Carport structures should be architecturally compatible with the design of the main building in the project. Pitched roofs for carports are strongly encouraged. Flat aluminum carport structures are prohibited, particularly in long interrupted runs. Carports shall meet setback and building separation requirements. 
9.  If tuck-under parking is provided, the first floor of the residential units shall not occur more than four feet above the finished street/sidewalk grade level. Parking may need to be below grade or occur behind the living spaces. These parking areas shall not be visible from the street. 
10.  The visual impact of parking courts, carports, and parking structures shall be mitigated with landscaping. Landscaping materials should have adequate room to grow and be protected from abuse by cars. Continuous six-inch concrete curbs shall be provided as wheel stops where parking adjoins landscaping. 
11.  Parking areas, driveways and pedestrian areas shall contain automatically controlled lighting. 
12.  Bicycle parking shall be provided for multi-family developments. 

J.  Open Space. 
1.  Residents of multi-family developments should have safe and efficient access to usable open space for recreation and social activities. The design and orientation of these areas should take advantage of available sunlight and should be sheltered from the noise and traffic of adjacent streets or other incompatible uses. 
2.  Open space areas should be provided in large meaningful and usable areas, pursuant to the requirements of Article V of this development code. 
3.  Common open space areas should be convenient to the majority of dwellings and should be secure and visible from dwellings to ensure safe use. Common open space areas should contain amenities appropriate to the project's size; i.e. pools, spas, recreation buildings are encouraged for large projects, while barbecue areas and gazebos, may be more appropriate for smaller projects. Children's play areas shall be sited to be visible from residential units. 

4.  Private open space should be contiguous to the unit they serve and should be screened from public view for privacy. All balconies and patios that front a public street should be substantially enclosed to screen items being stored on the balcony or patio. 
K.  Fences, Walls, Gates and Hedges. 
1.  Walls and fences should be planned and designed as an integral part of multi-family development, and should be consistent with the landscaping and building design. 
2.  If street fencing is required for security reasons, decorative types of view fencing, such as wrought iron, are encouraged. Solid fencing, such as stucco or masonry, is strongly discouraged when they will block the view of the buildings or provide hiding places. 
3.  Perimeter walls or fencing that do not front a public street should be of decorative masonry (split-face block, plaster/stucco finish), decorative metal (wrought iron), wood, hedges, or a combination of materials. They should be designed in a style, material and color to complement the development. Both sides of walls should be architecturally treated. 
4.  Tiered planting should be provided adjacent to project perimeter walls along street frontages to soften their appearance. 
5.  Walls should be eliminated or sited to provide additional setback areas at project entries to accommodate landscaping, ornamental gateways, signage and street furniture. 
6.  Wall sections greater than fifty (50) feet in length fronting a street shall incorporate at least two of the following design features, in proportion to the length of the wall: 
a.  A minimum two-foot change in horizontal plane for at least ten feet. 
b.  A minimum eighteen-inch change in height for at least ten feet. 
c.  A minimum eighteen-inch high raised planter for at least half the length of the wall. 
d.  Use of pilasters at twenty-five-foot maximum intervals and at changes in wall planes. 
7.  Gates or comparable design solutions should be provided in perimeter walls or fences to allow emergency access and facilitate convenient pedestrian access to activity areas and adjacent uses. 
8.  Walls should be curved or angled at corner locations along street frontages to allow sight line views around the corner. 
9.  Barbed wire and chain link fencing are prohibited. 

L.  Exterior Lighting. 
1.  Every multi-family project shall have adequate lighting to provide for security and visibility. Site lighting should not be pervasive or impact surrounding or neighboring properties. The type and location of site and building lighting should preclude direct glare onto adjoining property, public rights-of-way, or skyward. All lighting fixtures must be shielded to confine light spread on-site and to prevent nighttime light pollution. 
2.  The design of all exterior light fixtures shall be compatible with the building's architecture. 
3.  Pedestrian scale/decorative lighting along walkways and driveways is strongly encouraged. "High mast" poles are discouraged. The maximum height of walkway lighting shall be fifteen (15) feet. 
4.  Main entrances to parking areas or buildings should have strong architectural lighting, particularly for project name or addresses. 
5.  Open spaces should be adequately lighted with durable low maintenance fixtures. 
6.  The location of light fixtures should correspond to anticipated use. Lighting of pedestrian movement paths should illuminate changes in grade, path intersections, seating areas and any other uses along the movement path that, if left unlighted, would create an unsafe situation. 
7.  Night lighting of buildings is encouraged, but should be accomplished in a selective manner, avoiding overall building illumination that produces an undesirable look. Night lighting of buildings may be used to highlight special building features, emphasize repeated or decorative features, and use the juxtaposition of light and shadow to articulate the building facade. 
M.  Utility and Mechanical Equipment Screening. 
1.  All exterior mechanical equipment, except solar collectors, whether on a roof, side of a building, or on the ground, shall be appropriately screened from public view. The method of screening shall be architecturally integrated with the primary building in terms of materials, color, shape and size. Where individual equipment is provided, a continuous screen is desirable. 
2.  Roof mounted equipment should be avoided or appropriately concealed. For rooftop equipment, the screening materials shall be at least as high as the equipment being screened. Equipment requiring screening includes, but is not limited to, heating, air conditioning, refrigeration equipment, plumbing lines, ductwork, and transformers. Mechanical equipment shall not be permitted on any exposed portion of a pitched roof, except as may be approved through the site plan review process. 

3.  Equipment should be placed in locations that are not exposed to view from the street or they should be suitably screened. Ground-mounted utility equipment such as, but not limited to, transformers, backflow devices, cable television boxes, electric power transformers and distribution facilities, water pumps, and telecommunications facilities (not including pole-mounted equipment) shall be screened from view on all sides with solid masonry walls or similar permanent buildings. Such masonry wall or building shall be of a neutral color. Screening with wood, chain-link, or similar fencing materials shall not be permitted. Electric and other metering equipment and panels shall be painted to match adjacent building and wall surfaces. 
4.  All screening devices should be compatible with the architecture and color of the main building(s) and should not look like a "tacked on" addition. 
5.  All antennas should be placed in building attics or interiors. All new units should be prewired to accommodate cable reception. Satellite dishes shall be located away from public view and should be considered early in the design process in terms of location and screening from view from the street and from common recreation areas. 
N.  Refuse and Storage Areas. 
1.  Decorative treatment of trash and storage enclosures shall be used to minimize the adverse visual impact of these areas. Trash disposal areas, including dumpsters, shall be screened from view by a six-foot high enclosure with gates. Trash and storage enclosures shall be architecturally compatible with the 
project design, and landscaping shall be incorporated into their design to screen them and deter graffiti. Screening materials shall consist of fences, landscaping, and/or berming, and the use of natural terrain where possible. 
2.  Trash enclosures should be located for the convenience of the residents and should be easily accessible for trash and recyclables collection, but should not impede circulation during loading operations. They should be designed to avoid areas that are dark or hidden from view of residents or neighbors. 
(Ord. No. 2011-10, § 3(Exh. A), 8-16-11) 
ARTICLE IX. - COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL LAND USE DESIGNATIONS[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2012-02, § 3(Exh. A), adopted February 7, 2012, repealed the former Article IX, §§ 16.16.345-16.16.380, and enacted a new Article IX as set out herein. The former Article IX pertained to the administrative and professional office (AP) district and derived from SBCC § 86.0240 and Ord. No. 250, 1997. 

16.16.310 - Commercial and industrial land use designations. 
A.  Purpose. This article lists the land uses that may be allowed within the commercial and industrial land use designations established by the general plan and determines the permit process required for each use. All commercial and industrial land use designation regulations in this article are intended to be used concurrently with the general plan and other chapters in this development code, including Articles X and XI, or XII in this chapter. The commercial and industrial land use designations are as follows: 
1.  Convenience Commercial (C1). The convenience commercial (C1) designation is intended to meet the needs of local neighborhood residents. Businesses within the C1 designation should be smaller in floor area than the other commercial designations and should be less-intense in impacts such as traffic and noise due to the proximity of residentially designated properties. Uses within convenience commercial areas should include convenience-type goods and services intended to provide for the daily (short-term) needs of surrounding residential neighborhoods. 

2.  General Commercial (C2). The general commercial (C2) designation is intended for goods and services of a general nature as well as professional offices that will meet both the short and long-term needs of the city's population. 
3.  Service Commercial (C3). The service commercial (C3) designation is intended for utilization as a buffer between residential or commercial uses and industrial uses. Service commercial uses include business-to-business retail and wholesale sales and services. All business operations shall be conducted within an enclosed building, and no outdoor storage shall be permitted. 
4.  Limited Industrial (I1). The limited industrial (I1) designation is intended to include lighter industrial uses and supportive service commercial uses. Wholesale or retail sale of industrial supplies, transportation equipment, building equipment and materials, indoor manufacturing uses, and similar uses may be permitted in this designation. In addition, supportive commercial uses such as restaurants or convenience markets that serve consumers within the industrial area may be allowed. 
5.  General Industrial (I2). The general industrial (I2) designation is intended to permit the establishment of manufacturing and related uses within the city in areas which are protected from encroachment by incompatible residential uses. This designation permits the heaviest types of manufacturing and industrial uses with approval of a site plan or conditional use permit. Manufacturing, warehousing, and fabrication uses are all appropriate for this designation. 

( Ord. No. 2012-02, § 3(Exh. A), 2-7-12 ) 
16.16.315 - Permitted uses and permit requirements. 
    The permitted uses and permit requirements in this article are provided in a table format. Land uses are provided in the first (vertical) column of the table and commercial/industrial land use designation in the top (horizontal) row. In order to determine which permit process is applicable or if the land use is allowed, the use must be matched up with the corresponding land use designation. Once the land use and land use designation are matched, the symbol in the box represents the applicable process. The following key legend demonstrates which symbol corresponds with the applicable permit process. Footnotes are also provided and considered part of this development code. 
Key to Permit Requirements 
Symbol Applicable Process A Accessory Use CUP Requires a Conditional Use Permit NP Not Permitted P Permitted Use R Requires a Site Plan Review  
( Ord. No. 2012-02, § 3(Exh. A), 2-7-12 ; Ord. No. 2017-08 , § 5(Exh. A), 10-3-17) 
16.16.320 - Commercial and industrial uses. 
Land Use Designations Land Uses C1 C2 C3 I1 I2 A. Art studio/gallery (including photo) R R R R B. Assemblies of people - Entertainment (e.g., theater - Live performance, auditorium, banquet hall, nightclub, etc.) 1 R R R R C. Auction service, exchange or barter R R R D. Automotive parking R R E. Bank and financial institution/service R R F. Bar, saloon, cocktail lounge and tavern CUP G. Business support services and facilities (including graphic reproduction, computer-service, uniform store, etc.) R R R R H. Catering establishment R R R R I. Cemetery R R R R R J. Club or lodge (non-profit), fraternal or religious association CUP R K. Composting plant NP NP NP NP CUP L. Contractors and building trades R R R R R M. Equipment sales and rental - Indoors R R R N. Grocery store (not including off-sale alcohol 7 ) R R R NP NP O. Health and fitness club R R R R R P. Heavy equipment sales and rental R R Q. Helicopter landing and take-off pad CUP CUP CUP R. Historical and monument site R R R R R S. Home improvement sales and service, retail (e.g., hardware, lumber and building materials stores) R R R T. Hospital CUP CUP CUP CUP U. Hotel/motel R V. Impound/towing 2 NP NP NP CUP CUP W. Industrial uses (includes outdoor 
storage 3 ) NP NP NP P P X. Institutional uses R R R R R Y. Kennel - Boarding of domestic animals CUP CUP R R Z. Laboratory - Research CUP R R AA. Machine shop/repair R R BB. Manufactured housing (sales) R R CC. Manufacturing/warehouse (includes outdoor storage 3 ) R R DD. Medical services (not including hospitals) R R NP NP EE. Microwave and radio communication towers and facilities R R R FF. Self-storage facilities 2 CUP CUP CUP CUP CUP GG. Mortuary, not include crematory R HH. Museum, library and reading room R R R II. Off-sale alcohol establishment (ABC type 20 & 21 licenses) 7 CUP CUP JJ. Office/professional buildings R R R R 5 R 5 KK. Parking/storage of recreational vehicles R R R LL. Personal services (e.g., spas, salons, and massage facilities) R R R MM. Planetarium, aquarium, botanical garden and zoo R NN. Publishing and printing R R R OO. Processing (recycling) facility 4 NP NP NP CUP CUP PP. Recreational facility - Commercial R R R QQ. Recycling center - Large collection facility 4 NP NP NP NP CUP RR. Repair shop - Small items R R R R R SS. Restaurant (sit down and takeout), including outdoor dining 2 R R R TT. Retail sales (not including off-sale alcohol 7 ) R R R R 6 R 6 UU. School - Trade, community college, university R R R R VV. School - Specialty non-degree (e.g., dance and martial arts) R R R R R WW. Semi-truck repair and storage CUP CUP XX. Shopping center (not including off-sale alcohol 7 ) R R R YY. Terminal (bus and truck) CUP CUP CUP ZZ. Theater NP NP NP NP NP AAA. Upholstery and furniture repair/refinishing R R R R BBB. Vehicle fuel station 2 R R R CCC. Vehicle parts and accessories sales R R DDD. Vehicle repair facility - Major R R R R EEE. Vehicle repair facility - Minor R R R R FFF. Vehicle sales/rentals and leasing - new and used 2 R GGG. Vehicle wash facility 2 R R R HHH. Veterinary services - Clinics and small animals hospitals (short term boarding) R R R III. Warehousing and wholesale distribution center R R JJJ. Wrecking yard 2 NP NP NP NP CUP  
    Notes: 
1.  Shall not include a motion picture theater. Establishments serving alcohol shall require a CUP. 
2.  Shall correspond with standards in Section 16.16.365 (Specific land use standards). 
3.  Shall be subject to Section 16.16.360(A)(4). 
4.  Shall be subject to Section 16.16.070 (Recycling facilities). 
5.  Shall be supportive to a manufacturing/industrial use. 
6.  May sell products manufactured or distributed on-site pursuant to Section 16.16.360(A)(3). 
7.  Applications for off-sale alcohol (type 20 and 21 ABC licenses) below 12,000 SF in floor area shall be forwarded to the city council for final action. Such establishments shall be located within five hundred (500) feet of the intersection of two arterial or major arterial streets identified on the City's adopted circulation plan. 
( Ord. No. 2012-02, § 3(Exh. A), 2-7-12 ; ; Ord. No. 2017-08 , § 5(Exh. A), 10-3-17; Ord. No. 2019-03 , § 3(Exh. A), 2-5-19) 
16.16.325 - Interpretation of land uses. 
A.  Land Use Not Listed or No Key Provided. All uses not specifically listed or where there is no key provided for a particular use in Section 16.16.320 are prohibited. However, the development services director or his/her designee may determine that: 
1.  Any use not listed is comparable to a listed use; or 
2.  A listed use without a key is comparable to a listed use with a key, in which the applicable permit process may be used for the listed use without a key; and 
3.  Meets the intent of the land use designation as described in Section 16.16.310; and 
4.  Such use shall be reviewed and conditioned in a similar manner to a permitted or conditionally permitted use. 
    Such determination is appealable to the planning commission. A list of comparable use determinations shall be kept on file in the development services department. 
B.  Other Similar Uses. The development services director or his/her designee shall permit other similar uses or uses customarily incidental to land uses outlined in Section 16.16.320. In interpreting and applying the provisions of this article, such provisions shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Whenever there is any question regarding the interpretation of the provisions of this article or their application to any specific case or situation, the development services director or his/her designee shall interpret the intent of this article. 
( Ord. No. 2012-02, § 3(Exh. A), 2-7-12 ) 
ARTICLE X. - COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS 

16.16.350 - Commercial and industrial development standards. 
A.  New and existing developments in commercial and industrial land use designations shall be subject to the development standards in this article, unless otherwise specified. 
B.  The development standards in this table shall be required within each land use designation: 
C1 C2 C3 I1 I2 A. Maximum floor area ratio (FAR) 0.5 1.0 0.5 1.0 B. Height 35' 1 50' 1 C. Minimum lot area (gross) 21/2 
acres 2 5 acres 2 21/2 
acres 2 1 acre 2 21/2 
acres 2 D. Minimum lot dimension - Width, includes corner lots 300' 150' 300' E. Minimum lot dimension - Depth, includes corner lots 300' 200' 300' F. Front yard setback 25' 3 G. Side street yard setback - Corner lot 15' 3 15' 4 H. Side yard setback 0' I. Side yard setback, when adjacent to residential 20' 4 50' 4 J. Rear yard setback 0' K. Rear yard setback, when adjacent to residential 20' 4 50' 5 L. Landscaping Chapter 16.20, Article XII M. Signs Section 16.16.095 N. Parking Sections 16.20.080 through 16.20.120  
    Notes: 
1.  Proposals for development exceeding this height shall be subject to Chapter 16.16, Article VI (Variances and Minor Exceptions) of this development code. 
2.  The minimum site size and dimensions for new lots in this designation are as listed here, except in the case when a site plan review, conditional use permit or planned development is submitted, in which case, no minimum is established. This exception is only applicable when the site is being developed as one integrated development and appropriate measures are taken to ensure reciprocal access, parking and maintenance. 
3.  Minimum landscaping of eight feet is required adjacent to the property lines, pursuant to Chapter 16.20, Article XII (landscaping regulations) of this development code. 
4.  Minimum landscaping of five feet is required adjacent to the property lines, pursuant to Chapter 16.20, Article XII (landscaping regulations) of this development code. 
5.  Minimum landscaping of ten feet is required adjacent to the property lines, pursuant to Chapter 16.20, Article XII (landscaping regulations) of this development code. 
( Ord. No. 2012-02, § 3(Exh. A), 2-7-12 ) 
16.16.355 - Street setback reduction. 
A.  The following table lists the reduced setback distances permitted in the commercial and industrial designations (providing all required street improvements are incorporated into the developed area) and provides the minimum building and landscaping features required when granting the reductions. 
B.  When approving a minor exception consistent with Section 16.12.220 for commercial and industrial developments, the reviewing authority may require pedestrian oriented features in Section 16.16.360(C)(7) and/or Chapter 16.16, Article XI (Design Guidelines) to be integrated into the development. 
C.  The reviewing authority is responsible for the granting these variable building setbacks. The reviewing authority may require submittal of renderings and landscape design (including plant species photography) and/or an architectural palate prior to approval of variable setbacks. 
D.  In industrial developments, the outdoor dining feature may be substituted for outdoor seating, public art, and/or other similar feature deemed appropriate by the reviewing authority. If location and physical limitations exist, the reviewing authority may only require the architectural and landscaping features. 
Required 
Street 
Setback Building Features Landscaping Features 15 feet Provides pedestrian oriented features in Chapter 16.16, Article XI (Design Guidelines). Provides 7% on-site landscaping. Shade trees required in parking lot. 10 feet Provides pedestrian oriented features in Section 16.16.360(C)(7) and Chapter 16.16, Article XI (Design Guidelines). Recessed entrances, plazas and courtyards required to offset any building frontage over 50 lineal feet. Same as above but provides 10% on-site landscaping with parking lot planters separating parking aisles.  
( Ord. No. 2012-02, § 3(Exh. A), 2-7-12 ) 
16.16.360 - Additional development standards. 
A.  The following standards shall apply to development in all commercial and industrial designations, except as otherwise specified: 
1.  Any site plan review, conditional use permit or planned development accompanied by a map or merger combining two or more lots shall have the map or merger fees waived; 
2.  All uses shall be subject to the approval of a site plan review or a conditional use permit, pursuant to Chapter 16.12. 
3.  The following standards shall apply to development in all industrial designations, except as otherwise specified: 
a.  Any I1 sites which after lot consolidation have a gross area of ten acres or more may be permitted to establish a general manufacturing use permitted in the I2 designation, subject to the conditional use permit processes; 
b.  Retail sales and service incidental to a principally permitted use are allowable provided that the following standards are met: 
i.  The operations are contained within the main structure which houses the primary use, 
ii.  Retail sales occupy no more than twenty-five (25) percent of the total building square footage, 
iii.  No retail sales or display of merchandise occur(s) outside the structure(s), and 
iv.  All products offered for retail sales on the site are manufactured, warehoused or assembled on the premises; 
c.  Whenever possible, uses should incorporate air quality mitigation measures, including employee rideshare and transit programs, alternate schedules, delivery management programs, telecommunication programs and other modes of transportation. 
4.  Outdoor Displays, Storage, Equipment, and Work Areas. 
a.  No retail sales, merchandise displays or work areas shall occur outside building(s), except as approved by a site plan review, conditional use permit, or special event permit. 
b.  There shall be no visible storage of motor vehicles (except display areas for sale or rent of motor vehicles), trailers, airplanes, boats, recreational vehicles, or their composite parts; loose rubbish, garbage, junk, or their receptacles; tents, equipment or building materials in any portion of a lot. No storage shall occur on any vacant parcel. Building materials for use on the same premises may be stored on the parcel during the time that a valid building permit is in effect for construction; 
c.  In the I1 and I2 designations, outside storage and equipment shall be confined to the rear half of the property or the rear of the principal structure on site, whichever is more restrictive, and screened from public view from any adjoining properties and public rights-of-way by appropriate walls, fencing and landscaping. 
5.  Parking and Loading. In addition to the off-street parking requirements and standards set forth in Chapter 16.20, Article IV (Parking and Loading Standards) of this development code, the following shall apply: 
a.  Parking areas shall be landscaped along the perimeter as well as in the interior of the parking lot, pursuant to the requirements set forth in Chapter 16.20, Article XII (Landscape Regulations) of this Development Code. 
b.  Shared parking between adjacent businesses and/or developments is highly encouraged where feasible. 
c.  Loading facilities shall not be located at the front of buildings or in public areas of the development. Such facilities are more suitably located at the rear of the site where they can be screened appropriately. 
d.  When it is not possible to locate loading facilities at the rear of the building, loading docks and doors may be located along the sides of the buildings, but should not dominate the facades and must be screened from the public areas of the development. e) Loading facilities should be offset from driveway openings. 
e.  Backing from the public street onto the site for loading into front-end docks causes unsafe truck maneuvering and should not be utilized except at the ends of cul-de-sacs where each circumstance will be studied individually at the time of design review. 
6.  Open Space and Landscaping. 
a.  The design standards and guidelines included in the provisions of Chapter 16.20, Article XII (landscape regulations) and Chapter 16.24 (Protected Plants) of this development code shall apply. 
b.  Open space areas shall be clustered into larger landscape areas rather than equally distributing them into areas of low impact such as at site and building peripheries, behind a structure or areas of little impact to public view, or where they are not required as a land use buffer or required yard setback. 
7.  Walls and Fences. 
a.  A commercial or industrial development adjacent to any residential designation shall have a six-foot high decorative masonry wall along property lines adjacent to such designations. In the I1 and I2 designations, the wall height shall not exceed twelve feet, depending on the height of the material being screened. 
b.  In commercial designations, the maximum permitted height of any perimeter walls fronting a street shall be three feet. 
c.  Both sides of all perimeter walls shall be architecturally treated. In commercial designations, appropriate materials include decorative masonry, concrete, stone and brick. 
8.  Trash Collection Areas. 
a.  At least one trash enclosure area shall be provided for commercial and industrial developments. The reviewing authority may require additional enclosures as deemed necessary. All such required areas shall be enclosed and screened pursuant to the requirements of this section and in accordance with city standards. 
b.  All trash/recyclable materials collection enclosure areas shall be easily accessible to retail and office tenants, including easy pedestrian access for the disposal of materials and collection by refuse vehicles. 
c.  The collection area(s) shall be enclosed on three sides by a minimum six-foot tall decorative masonry wall. The wall materials used shall be complementary in color and style to architectural components of the development they serve. The fourth side of the enclosure shall be enclosed with an opaque, self-latching gate. 
9.  Mechanical Equipment Screening. 
a.  All exterior mechanical equipment, except solar collectors, whether on a roof, side of a structure, or on the ground, shall be appropriately screened from public view. The method of screening shall be architecturally integrated with the primary structure in terms of materials, color, shape and size. Where individual equipment is provided, a continuous screen is desirable. 
b.  For rooftop equipment, the screening materials shall be at least as high as the equipment being screened. Equipment requiring screening includes, but is not limited to, heating, air conditioning, refrigeration equipment, plumbing lines, ductwork, and transformers. Mechanical equipment shall not be permitted on any exposed portion of a pitched roof, except as may be approved through the site plan review process. 
c.  Ground-mounted utility equipment such as, but not limited to, cable television boxes, electric power transformers and distribution facilities, water pumps, and telecommunications facilities (not including pole-mounted equipment) shall be screened from view on all sides with solid masonry walls or similar permanent structures. Such masonry wall or structure shall be of a neutral color. Screening with wood, chain-link, or similar fencing materials shall not be permitted. Electric and other metering equipment and panels shall be painted to match adjacent building and wall surfaces. 
d.  Ladders for roof access shall be hidden and integrated into the building design. 
10.  Standards for Outdoor Dining. Outdoor dining may be provided either in private patios or within the public sidewalk right-of-way. The following standards and guidelines shall be followed relative to outdoor (sidewalk and patio) dining spaces: 
a.  These two kinds of outdoor dining areas including "patio dining space" and "sidewalk dining space." 
i.  "Patio dining space" is an area adjacent to a street (or alley) level eating or drinking establishment, located within private property line and is used exclusively for dining, drinking and circulation therein. This space may be open or covered with temporary structures such as trellises, umbrellas or permanent structures such as overhangs and upper floors of the building. 
ii.  "Sidewalk dining space" is an area adjacent to a street level eating or drinking establishment located within the sidewalk area of the public right-of-way and is used exclusively for dining, drinking and circulation therein. A barrier that separates the dining area from the remainder of the sidewalk and is in place during hours of operation defines the area. Sidewalk dining may be provided with either self-service or waiter/waitress service. 
b.  Sidewalk Dining Locations. Sidewalk dining shall be permitted within the public sidewalk right-of-way only when the clear widths are available. (See 2(f) below) 
c.  Patio Dining Locations. Patio dining shall be permitted within private property adjacent to the streets or public alley walkways. Outdoor patio dining is allowed within the street yard setback. 
d.  Adjacency to Buildings. Sidewalk dining within the public sidewalk right-of-way shall be located immediately adjacent to the buildings with the pedestrian path immediately along the curb. 
e.  Maintenance of Clear Passage. 
i.  Sidewalk dining within the public sidewalk right-of-way shall maintain a clear pathway, free from all obstructions, for pedestrians not less than seven feet depending on the exact sidewalk width and extent of pedestrian activity in the streetscape segment. A clear passage of ten feet in width is preferred. 
ii.  For purposes of calculating the clear pathway dimension, trees, traffic signs, meters, and all similar obstacles shall count as obstructions. The reviewing authority shall define exact clear pathway requirement within this range, on a case-by-case basis. The reviewing authority, based on the particular site conditions, may grant exemption to the minimum requirements. 
f.  Demarcation of Sidewalk Dining Areas. 
i.  The sidewalk dining area adjacent to the building shall be demarcated by barriers such as railings, fencing, or a combination of railings or fencing, and landscaping in planter boxes, or movable bollards. No solid walls shall be allowed. 
ii.  All the outdoor barriers shall be movable and removed from the sidewalk at the close of the business establishment daily. Some discretion in terms of pots and planters placed directly adjacent to the building facade shall be allowed. 
g.  Demarcation of Patio Dining Spaces. The patio dining spaces adjacent to streets or alley walkways shall be demarcated by either temporary or permanent boundary definers such as railings, fencing, or a combination of railings or fencing, and landscaping in planter boxes, or movable bollards. 
h.  Outdoor dining within arcades along sidewalk rights-of-way or alley walkways. The provision of a dining space in a covered arcade that is open to the sidewalk is permitted as long as the architectural integrity of the facade is maintained in conformance with the requirements in Chapter 16.16, Article XI (Commercial Design Guidelines) of this development code. 
i.  Windows or doors to outdoor dining along sidewalk rights-of-way or alley walkways. The provision of windows and doors from indoor dining areas that open to the sidewalk or alley walkway is permitted and encouraged as long as the architectural integrity of the facade is maintained in conformance with the other sections of this chapter and the requirements in Chapter 16.16, Article XI (Commercial Design Guidelines) of this development code, and the open doors and windows do not obstruct the pedestrian right-of-way. 
j.  Parking Requirements. The area used for sidewalk dining shall not be included in the eating or drinking establishment's area for the purposes of calculating the establishment's parking requirement. The area used for patio dining shall be included in the eating or drinking establishment's area for the purposes of calculating the establishment's parking requirement. 
k.  Materials. The style and materials of the barriers that demarcate the outdoor dining space should be compatible in color and finish with the adjacent structure and approved by the reviewing authority. 
l.  Hours of Operation. The outdoor dining space hours of operation shall be limited to the hours of operation of the associated dining establishment. 
m.  Display of Outdoor Menu Display. A single-sided framed menu attached to a moveable barrier that defines the sidewalk or patio dining space is permitted within the sidewalk and patio dining spaces. The size of the frame shall not exceed three square feet. Freestanding pedestal menus or A-frame displays are prohibited. 
n.  Maintenance of Outdoor Dining Furniture. Outdoor dining furniture shall be maintained to be safe, sanitary and attractive at all times. 
o.  Conformance to Title 24 Requirements. All outdoor dining areas shall conform to accessibility requirements as per the California Title 24 Accessibility Guidelines. All other requirements per the city engineering and building departments shall also be addressed. 
p.  Permit Requirements. An encroachment permit is required for all sidewalk dining areas. The city may also require additional liability insurance. 



B.  Additional Standards and Guidelines. Refer to Chapter 16.16, Articles X and XI in this development code for site and architectural design standards and guidelines. 
C.  Review Process. All new development in this designation shall be subject to the approval of a site plan review pursuant to Chapter 16.12, Article II (Site Plans and Revised Site Plans) of this development code. All new development in this designation that is conditionally permitted shall be subject to the approval of a conditional use permit pursuant to the procedures set forth in Chapter 16.12, Article III (Conditional Use Permits) of this development code, unless otherwise specified. 
( Ord. No. 2012-02, § 3(Exh. A), 2-7-12 ) 
16.16.365 - Specific land use standards. 
    In addition to the general development requirements contained in Chapter 16.20 (General Regulations), the following standards shall apply to specific commercial land uses. 
A.  Vehicle Sales, Leasing or Rental. Automobile, truck, motor home, motorcycle, and recreation vehicle, sales, leasing, or rental, new or used, shall be developed in compliance with the following additional standards: 
1.  No vehicles shall be parked, displayed or stored in the first fifteen (15) feet of the street side setbacks. All parts, accessories, etc., shall be stored within a fully enclosed structure; service and associated car storage areas shall be completely screened from public view. All vehicles offered for sale shall be kept clean, on a daily basis. 
2.  All loading and unloading of vehicles shall occur on-site and not in adjoining streets or alleys; 
3.  All vehicles associated with the business shall be parked or stored on-site and not in adjoining streets and alleys; 
4.  An adequate on-site queuing area for service customers shall be provided. Required parking spaces may not be counted as queuing spaces; 
5.  Service, repair or maintenance facilities shall be operated only as an incidental use in conjunction with the primary use. Such areas shall be visually screened from the street by walls of a building, or a variation as approved by the reviewing authority. Service bays from the exterior of the structure shall not directly face or front on a public right-of-way; 
6.  If the use involves automotive repair, installation of parts or service, a designated area must be provided in addition to the parking requirements for the temporary storage of vehicles or equipment awaiting repair, installation or service; 
7.  All lights shall be reflected away from adjacent uses; 
8.  The decor, treatment and architectural style of the improvements, including sales office, repair and maintenance facilities, landscaping, fencing and signing shall be reviewed for aesthetic qualities, and shall also be subject to the design standards and guidelines established in Section 16.16, Article XI (Commercial Design Guidelines). 
9.  Recreational vehicle camper sales, leasing or rental are permitted to have outdoor hoists subject to the conditions and standards listed in Section 16.16.365(B)(8). 
B.  Vehicle Service and Repairs (Major or Minor). Automotive service stations, parts and accessories installation and major or minor service shall be developed in compliance with the following additional standards: 
1.  All installation and service activities shall be performed within an approved structure or adjacent to and no more than twenty (20) feet from the service bay. 
2.  All installation and service facilities shall be visually screened from the street by walls of a building or a variation as approved by the reviewing authority. 
3.  All lights shall be reflected away from adjacent uses. 
4.  No used or discarded parts or equipment shall be located outside of the installation and service facilities. 
5.  In addition to the parking requirements of Chapter 16.20, Article IV (Parking and Loading Standards) of this development code, a designated area, screened from view, must be provided for the temporary storage of vehicles or equipment awaiting installation or service. 
6.  No vehicles, equipment, boats, trucks or motorcycles shall be stored for impound or for any other purpose other than installation or service under a work order. 
7.  Premises shall be maintained in a neat, orderly and environmentally safe manner, and all improvements shall be continuously maintained. 
8.  Limited Exception for Outdoor Hoists. Facilities that are intended for the repair or sale of recreational vehicles (RVs) (i.e. motorhomes) shall be permitted to have outdoor hoists as an ancillary use in areas designated general commercial (C2) and service commercial (C3) with approval of a site plan review. Under limited circumstances as outlined herein, the reviewing authority may permit outdoor hoists if proposed on an existing facility with at least one building from which RVs repairs and sales exist or are proposed; and the site is limited by building space and existing improvements. Facilities that satisfy such conditions shall be subject to the following standards: 
a.  Hoists shall not be placed within any setback, required parking, drive aisle, landscaping or accessible path of travel. 
b.  Outdoor hoists and associated repair activities shall not be visible from any right-of-way (i.e. street or highway) and shall be adequately screened. 
c.  The area on which hoists are stationed should be completely paved. 
d.  The outdoor hoists shall be operated with a limited accumulation of parts, equipment, and debris in and around the hoist. 
e.  Outdoor hoists shall be installed a minimum distance of three hundred (300) feet from any residence or residential zone. An acoustical study shall be required if outdoor hoists are requested to be placed less than three hundred (300) feet from any residence or residential zone. 
f.  Activities associated with outdoor hoists shall be operated between the hours of seven a.m. to seven p.m. if hoists are located within five hundred (500) feet from any residence or residential zone. 
g.  Outdoor hoists shall be an accessory use to a RV repair business. Outdoor hoists themselves shall not be the sole form of repairing RVs. 
h.  Newly developed RV repair businesses are required to keep all hoists indoors. Hoists may be permitted outdoors subject to these regulations, if the proposal demonstrates that the site is constrained by size or any other physical constraint on the property. 
C.  Vehicle Wash Facilities. 
1.  Vehicle wash facilities shall be developed in compliance with the following additional standards: 
a.  All lights shall be reflected away from adjacent uses. 
b.  Premises shall be maintained in a neat, orderly and environmentally safe manner, and all improvements shall be continuously maintained. 
c.  Noise from vehicle wash activities shall not exceed levels established in Chapter 16.20, Article V (General Performance Standards). 
D.  Salvage and Wrecking Yards. Automobile salvage and wrecking yards establishments are subject to conditional use permit review and shall be constructed in the following manner: 
1.  The site shall be entirely paved, except for structures and landscaping, so that vehicles are not parked in a dirt or otherwise not fully improved area; 
2.  Service access shall be located at the rear or side of structure(s) and as far as possible from adjoining residential uses; 
3.  Repair activities and vehicle loading and unloading shall be prohibited on adjoining public rights-of-way; 
4.  Service bays with individual access from the exterior of the structure shall not face adjacent public rights-of-way; 
5.  All repair activities shall be conducted entirely within an enclosed structure. Outdoor hoists shall be prohibited; 
6.  Exterior noise shall not exceed sixty-five (65) dBA at the property line; 
7.  The premises shall be kept in a neat and orderly condition at all times; 
8.  All used or discarded automotive parts or equipment or permanently disabled, junked or dismantled vehicles shall be permanently screened from public view; and 
9.  All hazardous materials resulting from the repair or dismantling operation shall be properly stored and removed from the premises in a timely manner. Storage, use and removal of toxic substances, solid waste pollution, and flammable liquids, particularly gasoline, paints, solvents and thinners, shall conform to all applicable federal, state and local regulations. 
E.  Convenience Stores. The retail sale of groceries, staples, sundry items and/or alcoholic beverages where the gross floor area is less than five thousand (5,000) square feet is subject to site plan review, and shall be constructed and operated in the following manner: 
1.  One access drive may be permitted for each street frontage with approval of city engineer. The design and location of the access drive(s) shall be subject to the approval of the reviewing authority; 
2.  The premises shall be kept in a neat and orderly condition at all times; 
3.  If on-site dispensing of automotive fuels is provided, the design, location and operation of these facilities shall be consistent with the provisions of Section 16.16.480(G) (Service Station Standards). Additionally, the cashier location shall provide direct visual access to the pump islands and the vehicles parked adjacent to the islands; 
4.  A bicycle rack shall be installed in a convenient location visible from the inside of the store; 
5.  Each convenience store shall provide a public restroom located within the store; 
6.  Public pay telephones provided on-site shall not be set up for incoming calls. Public telephones shall be featured with call out service only. 
F.  Drive-thru Restaurants. This section contains standards for drive-thru restaurants. Drive-thru restaurants are subject to site plan review. 
1.  Pedestrian walkways should not intersect the drive-thru drive aisles, but where they do, they shall have clear visibility, and they must be emphasized by enriched paving or striping; 
2.  Drive-thru aisles shall have a minimum thirteen (13) foot width on curves and a minimum twelve (12) foot width on straight sections; 
3.  Drive-thru aisles shall provide sufficient stacking area behind menu board and pick-up window to accommodate a minimum of four cars each; 
4.  All service areas, restrooms and ground mounted and roof mounted mechanical equipment shall be screened from view; 
5.  Landscaping shall screen drive-thru or drive-in aisles from the public right-of-way and shall be used to minimize the visual impact of reader board signs and directional signs; 
6.  Drive-thru aisles and structures shall be setback from the ultimate curb face a minimum of ten feet; 
7.  Menu boards shall be a maximum of thirty (30) square feet, with a maximum height of seven feet, and shall not face the street; 
8.  Drive-thru restaurants within an integrated shopping center shall have an architectural style consistent with the theme established in the center. The architecture of any drive-thru restaurant must provide compatibility with surrounding uses in form, materials, colors, scale, etc. Structure plans shall have variation in depth and angle to create variety and interest in its basic form and silhouette. Articulation of structure surface shall be encouraged through the use of openings and recesses which create texture and shadow patterns. Structure entrances shall be well articulated and project a formal entrance through variation of architectural plane, pavement surface treatment, and landscape plaza; and 
9.  Drive-thru aisles should not exit directly onto a public right-of-way. 
G.  Mini-malls. Mini-malls (small scale, up to fifty thousand (50,000) square feet, multi-tenant shopping centers) are subject to a site plan review and shall comply with the following standards. 
1.  All development and operational standards outlined in Section 16.16.480(C) (Convenience Stores), shall apply; 
2.  The development shall provide internal continuity, uniformity and compatibility relating to architectural design, vehicular and pedestrian access, and on-site provisions for landscaping, loading, parking and signage; 
3.  To the extent feasible, the on-site vehicular circulation system shall provide continuity with adjacent commercial developments; and 
4.  No outdoor displays or sale of merchandise shall be permitted. However, limited outdoor sales may be allowed subject to the issuance of a special event permit. 
H.  Self-storage facilities. Self-storage facilities, also known as mini-storage facilities, shall mean any real property designed and used for the purpose of renting or leasing individual storage space to occupants who are to have access to the space for the purpose of storing and removing personal property. Self-storage facilities are subject to a conditional use permit and shall be constructed in the following manner: 
1.  The site shall be entirely paved, except for structures, drainage facilities and landscaping; 
2.  The site shall be completely enclosed with a six foot high solid decorative masonry wall, except for points of ingress and egress (including emergency fire access) which shall be properly gated. The gate(s) shall be maintained in good working order and shall remain closed except when in use; 
3.  No business activity shall be conducted other than the rental of storage spaces for inactive storage use or the sale of unclaimed articles by the landlord; 
4.  All storage shall be located within a fully enclosed structure(s); 
5.  No flammable or otherwise hazardous materials shall be stored on-site; 
6.  Residential quarters for a manager or caretaker may be provided in the development; 
7.  The development shall provide for two parking spaces for the manager or caretaker, and a minimum of five spaces located adjacent or in a close proximity to the manager's quarters for customer parking; 
8.  Boats, recreational vehicles, campers, trailers, etc., may be stored on-site if located behind buildings and not visible from the public right-of-way; 
9.  Storage facilities located within or adjacent to residentially or agriculturally zoned properties shall have their hours of operation restricted to seven a.m. to nine p.m., Monday through Saturday, and nine a.m. to nine p.m. on Sundays; 
10.  Self-storage facilities shall not be permitted within six hundred sixty (660) feet of Interstate-15, Highway-395, Bear Valley Road, Main Street or a railway; and 
11.  For residentially or agriculturally zoned properties, the minimum lot size to have a self-storage facility shall be two and half acres, unless designed as part of a subdivision. Self-storage shall not be allowed in the MDR zone of the Main Street and Freeway Corridor Specific Plan, unless designed as a collateral component of a multi-family residential project. 
I.  Service Station (Gasoline) Standards. Service stations are subject to a site plan review and shall comply with the following standards: 
1.  All activities and operations shall be conducted entirely within an enclosed structure, except as follows: 
a.  The dispensing of petroleum products, water and air from pump islands, 
b.  The provision of emergency service of a minor nature, and 
c.  The sale of items via vending machines, including ice machines, shall be placed next to the main structure as approved by the reviewing authority; 
d.  Above ground tanks shall be horizontal, except that the reviewing authority may consider vertical tanks if the tanks are located away and/or adequately buffered and/or screened, from the street. The location and color shall be approved by the reviewing authority. 
2.  Pump islands shall be located a minimum of twenty (20) feet from a street property line; however, a canopy or roof structure over a pump island may encroach up to ten feet within this distance. Additionally, the cashier location shall provide direct visual access to the pump islands and the vehicles parked adjacent to the islands; 
3.  The maximum number of points of ingress/egress to any one street shall be two; 
4.  The width of a driveway may not exceed forty (40) feet at the sidewalk; 
5.  Outside storage of motor vehicles is prohibited. Temporary storage, up to seventy-two (72) hours, is permitted if adequately screened from the public right-of-way; 
6.  No vehicles may be parked on sidewalks, parkways, driveways or alleys; 
7.  No vehicle may be parked on the premises for the purpose of offering same for sale; 
8.  Openings of service bays shall not face public rights-of-way and shall be designed to minimize the visual intrusion onto adjoining properties; 
9.  No used or discarded automotive parts or equipment, or disabled, junked or wrecked vehicles may be located in any open area outside the main structure; 
10.  All light sources, including canopy, perimeter, and flood shall be energy efficient, stationary and shielded or recessed within the roof canopy so that the service station shall be indirectly visible and light is deflected away from adjacent properties and public rights-of-way. Lighting shall not be of such a high intensity as to cause a traffic hazard or adversely affect adjoining properties; 
11.  Where an existing service station adjoins property in a residential land use designation, a six-foot high decorative masonry wall shall be constructed at the time the station requires a permit for the on-site improvement/modification. Materials, textures, colors and design of the wall shall be compatible with on-site development and adjoining properties. When the wall reaches the established front-yard setback line of a residentially designated lot abutting or directly across an alley from the service station, it shall decrease to a height of thirty (30) inches; 
12.  Restroom entrances viewable from adjacent properties or public rights-of-way shall be concealed from view by planters or decorative screening; 
13.  Delivery areas for fuel or merchandise shall be located in a fashion so as not to significantly interfere with normal business operations. 
J.  Service Station Conversions. A structure originally constructed as a service station and which is proposed for conversion to another allowable use shall require upgrading and remodeling for such items as, but not limited to, removal of all gasoline appurtenances, removal of canopies, removal of pump islands, removal of gas tanks, removal of overhead doors, additional street improvements or modification of existing improvements to conform to access regulations, exterior remodeling and any additional standards as required by this code. 
(Ord. 2004-05 § 4 (part), 2004; Ord. 193 Exh. A (§ 85.01.030(C)), 1994) 
( Ord. No. 2012-02, § 3(Exh. A), 2-7-12 ; Ord. No. 2014-05, § 3(Exh. A), 4-1-14 ; Ord. No. 2016-09 , § 3(Exh. A), 2-7-17; Ord. No. 2019-03 , § 3(Exh. A), 2-5-19) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2012-02, § 3(Exh. A), 2-7-12 renumbered § 16.16.480 as § 16.16.365. 
Sec. 16.16.370. - Alcohol sales and deemed approved alcohol sales regulations. 
A.  Purpose. This section requires land use permits for newly established off-sale alcohol establishments that are in addition to the requirements elsewhere in this code and in the Hesperia Main Street and Freeway Corridor Specific Plan, confers deemed approved status for all existing permitted, conditionally permitted and legal nonconforming off-sale alcohol establishments, provides standards for the continued operation of alcohol establishments, and sets forth grounds for the modification, revocation and termination of conditional use permits and deemed approved status for establishments violating this section, in order to protect the general health, safety, and welfare of the residents of the City of Hesperia and to prevent nuisance activities where alcoholic beverage sales occur. 
    Specific purposes for enacting this section are as follows: 
1.  To protect residential, commercial, industrial and civic areas from the harmful effects attributable to the sale of alcoholic beverages and minimize the adverse impacts of nonconforming and incompatible uses; 
2.  To provide opportunities for alcohol establishments to operate in a mutually beneficial relationship to each other and to other commercial and civic services; 
3.  To provide mechanisms to address problems associated with the public consumption of alcoholic beverages such as litter, loitering, graffiti, unruly behavior, violence, vandalism, and escalated noise levels; 
4.  To provide that alcohol establishments are not to become the source of undue public nuisances in the community; 
5.  To provide for properly maintained alcohol establishments so that the secondary effects of negative impacts generated by these activities on the surrounding environment are mitigated; 
6.  To monitor deemed approved establishments to ensure they do not substantially change in mode or character of operation; and 
7.  To promote a healthy and safe business environment in the City of Hesperia through appropriate and consistent land use regulations and to encourage the establishment of businesses that will benefit both the local economy and residents while not placing an undue strain on city resources or surrounding businesses. 
    This section does not itself authorize or permit alcohol establishments, but only applies to these establishments where otherwise allowed or permitted within an applicable zoning district. The provisions of this ordinance are intended to complement the state of California alcohol-related laws. The city does not intend to replace or usurp any powers vested in the California Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control. 
B.  Applicability. 
1.  The provisions of this section shall apply to the extent permissible under other laws to all alcoholic beverage sales establishments, as defined in Section 16.16.370(C), located in the City of Hesperia. 
2.  Whenever any provision in this section, in an existing conditional use permit, or in any other law, ordinance, or regulation of any kind, imposes overlapping or contradictory regulations, or contains restrictions covering any of the same subject matter, that provision which is more restrictive or imposes higher standards shall control, except as otherwise expressly provided in this section. 
3.  The requirements provided herein are in addition to the requirements found under Chapter 16.20 (General Regulations), Chapter 16.16 (Land Use Designations), the Main Street and Freeway Corridor Specific Plan, any other applicable chapter of the Code, and any other applicable law. 
C.  Definitions. The meaning and construction of these words and phrases, as set forth below, shall apply throughout, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning or construction. 
1.  "Alcoholic beverage" means alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer, and any liquid or solid containing alcohol, spirits, wine, or beer, that contains one-half of one percent or more of alcohol by volume and that is fit for beverage purposes either alone or when diluted, mixed or combined with other substances, the sale of which requires an ABC license. 
2.  "Alcoholic beverage sales activity" means the retail sale of alcoholic beverages for off-site consumption. 
3.  "Alcoholic beverage sales establishment" or "alcohol establishment" means an establishment that conducts alcoholic beverage sales activity. Alcohol establishments include but are not limited to: liquor stores, beer and wine stores, convenience markets, markets, neighborhood specialty food markets, retail sales establishments, wine shops, and service stations. For purposes of this section, an alcohol establishment also includes a general retail store, a grocery store and a retail pharmacy that devotes any percentage of its gross floor area to the sale and display of alcoholic beverages. As of the effective date, an alcohol establishment is an establishment holding (or eligible to hold) an off-sale ABC License Type 20 or 21. For purposes of this section, an alcohol establishment does not include a lawfully established alcohol beverage production manufacturer such as a winery, brewery or micro-brewery that sells alcohol for off-site consumption. 
4.  "California Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control" or "ABC" refers to the department of the state of California empowered to act pursuant to Article 20, section 22, of the California Constitution and authorized to administer the provisions of the Alcoholic Beverage Control Act. 
5.  "Deemed approved establishment" means any permitted or conditionally permitted alcoholic sales establishment, whether or not constructed or operational, or any legal nonconforming alcoholic beverage sales establishment. Such establishment shall be considered a deemed approved establishment effective on the effective date, as long as it complies with the deemed approved operational standards set forth in Section 16.16.370(J). 
6.  "Deemed approved status" means the permitted use of land for a deemed approved establishment. Deemed approved status replaces permitted and conditionally permitted status and legal non-conforming status for alcohol establishments with respect to alcoholic beverage sales activity. Deemed approved status remains in effect as long as an alcohol establishment complies with the deemed approved operational standards provided in Section 16.16.370(J). 
7.  "Effective date" means the effective date of the Ordinance adopting this Section 16.16.370. 
8.  "Enforcement officer" means the city manager or designee, and chief of police or designee. 
9.  "Illegal establishment" means an alcohol establishment which has been finally determined to be in noncompliance with local, state or federal laws, the conditions of any applicable permits, or the deemed approved operational standards in this section. Such an establishment may lose its deemed approved status, and if it does it shall no longer be considered a deemed approved establishment. 
10.  "Legal nonconforming alcoholic beverage sales establishment" or "legal nonconforming establishment" means an off-sale alcoholic beverage sales establishment which was a nonconforming use pursuant to Article IX of Title 16 of this code, and for which a valid ABC license had been issued and used in the exercise of the rights and privileges conferred by the license at a time immediately prior to the effective date. A legal nonconforming establishment also includes existing alcohol establishments that are not in conformance with the regulations applicable to new alcohol establishments contained in this section, regardless of whether such activities were allowed as part of a conditional use permit granted prior to the effective date. Such an establishment shall be considered a deemed approved establishment and shall no longer be considered a legal nonconforming establishment. 
11.  "Modify" or "modified" as used in Sections 16.16.370(E), (F) and (G) means the expansion or increase in intensity or substantial change of a use, as these terms are used in Article IX of Title 16 of this code. 
12.  "Operational standards" means regulations for the business practice activities and land use for alcohol establishments with: (i) a conditional use permit issued in conformance with this section on or after the effective date, or (ii) deemed approved status. Operational standards constitute requirements which must be complied with by an alcohol establishment in order to maintain its conditional use permit or deemed approved status. 
13.  "Permitted or conditionally permitted alcohol beverage sales establishment" or "permitted or conditionally permitted alcohol establishment" means an alcohol establishment which is a permitted or conditionally permitted use pursuant to the applicable provisions of the Hesperia Municipal Code or Main Street and Freeway Corridor Specific Plan prior to the effective date. 
14.  "Premises" means the actual space in a building devoted to alcoholic beverage sales. 
15.  "Redeveloped" means the demolition of an existing alcohol establishment followed by the immediate reconstruction and operation of a replacement alcohol establishment. 
D.  Public hearing by planning commission. The planning commission may conduct public hearings and make determinations on whether alcohol establishments are in compliance with conditions of approval or operational standards prescribed in these regulations, and may modify, suspend or revoke an establishment's conditional use permit or deemed approved status in order to obtain compliance with the provisions of this section. This section is not intended to restrict the powers and duties otherwise pertaining to other city officers or bodies in the field of monitoring and ensuring the harmony of alcoholic beverage sale activities in the city. The planning commission shall have the powers and duties assigned to them by the Hesperia Municipal Code and by this section. 
E.  Conditional use permit required for alcoholic beverage sales establishments that are new, modified, or redeveloped, or have deemed approved status revoked. Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 16.12.315, no person shall establish a new alcohol establishment, nor shall any person modify or redevelop an existing alcohol establishment, without first obtaining a conditional use permit pursuant to Article III of Chapter 16.12 of Title 16. The requirements of this section shall be in addition to any other requirements found in this code and the Main Street and Freeway Corridor Specific Plan. A conditional use permit shall also be required for any deemed approved establishment when the deemed approved status is revoked in accordance with this section. 
F.  Operational standards for alcohol establishments with conditional use permits. Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 16.12.315, all new, modified, or redeveloped off-sale alcohol establishments, and deemed approved establishments when deemed approved status is revoked and a new conditional use permit is obtained, shall be designed, constructed, and operated to conform to all of the following operational standards: 
1.  That it does not result in adverse effects to the health, peace or safety of persons residing or working in the surrounding area, and will not aggravate existing problems in the neighborhood created by the sale of alcohol such as loitering, public drunkenness, alcoholic beverage sales to minors, noise and littering. 
2.  That it does not jeopardize or endanger the public health or safety of persons residing or working in the surrounding area and will not detrimentally affect nearby neighborhoods considering the distance of the alcohol establishment to residential buildings, schools, parks, playgrounds or recreational areas, nonprofit youth facilities, places of worship, hospitals, alcohol or other drug abuse recovery or treatment facilities, county social service offices, or other alcoholic beverages sales activity establishments. 
3.  That it does not result in repeated nuisance activities within the premises or associated with the establishment or activity, including but not limited to disturbance of the peace, illegal drug activity, public drunkenness, drinking in public, harassment of passersby, gambling, prostitution, sale of stolen goods, public urination, theft, assaults, batteries, acts of vandalism, littering, loitering, graffiti, illegal parking, excessive loud noises, especially in the late night or early morning hours, traffic violations, curfew violations, or lewd conduct. The establishment shall take all reasonable steps to include (1) immediately calling the police upon observation of the activity, and (2) requesting that those engaging in activities that constitute a nuisance or are otherwise illegal to cease those activities unless personal safety would be threatened in making the request. 
4.  That it complies with all provisions of local, state or federal laws, regulations or orders, including but not limited to those of the ABC, California Business and Professions Code sections 24200,24200.6, and 25612.5, as well as any condition imposed on any permits issued pursuant to applicable laws, regulations or orders. This includes compliance with annual city business license fees. 
5.  That its upkeep and operating characteristics are compatible with, and will not adversely affect the livability or appropriate development of abutting properties and the surrounding neighborhood. 
6.  That it complies with the following alcohol sale limitations: 
a.  No sale of single-serve alcoholic beverages, including, but not limited to beer, malt liquor and alcoholic energy drinks of any size; wine of less than seven hundred fifty milliliters (750 ml) in size; distilled spirits of less than three hundred seventy five milliliters (375 ml) in size; or any other individual alcoholic beverage for single-serve consumption. 
b.  No sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages shall be made from a drive-up or walk-up window. 
c.  No display of alcoholic beverages closer than five feet from the store entrance. 
d.  No beer, ale or malt liquor shall be offered for sale in a container with a volume greater than thirty-two (32) ounces. This restriction is not intended to prohibit the sale of such beverages in kegs or other types of containers, with a volume of two or more gallons, which are clearly designed to dispense multiple servings. 
7.  That it complies with the following public nuisance prevention measures: 
a.  Lighting: Exterior areas of the premises and adjacent parking lots shall be provided with sufficient lighting in a manner that provides adequate illumination for alcohol establishment patrons while not spilling onto surrounding residential and commercial properties. A photometric study may be required to demonstrate compliance. 
b.  Litter: Adequate litter receptacles shall be provided in and around the premises. The premises shall be kept free of the accumulation of litter and shall be removed no less frequently than once each day the business is open. 
c.  Loitering: The following measures may be required: 
No fixtures or furnishings that encourage loitering and nuisance behavior are permitted on the premises controlled by the establishment. This includes, but is not limited to chairs, seats, stools, benches, tables, crates, ashtrays, pay phones, etc. 
d.  Signage: There shall be no exterior advertising of paraphernalia or similarly controlled products. 
e.  Signs: The following signs shall be required to be prominently posted in a readily visible manner on an interior wall or fixture, and not on windows, in English, Spanish, and the predominant language of the patrons: 
i.  "California State Law prohibits the sale of alcoholic beverages to persons younger than twenty-one (21) years of age." 
ii.  "No Loitering or Public Drinking." 
iii.  "It is illegal to possess an open container of alcohol in the vicinity of this establishment." 
f.  Presentation of Documents: A copy of the conditions of approval and the California Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control license shall be required to be kept on the premises and presented to any enforcement officer or authorized state or county official upon request. A copy of these operational standards (including any conditions of approval), any applicable ABC or city operating conditions, and any training requirements shall also be posted in at least one prominent place within the interior of the establishment where it will be readily visible and legible to the employees and patrons of the establishment. 
g.  Mitigating Alcohol Related Problems: The establishment shall be required to operate in a manner appropriate with mitigating alcohol related problems that negatively impact those individuals living or working in the neighborhood including but not limited to sales to minors, the congregation of individuals, violence on or near the premises, drunkenness, public urination, solicitation, drug-dealing, drug use, loud noise and litter. 
h.  Drug Paraphernalia: An off-sale alcohol establishment shall be prohibited from selling drug/tobacco paraphernalia products as defined in Health and Safety Code sections 11014.5 and 11364.5. "Drug paraphernalia" means all equipment products and materials of any kind that are used intended for use or designed for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing into the human body a controlled substance in violation of the California Uniform Controlled Substances Act commencing with California Health and Safety Code section 11000. 
i.  Window Obstructions: To ensure a clear and unobstructed view of the interior of the premises, including the area in which the cash registers are maintained, from the exterior public sidewalk or entrance, no more than thirty-three (33) percent of windows and entry doors shall be blocked by signs, vending machines, shelves, racks, storage, etc., notwithstanding the provisions of Section 16.36.040. 
8.  Failure to comply with these requirements shall constitute grounds for revocation of a conditional use permit. 
    Additional Conditions of Approval. Additional conditions of approval that may be imposed as necessary on new, modified, or redeveloped alcohol establishments, and to deemed approved establishments when deemed approved status is revoked and a new conditional use permit is obtained include but are not limited to the following: 
1.  Program: A "complaint response community relations" program adopted and maintained by the establishment conducting the alcoholic beverage sales activity may be required. The program may include the following: 
a.  Posting at the entry of the establishment providing the telephone number for the watch commander of the police department to any requesting individual. 
b.  Coordinating efforts with the police department to monitor community complaints about the establishment activities. 
c.  Having a representative of the establishment meet with neighbors or the applicable neighborhood association on a regular basis and at their request attempt to resolve any neighborhood complaints regarding the establishment. 
2.  Hours of Operation: the sale of alcoholic beverages may be restricted to certain hours of each day of the week unless limited further by the State of California Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control. 
3.  Security Cameras: At least two high definition 24-hour time lapse security cameras may be required to be installed and properly maintained on the exterior of the building at locations recommended by the police department capable of color recording and storing a minimum of thirty (30) days of continuous video. All criminal and suspicious activities recorded on this surveillance equipment must be reported to local law enforcement. To the extent allowed by law, the establishment operators may be required to provide any tapes or other recording media from the security cameras to the police department. 
H.  Grounds for conditional use permit suspension, revocation or termination. 
1.  In addition to the grounds for revocation or modification of a conditional use permit contained in Section 16.12.130, an alcohol establishment's conditional use permit may be suspended for up to one year, modified or revoked by the planning commission after holding a public hearing in the manner prescribed in this title, for failure to comply with operational standards, training requirements or conditions of approval imposed through their conditional use permit. Notice of such hearing by the planning commission at which it will consider the modification, suspension or revocation of an establishment's conditional use permit shall be in the manner prescribed by this title. 
2.  In addition to any and all other provisions of this section, any conditional use permit shall terminate and cease to apply to any establishment when either of the following has occurred: 
a.  The alcohol establishment has ceased its operation for a period of twelve (12) or more calendar months, and when either one of the following events occur: 
i.  If, after the twelve (12) calendar months, any application or requested transaction with the California Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control, whereby the laws of the state of California require notice thereof to be filed with the city, and allow the filing of a protest thereon by the city (including person-to- person transfer of existing licenses), and the city has filed such protest; or 
ii.  If after such 12-calendar-month period, the existing license shall have ceased to apply to such establishment. 
b.  Surrendered its license to the California Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control for a period exceeding twelve (12) calendar months. 
I.  Automatic deemed approved status for existing alcohol establishments. 
1.  As of the effective date, all existing or conditionally permitted alcohol establishments, whether or not constructed or operational, and all existing legal nonconforming alcohol beverage sales establishments, shall automatically become deemed approved establishments, and shall no longer be considered permitted, conditionally permitted or legal nonconforming establishments. Each deemed approved establishment shall retain its deemed approved status as long as it complies with the deemed approved operational standards set forth in Section 16.16.370(J). 
2.  The city shall notify the owner and/or operator of an alcohol establishment of its deemed approved status at the address as shown on their city business license, and also, if not the same, any property owner at the address shown on the county assessor's property tax assessment records, of the establishment's deemed approved status. The notice shall be sent by first-class mail and certified mail return receipt requested and shall include a copy of the operational standards in this section with the requirement that they be posted in a conspicuous and unobstructed place visible from the entrance of the alcohol establishment for public review. Should the notice be returned, then the notice shall be sent via regular mail. Failure of any person to receive notice given pursuant to this section shall not affect the deemed approved status of the establishment. 
    Operational standards for alcohol establishments with deemed approved status. After the effective date, a deemed approved establishment shall retain its deemed approved status only if it conforms to all of the following deemed approved operational standards: 
1.  The deemed approved establishment shall not cause adverse effects to the health, peace or safety of persons residing or working in the surrounding area. 
2.  The deemed approved establishment shall not jeopardize or endanger the public health or safety of persons residing or working in the surrounding area. 
3.  The deemed approved establishment shall not allow repeated nuisance activities within the premises or associated with the establishment or activity, including but not limited to disturbance of the peace, illegal drug activity, public drunkenness, drinking in public, harassment of passersby, gambling, prostitution, sale of stolen goods, public urination, theft, assaults, batteries, acts of vandalism, excessive littering, loitering, graffiti, illegal parking, excessive loud noises, especially in the late night or early morning hours, traffic violations, curfew violations, or lewd conduct. The establishment shall call the police upon observation of the activity. 
4.  The deemed approved establishment shall comply with all provisions of local, state or federal laws, regulations or orders, including but not limited to those of the ABC, California Business and Professions Code sections 24200, 24200.6, and 25612.5, as well as any condition imposed on any permits issued pursuant to applicable laws, regulations or orders. This includes compliance with annual city business license fees. 
5.  The deemed approved establishment's upkeep and operating characteristics shall be compatible with and not adversely affect the livability or appropriate development of abutting properties and the surrounding neighborhood. 
6.  A copy of these deemed approved operational standards, any applicable ABC or city operating conditions, and any training requirements shall be posted in at least one prominent place within the interior of the establishment where it will be readily visible and legible to the employees and patrons of the establishment. 
    Grounds for deemed approved status suspension, revocation or termination. 
1.  An alcohol establishment's deemed approved status may be suspended for up to one year, modified or revoked by the planning commission after holding a public hearing, for failure to comply with the deemed approved operational standards set forth in Section 16.16.370(J). Notice of such hearing by the planning commission at which it will consider the modification, suspension or revocation of an establishment's deemed approved status shall be in writing and shall state the grounds therefore. Notice shall be mailed by first-class mail and certified mail return receipt requested at least ten days before the date of the hearing. 
2.  The occurrence of any of the following shall terminate the deemed approved status of the alcohol establishment after notice and a hearing in front of the planning commission, and require the application for and issuance of a conditional use permit in order to continue the alcoholic beverage sales activity: 
a.  An existing alcohol establishment changes its activity so that ABC requires a different type of license. 
b.  There is a substantial modification to the mode or character of operation, including but not limited to the following: 
i.  The deemed approved establishment extends the hours of operation. 
ii.  The deemed approved establishment proposes to reinstate alcohol sales after the ABC license has been either revoked or suspended for a period 12 months or greater by ABC. 
iii.  The deemed approved establishment voluntarily discontinues active operation for more than twelve (12) consecutive months or ceases to be licensed by the ABC. 
c.  A "substantial change in the mode of character of operation" shall not include: 
i.  Re-establishment, restoration or repair of an existing deemed approved establishment on the same premises after the premises have been rendered totally or partially inaccessible by a riot, insurrection, toxic accident or act of God, provided that the re-establishment, restoration or repair does not extend the hours of operation of any establishment or add to the capacity, floor or land area or shelf space devoted to alcoholic beverages of any establishment. 
ii.  Temporary closure for not more than twelve (12) months in cases of vacation or illness or for purposes of repair, renovation, or remodeling if that repair, renovation, or remodeling does not change the nature of the premises and does not extend the hours of operation of any establishment, or add to the capacity, floor or land area, or shelf space devoted to alcoholic beverages of any establishment, provided notice is provided to the city. The development services director may, upon request of an owner of a deemed approved establishment made prior to the expiration of twelve (12) months, grant one or more extensions to the period of temporary closure, in accordance with Section 16.12.315(F). 
d.  There has been a discontinuance of active operation for twelve (12) consecutive months or a cessation of ABC licensing, which shall be presumed to be abandonment of the use by the property owner. At any time after any active operation is discontinued for a period of twelve (12) consecutive months or more, the city manager's designee shall notify the property owner in writing of the determination of presumed abandonment of the active operation. Pursuant to Chapter 16.12 of this title, the property owner may appeal the determination to the planning commission, which may overturn the determination only upon making a finding that the evidence supports the property owner's position that the use was not discontinued for a period of twelve (12) consecutive months or more. 
L.  Violations; Enforcement. 
1.  In addition to the penalties provided in this section, this section shall be enforced pursuant to Chapter 1.12 of the Hesperia Municipal Code. 
2.  It is not the intent of this section to discourage owners and employees of alcohol establishments to report nuisance or criminal activity. Nuisance or criminal activity that is reported by owners and employees shall not be considered for the purposes of revoking a conditional use permit or deemed approved status. 
M.  Annual alcohol sales regulatory fee. 
1.  The intent and purpose of this section is to impose a regulatory fee upon all off-sale alcohol establishments that either hold deemed approved status pursuant to this section or obtained a conditional use permit after the effective date. This fee shall provide for the enforcement and administration of the conditions of approval, operational standards, and other applicable regulations set forth in this section with regard to off-sale alcohol establishments. 
2.  The regulatory fee shall be established by resolution of the city council, and may include an annual component and a compliance component. The fee shall be calculated so as to recover the total cost of both administration and enforcement of the operational standards and other applicable regulations set forth under this section upon all off-sale alcohol establishments that either hold deemed approved status pursuant to this section or obtained a conditional use permit after the effective date, including, for example, notifying establishments of their deemed approved status, administering the program, establishment inspection and compliance checks, documentation of violations, conducting hearings and prosecution of violators, but shall not exceed the cost of the total program. All fees shall be used to fund the program. Fees are nonrefundable except as may be required by law. 
(Ord. No. 2017-03 , § 1, 5-2-17) 
ARTICLE XI. - COMMERCIAL DESIGN GUIDELINES[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2012-02, § 3(Exh. A), 2-7-12 , repealed the former Article XI, §§ 16.16.460-16.16.475 and §§ 16.16.485-16.16.535 and renumbered § 16.16.480 as § 16.16.365 and enacted a new Article XI as set out herein. The former Article XI pertained to commercial districts and derived from Ord. No. 193, 1994; Ord. No. 2004-05, 2004 and Ord. No. 278, 1999. 

16.16.400 - Commercial design standards and guidelines. 
A.  General. 
1.  Purpose. This article provides standards and guidelines for designing new commercial projects in the city, as well as exterior alterations and additions to existing commercial developments. Commercial developments are often located at prominent locations in a city and convey a strong visual image. The attention paid to their design reflects a city's economic vitality as well as its pride in itself. These standards and guidelines encourage the highest level of design quality and creativity and recognize the importance of quality design to the success or failure of commercial enterprises. 
    Property owners, developers, architects, building designers, and contractors seeking to construct new commercial developments, or alterations or additions to existing developments, should use these standards and guidelines in the early design stages of their projects. These standards and guidelines are not intended to limit creative site planning and architecture that are consistent with the stated goals and within the context of surrounding neighborhood patterns. Innovative design solutions are strongly encouraged. 
2.  Applicability. These standards and guidelines apply to all new commercial development, including exterior alterations and additions to existing developments. They apply to smaller infill projects as well as larger master planned sites. 
3.  Design Goals. The design standards and guidelines have been established in order to accomplish the following goals: 
a.  Promote design creativity and variation while ensuring consistency in building scale, proportion and pedestrian orientation. 
b.  Improve the quality of design for commercial developments, thereby improving the image, character, and appearance of the commercial areas. 
c.  Contribute to the character of neighborhoods by respecting the scale, proportion and architectural style of the surrounding area. 
d.  Create visual interest in commercial buildings, while maintaining a sense of harmony within the project. 
e.  Eliminate random development patterns and establish site planning and design relationships between new development and neighboring properties. 
f.  Encourage environmental sensitivity in development. 
g.  Create attractive and functional site arrangements of buildings, service and loading areas, open spaces, and parking areas; and develop a high quality architectural and landscape design. 
h.  Improve pedestrian circulation and connections on commercial sites and within commercial areas. 
i.  Minimize incompatible impacts of noise, light, traffic and visual character. 
B.  Architectural Design Standards and Guidelines. Commercial buildings should display unique, visually attractive qualities while having a unified composition. New buildings or building additions and renovations should not only harmonize with the prevailing characteristics of the surrounding area, but should be designed in response to individual site conditions, and to enhance the overall image of the city by virtue of the quality of design and construction. 
    Additions and renovation should be compatible with the existing building in scale, materials, and design. New projects should meet or exceed the standards of quality that have been set by surrounding development and contribute to the improvement of the area. All new construction should be designed to improve the reality and perception of pedestrian safety and security with elements such as easily identifiable entrances, retail windows, pedestrian-scaled building massing and unique architectural features. 
    Pedestrian-oriented development is generally low- to medium-scale, low-intensity, neighborhood serving commercial (retail and office) uses, within or adjacent to residential neighborhoods. It is strongly pedestrian-oriented with a storefront emphasis on the street, but also is geared towards accommodating the automobile. At the other end of the spectrum are "big box" retail and larger-scale commercial (retail and office) centers. These are much larger in scale and intensity, and typically geared towards the automobile, both in location (often near a freeway), and in site layout (large surface or structured parking). These larger "big box" retail centers and office complexes should also provide for the pedestrian. 
    Both of these types of commercial development can be found in the city. Therefore, while the following guidelines are applicable to all commercial developments, in some instances, additional standards and guidelines are provided for: 
  Pedestrian-oriented commercial development, and 
  "Big box" retail and larger scale commercial development. 
1.  Architectural Style. 
a.  There is no mandated architectural style required for commercial structures in the city, however, each project should possess an identifiable architectural theme and be of high quality design and materials. Innovative and imaginative architecture is encouraged. New buildings or building complexes should be stylistically consistent. Architectural style, materials, colors and forms should all work together to express a single theme. For remodels or additions, the theme should be true to the original intent and style of the building. 
b.  Each new building, addition or remodel should be stylistically consistent. For example, "Spanish" details are consistent with stucco buildings and mission tile roofs and should not be used on a contemporary building. Historic detailing on otherwise contemporary style buildings is strongly discouraged, such as using oversized (too large or out of scale) crown moldings or cornices to make a 1950's building appear "mission" style. 
2.  Scale, Mass and Form. 
a.  The size and mass of new structures, including additions, should be in relation to surrounding structures. Special care should be taken to achieve compatibility next to small-scale buildings; techniques should include limited size, building articulation and shadow patterns. 
b.  Building design should employ clean simple geometric forms and coordinated massing that produce an overall sense of unity, scale, and interest. Use simple, strong massing with broken and varied elements. 
c.  To create visual interest, where appropriate, varied roof or parapet heights and/or recessed or extended building walls should be used. 
d.  Building corners may be emphasized by use of elements such as towers, domes, or entries. 
e.  Where new buildings or additions are built immediately between existing buildings, the design of the new construction should acknowledge the existing buildings through the use of architectural elements such as matching cornice lines, continuation of a colonnade, use of similar materials, and similar building proportions. 

f.  Variable building facades along linear street frontages are encouraged. Variable facades create an interesting street scene. Nearly vertical or mansard roofs should be avoided. 
g.  The appearance of building mass may be reduced through the use of arcades, courtyards, pergolas, and stepping stories back above the ground level. 
h.  Color and material changes should be used to add interest and reduce a building's apparent scale. 
    Pedestrian-Oriented Commercial Development. 
i.  Buildings should have a "human scale" (i.e. relate to the pedestrian user). 
    "Big Box" and Large-Scale Commercial Development. 
j.  The scale and mass of a new "big box" and large scale commercial development should be consistent with neighboring developments and not overwhelm them with disproportionate size or a design that is out of character. 
k.  A single, dominant building mass should be avoided by clustering several smaller structures and using variations in building form. 
l.  As appropriate to the function of a building, a combination of major and minor changes in building form should be incorporated to create visual interest and establish a transition to neighboring developments. 
m.  Primary building entries should be highlighted through the massing of the building. Greater height can be used to highlight and accentuate entries in the form of corner tower elements, tall voids, or a central mass sited within an entry plaza. Conversely, smaller building masses can also communicate the location of entries. 
3.  Building Modulation, Articulation and Detailing. 
a.  Building design shall avoid large monotonous facades, long straight-line building fronts, plain box shapes, and barren exterior treatment. Where consistent with the design theme and function of the building, incorporate a variety of massing elements and a combination of major and minor changes in building form to establish visual transition and unity among neighboring developments and create visual interest. 

b.  Use building modulation, facade articulation, and detailing to create an interesting and individual design for commercial centers. 

c.  Use building form to emphasize individual units within a building, larger units and/or anchor stores within retail projects, and foyers, lobbies, and reception areas within non-retail commercial projects. Use building form and articulation to emphasize public entrances and de-emphasize service areas, and to define and shelter (i.e. give a sense of invitation and enclosure) pedestrian walks and exterior spaces. 
d.  Building articulation and detailing should be used to create an interesting and individual design, diminish the massing of large structures, and be compatible with the scale of surrounding development. Building design shall avoid large monotonous facades, long straight-line building fronts, plain box shapes, and barren exterior treatment. All building elevations visible from a public way including freeways shall be fully articulated, and incorporate the chosen design theme in a consistent manner. 

e.  Building articulation can also be accomplished with the placement of windows and entries, volume changes, variable roof forms and height, significant color and material changes, variable transparency, and the creation of shadow textures with trellises and overhangs. 
f.  Appropriate building modulation and articulation creates interesting facades and makes a positive contribution to the street environment. 
g.  Use building form to emphasize public entrances and reduce the overall mass of non-retail commercial projects. 
h.  The staggering of planes along an exterior wall elevation creates pockets of light and shadow, providing relief from monotonous, uninterrupted expanses of wall. Wall planes should not run in one continuous direction for more than fifty (50) feet without an offset. 
i.  Facades should reflect the quality and integrity of the underlying structure in a clear and consistent manner. Architectural elements that define scale and organize space are encouraged; facades should display a sense of order. 
j.  Buildings should incorporate architectural details and elements, which will reduce building scale at the street level, especially along pedestrian walkways. Awnings, canopies, arbors, trellises, etc. are effective in this regard. The appropriate use of other architectural details, including reveals, course lines, decorative cornice, columns, etc., is also encouraged as a means of creating interest, variety, and distinctive design. Details should reflect the structural and material integrity of the building; overly gratuitous ornamentation is discouraged. 
k.  Vertical architectural elements such as towers should be used as focal points. Gutters and downspouts should be concealed, unless designed as a decorative architectural feature. 
    Pedestrian-Oriented Commercial Development. 
l.  Retail buildings should incorporate "human scale" design elements that generate interest and diversity, and relate the building to the everyday user. The design of individual storefronts, and their entrances should be emphasized. 
m.  A pedestrian-oriented commercial building module shall range from thirty (30) to forty-five (45) feet and have a typical three-bay modulation. Buildings wider than two modules (60-90 feet) shall have a different modulation. These buildings shall either repeat the basic three-bay module of thirty (30) to forty-five (45) feet or increase the number of bays while keeping the individual bay width from ten to fifteen (15) feet. Buildings wider than ninety (90) feet shall be visually broken into two or more buildings (each with a maximum width of ninety (90) feet) in terms of the facade treatments. The modules should be articulated in a manner consistent with the building style. The use of pilasters is one element commonly used to achieve this articulation. 

n.  The horizontal should be emphasized to create a low profile and human scale. Vertical elements such as towers are just one of the design tools available to accentuate the predominantly horizontal massing. 
o.  Smaller building bays can be articulated by color and material changes, as well as variations in the wall plane. 
    "Big Box" and Large-Scale Commercial Development. 
p.  In large-scale commercial development, while the modulation of a typical storefront may be larger than that in the pedestrian-oriented area, design elements that generate interest and diversity, and relate the building to the everyday user should still be incorporated. The design of individual storefronts and their entrances should be emphasized. 
q.  A typical large-scale commercial building module should range from forty-five (45) to eighty (80) feet with the articulation of the building structure at fifteen (15) to twenty (20) feet. Buildings wider than two modules (90-160 feet) shall have a different modulation. These buildings shall repeat the basic module of forty-five (45) to eighty (80) feet. Buildings wider that one hundred sixty (160) feet should be visually broken into two or more buildings (each with a maximum width of one hundred sixty (160) feet) in terms of the facade treatments to stay in scale with the rest of the block. 

r.  Anchor buildings for major tenants, generally "big boxes," should be sited and designed in such a way that the buildings that accommodate the smaller tenants are not overwhelmed or crowded. 
s.  Arcades, trellises and other open structures should be utilized to visually and physically link buildings and provide connections to adjacent sidewalks. Stairways should be designed as an integral part of the building architecture. Boldly projecting stairways that complement the architectural massing and form of commercial buildings are encouraged. 
4.  Site and Building Entrances. 
a.  Main entries to buildings should be clearly demarcated, visible and accessible from the street and/or pedestrian walkways. Secondary entries may be from parking areas. 
b.  Building entries should read as such, and be integrated with the overall building form. Variation in building height, wall plane, roof treatment, window placement, architectural detailing, etc. should define and emphasize public entries. Variation in material, texture, and/or color is also recommended as a means of identifying building entries. 
c.  Arcades can provide shaded paths for pedestrians during inhospitable weather conditions. 
d.  Entries should be open, inviting, and highly visible so as not create a sense of fear in someone entering the space. Recessed or deeply shadowed entrances that allow hiding place opportunities should be avoided. Entry doors should be designed to create a sense of welcome, while clearly demarcating the private space. 
    "Pedestrian-Oriented" Commercial Development. 
e.  All entrances should be clearly visible from the street. Secondary entries may be from parking areas. If parking is located behind the stores, provide additional well-lit and signed rear entrances to allow easy access. 
f.  Retail entrances should be centrally located within the building facade, not be recessed more than three feet in depth and be located no more than fifty (50) feet apart. 
g.  Entrances should comprise no more than a third of the ground floor facade or fifteen feet, whichever is less. 
h.  Entrances for second floor uses are encouraged from the rear, adjacent to the parking. If separate entrances for the upper floor(s) are provided from the front, the entrance width should be limited to fifteen (15) feet to maintain retail continuity. 
    "Big Box" and Large-Scale Commercial Development. 
i.  Entrances should be located prominently within the building facade and be clearly visible from the street. Locate entrances along the street side of the building. If the parking is located to the side or rear of the building, a secondary entrance may be located on the side of the building adjacent to the parking. This entrance should be visible and obvious from the street. Entrances should be located no more than sixty (60) feet apart. If only one entrance is provided, it should be located along the street side of the building. 

j.  If the parking is located to the rear of the building and hence not visible from the street, provide a secondary entrance on the street side of the building. If the building frontage is greater than seventy-five (75) feet, provide additional pedestrian entrances. Avoid long balconies and corridors for access to upper level units. 
k.  Entrances should comprise no more than a third of the ground floor facade or twenty (20) feet, whichever is less. 
l.  In large-scale retail developments, locate entrances prominently within the building facade so they are visible from the street. 
5.  Building Facade and Elevation Design. 
a.  The elements of a building should relate logically to each other, as well as to surrounding buildings to enhance the characteristics of a particular building or area. The buildings should present an "active" building elevation including entrances and windows to the street, not blank walls or parking. 
b.  Buildings should contain the traditional three parts of a building: a base, mid-section, and a top. On low-rise buildings, the different parts may be expressed through detailing at the building base or eave or cornice line. On taller structures, different treatment of the first, middle, and top stories should be used to define the three parts. 
c.  The base should visually relate to the proportion and scale of the building. Techniques for establishing a base may include richly textured materials (e.g. tile or masonry treatments), darker colored materials, mullion, panels, reveals and/or enriched landscaping. Tops take advantage of the visual prominence of a building's silhouette. Techniques for clearly expressing a top may include cornice treatments, roof overhangs with brackets, richly textured materials (e.g. tile, masonry or fluted concrete), and/or differently colored materials. Colored "stripes" are not acceptable as the only treatment. 
d.  When buildings have a direct relationship to both the street and a major pedestrian corridor or parking lot, all facing facades should be designed to assure an attractive appearance. Building walls that are visible from a freeway, street, major pedestrian corridor, or public open space, should include architectural features such as windows, arcades, canopies, pop-outs, and trim to create visual interest, provide "eyes on the street," and avoid a blank wall appearance. 
e.  The fenestration (design and pattern of doors, windows, awnings, canopies, etc.) should be proportioned to and integrated with the facade modulation of columns and beams and other similar elements. Clear vertical and/or horizontal hierarchy and patterns in the placement of openings (doors, windows, awnings, canopies, etc.) on the facade should be established. 
f.  Details or elements should be integral to the design, not appear added on and reflect the structural or material integrity of the building. 
6.  Building Elements for Retail Storefronts. A typical retail storefront has the following characteristic elements: 
a.  Bulkhead; 
b.  Entrance door; 
c.  Display windows; 
d.  Canopies or awnings; 
e.  Cornices/parapets; 
f.  Security grilles. 
    Design guidelines for these elements are described below. Appropriate scaled and proportioned elements should be provided in both the rehabilitation of existing storefronts and the construction of new buildings. 
a.  Bulkhead. A bulkhead, between fifteen (15) and twenty-four (24) inches in height, should be provided at the base of the storefront display window. However, new storefront buildings may use floor to ceiling display windows if the design is compatible with surrounding architecture. 
b.  Entrance Door. Every building entry should be well lit. The entrance door should be kept simple and located centrally in the building facade. The door should be made of materials compatible with the building architecture and style. All entrances shall meet handicapped accessibility requirements. 
c.  Display Windows. Retail storefronts should have large display windows oriented toward the street or major pedestrian corridors to establish a visual connection between the interior and exterior of retail building. Display windows shall provide a clear view of store merchandise or a view into the business interior to add to the vitality of a retail environment as well as provide "eyes on the street." To achieve this, at least fifty (50) percent of available window area shall remain clear and free from obstructions. This zone should be between four and eight feet from the base of the facade. Ground floor wall sections without windows shall not be more than five feet in width. 
    Display windows should consist of a single pane of glass. When required to be divided into smaller sections, clear silicone vertical joints, glazing bars, or muntins should be used. Glazing bars and mullions should be of a minimal size and utilized to enhance the architectural style. The glass should be clear with an exterior daylight reflectance of not more than eight percent. The use of opaque glass is prohibited. 
d.  Canopies or Awnings. The size, scale and color of awning(s) should be compatible with the rest of the building; the awning(s) should not be the predominant element of the facade. Awnings should not cover the storefront piers or pilasters and should be divided into sections to reflect the major vertical divisions of the facade. 
    The awning should be mounted such that its valance is between eight and nine feet above the sidewalk with a projection of between four and eight feet from the building face, but no closer than five feet to the street curb. An encroachment permit is required for all awnings that encroach or overhang on the sidewalk. 
    The use of awnings along a row of contiguous structures should be restricted to awnings of the same form, location on the building facade, and material and color. 
    Awnings shall not start at the parapet edge of the facade. The step (the highest line of contact where the awning touches the facade) of the awning shall be at least twenty-four (24) inches below the parapet line. Retractable awnings are encouraged, but barrel shaped awnings are discouraged. Where architecturally appropriate, cantilevered or suspended integral horizontal canopy slabs may be used instead of awnings. Internally lit awnings should not be used. Awnings shall be well maintained, cleaned on a regular basis, and replaced when faded or torn. 
e.  Reserved. 

f.  Cornices or Parapets. Each building should have a simple cornice. If a parapet is provided, it may be stepped vertically to provide modulation and emphasis on the central module. The cornice should enhance the architectural style of the building. The use of elements such as oversized crown moldings is not permitted. A plaster front building may have a stone sill at the parapet line. A brick-front building may have a corbelled cornice. 
g.  Security Grilles. Visible security grilles are prohibited on the building facade exterior. Security grilles installed on the interior of the storefront are permitted. This installation must be done in a manner such that the grille is concealed from public view when not in use by retracting into casings that are in proportion and scale with the building's architecture. The color of the interior grilles should blend in with the background color so as to reduce their visibility when used. Exterior grilles on existing structures should be removed and placed on the interior of the storefront per these guidelines. Permanent security bars (defined as those clearly visible and fixed to windows on the facade) and roll-up metal security doors (including opaque shutters) are also strongly discouraged. 

h.  Security Bollards. Decorative bollards for security are permitted. Bollard design should be consistent with the overall project theme and should coordinate with other site furnishings. In locations where emergency access may be necessary, removable bollards should be considered. 
7.  Building Elements for Non-Retail Buildings. The elements of a building should relate logically to each other as well as to surrounding structures. A typical non-retail building has the following characteristic elements: 
a.  Entrance door; 
b.  Windows; 
c.  Canopy or awnings; 
d.  Parapets. 
    Design guidelines for these elements are described below. Appropriate scaled and proportioned elements should be provided in both the rehabilitation of existing storefronts and the construction of new buildings. 
a.  Entrance Door. Entrance doors should be simple and located prominently in the building facade. The door should be made of materials compatible with the building architecture and style. 
b.  Windows. Use interior and/or external shading devices to reduce solar heat gain and reduce energy consumption. Windows should be set from the exterior face of wall to create a shadow line. The glazing used for the windows may be clear or partly tinted glass. Highly reflective or dark tinted glass is not permitted. 
c.  Canopies or awnings. In non-retail buildings, the use of awnings is generally not encouraged. Instead, if architecturally appropriate, cantilevered or suspended integral horizontal canopy slabs may be used instead of awnings. A canopy should be located such that its valance is between eight and nine feet above the sidewalk with a projection of between four and eight feet from the building face, but no closer than five feet from the street curb. 
d.  Parapets. Parapets should have sufficient articulation of detail such as corner treatments, continuous banding, details, or varying pitch. Parapets should always include a cap and corner detail to enhance the building. Parapets should look integrated with the building. 
8.  Roof Design. 
a.  The roof design should be considered as a component of the overall architectural design theme. Roof forms should be simple, avoid a massive appearance, and reflect the internal organization of buildings. 
b.  New buildings may have flat or sloping roofs, depending on what is most compatible with the architectural style of the building and others in the area. Parapets should appear integrated with the building and should include a cap and corner detail to create a shadow line to enhance the building. Mansard roofs are discouraged. 
c.  As a building feature, sloped roofs help make a visual transition from commercial uses to the surrounding residential neighborhoods. When gabled or pitched roofs are used, careful integration with the primary building and adjacent buildings should be considered in design. Roof slopes should be between 3:12 and 6:12. 
d.  Varied roof forms such as tower elements, extended eaves with rafters and corbels may be used to add interest and to create a consistent style. Roof planes may be extended beyond the building volume to create covered walkways and verandas. 
e.  Roof form and height should be varied to complement building mass and articulation. Vertical variations to the roof line should incorporate roof projections to avoid a false front/unfinished appearance. 
f.  The roof line at the top of the structure should not run in a continuous plane for more than sixty (60) feet without offsetting or jogging the roof plane. This dimension should correspond with the modulation of the building's wall planes. 
9.  Doors and Windows. 
a.  Doors and windows are key elements of any structure's form, and should relate to the scale and proportions of the elevation on which they are located. Windows and doors can establish character by their rhythm and variety and help to provide depth and contrast on elevation planes. Windows and doors should be used to help mitigate building mass, establish scale, give expression to otherwise blank walls, and create a distinctive building design. 
b.  All doors and windows should be related with the chosen architectural style. Windows with widely varying styles are strongly discouraged. All doors and window frames should be made of consistent material. Wherever possible, window sizes should be coordinated vertically and horizontally and window design should be consistent in terms of style and general arrangement on all building sides. 
c.  Window exposure should be maximized along pedestrian walkways. The use of opaque glass adjacent to pedestrian walkways is discouraged. 
d.  Window frames should appear substantial and should not be flush with the exterior finish. Windows should be designed to enhance building interest and articulation. Recessed windows or inset glazing are possible design considerations. 
e.  Windows located on the sides and rear of the project should also be consistent with the look and style on the front of the project. 
f.  Use interior and/or external shading devices to reduce solar heat gain and reduce energy consumption. Windows should be set from the exterior face of wall to create a shadow line. The glazing used for the windows may be clear or partly tinted glass. Highly reflective or dark tinted glass is not permitted. 
10.  Architectural Lighting. 
a.  Architectural lighting can be used to enhance the perception of a commercial building(s) at night. A facade light style that is sympathetic to the building's architecture should be used. Architectural lighting should "wash" upon the street faces of a building. Facade lighting should vary so that the important elements such as entries, architectural details and public art, are lit more dramatically than the intervening walls and voids. 
b.  Visible direct lamp glare from unshielded floodlight fixtures is not allowed. In addition, retailers and other building users are discouraged from allowing a direct view to any bare light source from normal pedestrian or vehicular sight lines. This includes both facade lighting as well as interior lighting within ten feet of the structures' windows. 
11.  Materials and Finishes. 
a.  Materials and finishes should be suitable to the scale, character and design theme of the building and further lend variety and interest to the project. 
b.  Textures, colors and materials should unify the building and its elements. Materials should be consistently applied and should be chosen to work harmoniously with adjacent materials. Piecemeal embellishment and frequent changes in materials should be avoided. 
c.  Buildings should be treated as a whole and finished appropriately on all sides to provide continuity. Backs of buildings should use similar materials; however, less expensive and more utilitarian substituted materials are acceptable, provided they are compatible with the overall design. 

d.  Materials tend to appear substantial and integral to the structure when material changes occur at changes in plane. Material changes not accompanied by changes in plane appear "tacked-on" and are strongly discouraged. Material changes should not occur at external corners. Material changes may occur at "reverse" or interior corners or as a "return" at least four feet from external corners, with extended returns provided for large buildings. 
e.  Exterior materials for all commercial developments should be of high quality, durable and low maintenance. Materials that will withstand abuse by vandals or accidental damage from machinery are strongly encouraged. 
f.  Accessory structures should be designed as an integral part of the project architecture and should be similar in material, color, and detail to the primary buildings. 
g.  The use of sustainable building materials is strongly encouraged. This includes using quality materials with a long life span, selecting materials that are not energy-intensive to manufacture, using building products made from recycled materials, and repairing and maintaining well-built existing structures to the fullest extent possible. No large expanses of wood features should be used due to maintenance issues in high desert climate. 
h.  Materials that have no relationship to the architectural style shall not be permitted. These include mirrored glass, antiqued or imitation old brick, fake or cultured river rock, exposed concrete block, etc. Translucent plastic is strongly discouraged for use in awnings. 
12.  Color and Texture. 
a.  Color and finishes on exteriors of all elevations of a building should be coordinated to provide a total continuity of design. Materials provide texture and color and should influence the choice of other colors on the facade. 
b.  The blending of compatible colors in a single facade or composition is a good way to add character and variety, while reducing, or breaking up the mass of a building. Lower wall wainscots and built-up or recessed reveals may be employed to add interest and break up vertical monotony. 
c.  The colors chosen should accentuate the architectural details of the building and be consistent with its architectural style. A minimum of three and a maximum of five exterior building colors shall be used. These colors should be used on the base (main body), trim and accent. The base colors should be the lightest and the accents used sparingly. The two additional colors may be used on the base (main body) to distinguish between upper and lower floors or as an additional trim color. 
d.  Sign colors and finishes shall relate to those of the building. Signs may use any of the building colors plus up to three additional colors for a maximum of eight colors. Signs must use at least one of the building exterior colors. 
e.  Unusual patterns and color schemes should be avoided. Garish, non-harmonious, or out-of character colors should not be used. 
13.  Corporate Identity Issues. The use of standardized "corporate" architectural styles associated with franchises is discouraged. Make corporate identity secondary in the design of projects, and consistent with the architecture of the surrounding community. Site-specific design solutions are encouraged. The design character should not be a standard franchise prototype and should incorporate dominant characteristics of the neighborhood in which it is located. 
( Ord. No. 2012-02, § 3(Exh. A), 2-7-12 ) 
16.16.405 - Site design standards and guidelines. 
A.  The scale and site layout of commercial development can vary greatly from project to project. 
1.  Building Siting, Orientation and Setbacks. 
a.  Building siting should take into consideration the context of the commercial area, the location of nearby uses, and the location of major traffic generators as well as the site's characteristics. 
b.  The arrangement of structures, parking and circulation areas and open spaces should relate to the surrounding built environment in pattern, function, scale, character and materials. In developed areas, new projects should meet or exceed the standards of quality that have been set by surrounding development. 
c.  Uniform building setbacks and orientation represent an effective means of establishing compatible development patterns among neighboring properties. Contribute to an attractive street scene, and consistently orient buildings and building entrances along the public right-of-way. 
d.  As far as is feasible, buildings should be sited to screen parking and unsightly scenes and activities from public view, and from residentially designated properties. 
e.  Buildings should not turn a blank wall to neighboring properties; site buildings to avoid visible blank walls along interior side property lines. 
f.  Buildings with angled corners or plazas are encouraged at corner locations. 

g.  One of the critical elements of a successful pedestrian-oriented retail area is continuous street frontage. The street side setbacks should be minimized and new structures built at the street side setback line. For the rehabilitation of existing buildings, the existing setback may be maintained. 
h.  The placement and design of buildings should facilitate and encourage pedestrian activity and convey a visual link to the street and sidewalks. The building(s) and main entrance(s) should be oriented toward the primary street frontage. 

    "Big Box" Retail and Large-Scale Commercial Development. 
i.  Buildings shall be sited to avoid random and irregular building relationships; arrange buildings to create a sense of unity and overall harmony. Whenever possible, new structures should be clustered to create plazas and pedestrian malls and avoid the creation of "barrack-like" rows of structures. When clustering is impractical, a visual link between separate structures should be established. This link can be accomplished through the use of an arcade system, trellis, or other open structure. Orient the main entrance or entrances to the street or major plazas or open space. 

j.  Typical Large-Scale Commercial Site Layout. Where the parking area of a commercial project abuts another commercially or industrially designated property, a minimum five-foot wide perimeter landscape buffer (exclusive of the planter area curb) is required. Where feasible to do so, integrate the landscape buffer with that of the adjacent property. An exception is permitted for areas where shared parking and access has been designed with an adjacent project. 
2.  Interface Between Non-residential and Residential Uses. In several portions of the city, non-residential uses abut residential uses. Residential uses should be buffered from incompatible commercial development to mitigate negative impacts due to noise, vibration, shading, light and glare, and aesthetics. Intensified landscaping, increased setbacks and appropriate building orientation should be utilized as a means of providing adequate separation between such land uses. However, linkages (e.g. walkways, common landscape areas, and building orientation) between compatible commercial and residential uses are encouraged where appropriate. Issues of privacy, safety and noise are addressed in these following standards: 
a.  To provide privacy for adjacent residential properties, taller elements of the building shall be set at the front end of the parcels instead of the rear. Building heights should be stepped down to the height of adjacent residential uses, utilizing architectural elements such as gables and hipped roofs to reduce building mass. No portion of the building, including parapets, shall be above an imaginary plane drawn at the rear property line (where no alley is present) and extended at an angle of forty-five (45) degrees towards the center of the property. When an alley is present, the plane shall begin at the centerline of the alley. 
b.  In addition, appropriate landscape screening shall be provided at the shared property line to mitigate the negative visual and environmental impacts that are associated with commercial land uses. Excepting trees, this screening shall be eight feet in height. 
c.  Eighty percent of the vertical plane at the property line to a height of eight feet shall be opaque. 
d.  Screening may consist of one (or more) of the following: 
i.  "Vertical" trees closely spaced; 
ii.  "Green" (vine-covered) solid or fenced walls; 
iii.  Hedges (minimum height of eight feet). 
e.  Non-residential buildings should be sited to avoid significant shading of adjacent residences and compromising residents' privacy. 
f.  Windows of non-residential buildings should be oriented to avoid a direct line of site into adjacent residential buildings or property. 
g.  Noise or odor generating activities in general, and loading areas, trash and storage areas, and rooftop equipment in particular, should be located as far as possible from adjacent residential uses and shall not be located next to residential properties without fully mitigating their negative effects. 
h.  Whenever adjacent residential and commercial uses can mutually benefit from connection rather than separation, appropriate connective elements such as walkways, common landscaped areas, building orientation, gates and/or unfenced property lines should be employed. 
i.  Additional noise standards pursuant to Section 16.20.125 of this development code shall also apply. 
    Pedestrian-Oriented Commercial Development. 
j.  Where a project abuts a residentially designated property, a minimum of three feet of the required setbacks adjacent to the residential use shall be devoted entirely to shrubs (at least six feet in height) and trees (exclusive of any planter area curb). 
    "Big Box" Retail and Large-Scale Commercial Development. 
k.  To provide privacy for adjacent residential properties, taller elements of the building should be set away from the residential uses. No portion of the building, including parapets, should be above an imaginary plane drawn at the rear property line (where no alley is present) and extended at an angle of forty-five (45) degrees towards the center of the property. When an alley is present, the plane shall begin at the centerline of the alley. 
l.  Where a project abuts a residentially designated property, a minimum of six feet of the required setbacks adjacent to the residential use shall be devoted entirely to shrubs (at least six feet in height) and trees (exclusive of any planter area curb). Shrubs shall be planted at a minimum size of five gallons and trees at twenty-four (24) inches box. 
3.  Plazas and Courtyards. 
a.  Commercial developments should incorporate plazas and courtyards into their design. Buildings should be clustered to create usable pedestrian areas. 
b.  Primary access to public plazas and courtyards should be provided from the street. Secondary access may be provided from retail shops, restaurants, offices and other uses within the development. Entries to the plazas and courtyards should be inviting and well lit. 
c.  Landscaping, water features, and public art should be incorporated into plaza and courtyard design. Shade trees or architectural elements that provide shelter and relief from direct sunlight should be provided. 
d.  Plazas and courtyards should be buffered from the street, parking areas or drive aisles. 
e.  Auxiliary structures and areas such as play areas and outdoor dining areas should be integrated within the overall site design. Play structures associated with commercial uses should be enclosed and integrated within the building design. 

4.  Environmental Considerations. 
a.  Buildings should be designed and sited to maximize the use of sunlight and shade for energy savings, and respect the solar access of adjacent buildings. 
b.  Grading shall be designed to limit the height of retaining walls and perimeter walls to that permitted by the city's requirements. To the extent possible, site grading should relate to the natural surroundings and be designed to minimize grading by following the natural ground contours and recognizing existing drainage patterns. Graded slopes should be rounded to blend with existing terrain. Grading should emphasize and accentuate scenic vistas and natural landforms. 
c.  Large manufactured slopes should be avoided in favor of several smaller slopes integrated throughout the project. Smaller slopes are less obtrusive, more easily vegetated and can be used to add visual interest, preserve views and provide visual buffers where necessary. 
d.  Significant existing trees, vegetation and any other natural site attributes should be preserved to the greatest extent possible in the design and development of the commercial project. Site design that requires altering landforms and removing trees is discouraged. 
e.  Consideration should be given to the reduction of landscape maintenance and water consumption when selecting landscape materials. 
5.  Vehicle Circulation and Access. 
a.  Site access and internal circulation in commercial developments should promote safety, efficiency, and convenience. Vehicular traffic should be adequately separated from pedestrian circulation. Vehicular entrances should be clearly identified and be easily accessible to minimize pedestrian/vehicle conflict. 
b.  Adequate areas for maneuvering, stacking and emergency vehicle access should be provided. Internal circulation routes and parking areas should be separated. Continuous circulation should be provided throughout the site to the greatest extent possible to prevent awkward vehicular maneuvers. Dead-end driveways should be minimized. Vehicles should not be required to re-enter the street in order to move from one area to another on the same site. 
c.  The number of site access points or driveway aprons shall be minimized, to achieve efficient and productive use of paved access ways, and to eliminate traffic hazards. They should be located as far as possible from street intersections. A minimum distance for driveway aprons shall be required as outlined in Table 1 of Section 12.08.020 of the Hesperia Municipal Code and may be increased based upon safety considerations. 
d.  The site access points should be coordinated with existing or planned median openings and driveways on the opposite side of the roadway. Entrances and exits to and from parking and loading facilities should be clearly marked with appropriate directional signage where multiple access points are provided. Shared site access is encouraged and in some cases may be required. 
e.  Where possible, driveways should be minimized along arterial streets and access instead provided from side/secondary streets. 
f.  Design that allows for present or future reciprocal access with adjacent properties is encouraged. Driveway entry locations should be coordinated with existing or planned median openings and driveways on the opposite side of the roadway. 
g.  The main entry driveway should be easily identifiable, incorporating landscaping and possibly accent paving that is related to the building hierarchy and color. 
h.  Vehicular access, drives and circulation routes shall be designed so that all movements involved in loading, parking, or turning shall occur on-site and not within the public right-of-way. Exceptions will be considered where a property abuts an alleyway. 

6.  Pedestrian Circulation. 
a.  Commercial developments shall incorporate pedestrian walkways into site design to provide pedestrian connections from building entries to public sidewalks, plazas, and parking areas, and to buffer pedestrians from vehicular movement. Project entries and driveway areas should contain design features, including landscaping and textured paving, to break up the expanse of paving in a project. Paving materials should complement the architectural design. The use of stamped concrete, stone, brick, pavers; exposed aggregate or color concrete is encouraged. 
b.  Pedestrian walkways should be a minimum of four feet in width. Pedestrian walkways should be safe and clearly identifiable using varied surfaces, decorative paving, and landscaping. At a minimum, varied surfaces should be used to delineate crossings at circulation drives and parking aisles. 
c.  Design parking areas so that pedestrians walk parallel to moving cars. Minimize the need for pedestrians to cross parking aisles and landscape islands to reach building entries. 
d.  New structures and parking areas should enhance existing pedestrian connections to existing outdoor pedestrian spaces such as courtyards, plazas and porticos and create new connections where none exist. 
e.  Raised pathways, decorative paving, landscaping and bollards should be used to separate pedestrian paths from vehicular circulation areas to the maximum extent possible. 
f.  Identify and accentuate pedestrian areas; use special paving, painting, landscaping, etc. 
7.  Parking. 
a.  Parking lots should be designed with a clear hierarchy of circulation: major access drives with no direct access to parking spaces; major circulation drives with little or no parking; and parking aisles for direct access to parking spaces. Loading and service areas should be provided with separate access and circulation whenever possible. 
b.  On-site parking (lots and structures) shall be located to the rear of the building for parcel widths less than two hundred (200) feet and accessed by alleyways wherever they exist. 
c.  For parcel widths greater than two hundred (200) feet, parking lots may occupy up to forty (40) percent of the parcel's street frontage. Such siting in conjunction with substantial landscape treatment, enhances the streetscape, and contributes in the screening of parking areas. 
d.  Parking areas shall be designed so that no vehicle has to back into the public street. Provide end-stall turnarounds or a continuous circulation pattern. 
e.  Parking lots should be separated from buildings by a raised walkway (minimum four feet wide) and landscape strip (minimum seven feet wide). 
f.  Parking areas should be screened by buildings and landscaping. 
    Pedestrian-Oriented Commercial Development. 
g.  In pedestrian-oriented retail areas, vehicular entrances to off-street parking lots should be minimized in order to maintain retail facade and pedestrian continuity. No existing storefronts may be removed to provide vehicular access to parking. Encourage alley access to parking, where present, by implementing area-wide parking information and signage systems. 


h.  Shared driveways and parking arrangements between adjacent businesses/developments are strongly encouraged. 
i.  In commercial centers, on-site parking should be consolidated in one area rather than wrapping around the entire building. 
    "Big Box" Retail and Large-Scale Commercial Development. 
j.  The visual dominance of parking facilities should be reduced such that parking is visually subordinate to the building it serves. The desirable solution is to provide a majority of the parking at the rear of the site, where it is largely hidden from view by a building that fronts the street. In addition, on-site parking should be consolidated in one area rather than wrapping around the building. 
k.  Where feasible and compatible with the design of the building, use subterranean, semi-subterranean, or parking, which is tucked under the building. Parking designed in this manner must effectively reduce the visual impact of parking, and not detract from the building architecture or site views. 
l.  Entry areas to commercial development should be enhanced by ornamental landscaping, decorative paving, raised medians, gateway structures, and monument signage. 
m.  Main entry drives should extend from the street to the front cross aisle and should include: 
i.  A median with a minimum ten-foot wide clear landscaped area between the street and the first bisecting parking aisle. 
ii.  A minimum five-foot wide sidewalk on each side of the driveway. 
iii.  A minimum ten-foot wide landscaped parkway on each side of the driveway. 
iv.  A minimum twenty (20) foot wide decorative paving band. 
v.  Use decorative paving and landscaping to facilitate vehicular and pedestrian access at project entries. 

8.  Loading Areas. 
a.  Loading areas shall be designed to prevent interference with vehicular circulation and parking, and to provide an unobstructed area for trucks to maneuver when accessing loading spaces. 
b.  Loading areas shall be located away from main customer entrances and the street, preferably toward the rear of the property. 
c.  Overhead (roll-up) doors shall not be directly open to public view, and shall be substantially screened from the street, the freeway, and residential designated properties. Screening may be accomplished in a variety of ways, including the use of wing walls, the recessing of overhead doors (building articulation), landscaping, or a combination of these techniques. Fixed hardware for roll up doors shall be located on the inside of buildings to minimize visual clutter. 
d.  If located adjacent to residential areas, the design of overhead doors should minimize noise through devices such as rubber seals and/or other dampening features. 

e.  The grade of loading docks should be as low as feasible to minimize views from the street and the need for tall walls or fencing. Building segments above loading doors visible from the street and surrounding properties should conform with other guidelines pertaining to building features, materials and finishes. 
f.  Service areas should be screened from streets, freeways and adjacent properties. Lowering loading docks reduces the wall height needed to block views (offers one possible solution, subject to reasonable grading costs and site constraints). Screen walls should be setback from the street curb to minimize the visual impact and scale of the wall along the street. Varies based upon site conditions. Landscaped berms should be provided to minimize the visual impact of screen walls. 

9.  Outdoor Storage and Service Areas. 
a.  Outdoor storage and service areas (including, but not limited to, service entrances, loading docks and bays, outdoor storage of commercial vehicles) should be clearly defined and designated for convenient access. They shall not conflict with vehicular access, on-site parking facilities, pedestrian walkways, and customer entrances. 
b.  Outdoor storage and service areas should be located to the rear of a property so as not to face a public street. They shall not be open to view from the street or freeway. In addition, outdoor storage and service areas shall be located so as to minimize negative impacts (visual, noise, dust, vibration, etc.) upon any neighboring residential properties. 
c.  Service access should be located in a manner such that an unsightly condition is not created and the flow of pedestrians or user circulation when in use is not obstructed. 
d.  Outdoor storage and service areas shall be screened from on-site and off-site public view with a combination of building features, decorative walls, and landscaping consistent with the architectural style and design of the building. 
10.  Refuse Collection Facilities. 
a.  Trash storage must be enclosed within or adjacent to the main structure or located within separate freestanding enclosures. 
b.  The location of refuse collection facilities should be coordinated with the location of loading/service areas, and not readily visible to public view. 
c.  Refuse collection facilities should be unobtrusive and conveniently accessible for trash collection but should not impede circulation during loading operations. Where multiple trash bins are provided for a given project, disperse the location of trash facilities for more convenient waste disposal by individual trash generators. 
d.  Refuse collection facilities should be located to the rear of site and, where possible, screened from view from public streets and walkways and removed from pedestrian oriented areas. These areas should be screened with portions of the building, architectural wing walls, freestanding walls and landscape planting. Other acceptable screening materials include fences, landscaping, and/or berming, and the use of natural terrain where possible. Decorative treatment shall be used to minimize the adverse visual impact of these areas. 
e.  Refuse collection facilities shall be located so that there will be minimal intrusion (i.e. impacts associated with site views and odors) upon neighboring residentially designated properties. 
f.  Refuse collection facilities should be architecturally compatible with the project design. Colors and materials used to enclose these elements should be compatible with all other buildings on site. Landscaping shall be incorporated into the design of trash enclosures to screen them and deter graffiti. 
11.  Utility and Mechanical Equipment. 
a.  All utility and mechanical equipment (wall-mounted meters, air conditioners, transformers, etc.) shall be screened from public view. This includes all ground, wall, and roof mounted equipment. Screening elements shall be an integral part of the building; no screening method shall give the appearance of being "tacked on." 
b.  Where possible, integrate rooftop equipment into the overall mass of a building. At a minimum, roof mounted equipment shall be screened through the use of parapets, screening walls, equipment wells, mechanical room enclosures and similar design features. Screening devices other than parapet walls shall be designed as an integral element of the building massing. Picket fencing, chain-link fencing and metal boxes are not permitted. The top of screens should be at least as high as the top of the equipment, with additional height provided where larger equipment units could be used in the future. 

c.  Ladders for roof access shall be hidden and integrated into the building design. 
d.  Typical ground-mounted equipment (such as transformers and heating units) shall be adequately screened with walls and/or landscaping. The building from view of adjacent streets and properties should screen large structures and/or equipment. 
e.  Utility equipment such as electric and gas meters, electrical panels, and junction boxes shall be located in a utility room within the building. 
f.  All utility lines from the service drop to the site should be underground. 
g.  Transformers should not be located in the front landscaped setback area. Where transformers are unavoidable in the front setback, they shall be completely screened and camouflaged by landscaping, and should not obstruct views of tenant spaces, monument signs, and/or driveways. 
h.  All vents, gutters and downspouts, louvers, exposed flashing, etc. should be treated as design elements and be compatible with the rest of the building, or hidden from public view. 
i.  Exposed roof-mounted equipment is prohibited. 
12.  Fences, Walls and Hedges. 
a.  Walls and fences serve a major function in the streetscape and are used to screen vehicles, loading and storage areas, and utility structures. However, if not required for a specific screening or security purpose, they should not be utilized. The intent is to keep the walls as low as possible while performing their screening and security functions. The height of walls and fences on commercial properties is set forth in Section 16.20.070. 
b.  Walls and fences should be planned and designed as integral parts of the development, and should be consistent with the landscaping and building design. 
c.  If street fencing is necessary, decorative types of view fencing, such as wrought iron, are encouraged. Solid fencing, such as stucco or masonry, is strongly discouraged when they will block the view of the buildings or provide hiding places. The use of chain-link, barbed wire or razor wire for fencing is prohibited. 
d.  Perimeter walls or fencing that do not front a public street should be of decorative masonry (split-face block, plaster/stucco finish), decorative metal (wrought iron), hedges, or a combination of materials. They should be designed in a style, material and color to complement the development. Both sides of walls should be architecturally treated. 
e.  Tiered planting should be provided adjacent to project perimeter walls along street frontages to soften their appearance. 
f.  Walls should be eliminated or sited to provide additional setback areas at project entries accommodate landscaping, signage, or street furniture. 
g.  Wall sections greater than fifty (50) feet in length fronting a street shall incorporate at least two of the following design features, in proportion to the length of the wall: 
i.  A minimum two-foot change in horizontal plane for at least ten feet. 
ii.  A minimum eighteen (18) inch change in height for at least ten feet. 
iii.  A minimum eighteen (18) inch high raised planter for at least half the length of the wall. 
iv.  Use of pilasters at twenty-five (25) foot maximum intervals and at changes in wall planes. 
h.  Gates or comparable design solutions should be provided in perimeter walls or fences to allow emergency access and facilitate convenient pedestrian access. 
i.  Walls should be curved or angled at corner locations along street frontages to allow sight line views around the corner. 
j.  Hedges and other landscape screening materials should consist of evergreen plant materials. 
    Pedestrian-Oriented Commercial Development. 
k.  Freestanding walls, fences or hedges between any street frontage and retail building on site are not permitted. 
13.  Site Amenities. 
a.  Site amenities within a commercial setting should be coordinated in terms of color, materials and design in order to convey a cohesive project appearance and distinctive character. 
b.  Seating should be included in plaza and courtyard design. Where possible, seating should be provided in active and passive areas. 
c.  Tree grates should be provided along street edges and plazas where a continuous walking surface is needed. Grates should be a minimum of four feet in diameter. Knockouts must be provided to enlarge the inside diameter to support a larger tree trunk as the tree grows. 
d.  Tree guards should be provided to protect trees in high activity areas. Tree guard design should be compatible with other site furnishings. Tree guards should be attached to the tree grate; welds should not be visible. 
e.  Planters and pots should not obstruct pedestrian traffic flow. Consider placing pots in building recesses, at locations where access is discouraged and adjacent to blank walls to provide visual interest and color accents. Group similar sized planters in clusters to enrich streetscapes and plazas. Planter materials should complement the project architecture. Use of cast stone and masonry is encouraged. 
f.  Bollard design should be consistent with the overall project theme and should coordinate with other site furnishings. In locations where emergency access may be necessary, removable bollards should be considered. 
g.  Trash receptacle design should coordinate with other streetscape furnishings. 
h.  Bicycle rack design should be consistent with other streetscape furnishings. Use of "loop racks" and "ribbon bars" are encouraged. 
i.  Newspaper racks should be consolidated. Newspaper rack locations should not inhibit pedestrian flow. Newspaper rack design should incorporate masonry and/or metal elements that compliment other streetscape furnishings. 
j.  Site directories should be provided near vehicular and pedestrian entrances to multi-tenant commercial developments. Directory siting should maximize their visibility while minimizing the potential for creating a traffic hazard. 

14.  Exterior Lighting. 
a.  Exterior lighting shall be used to provide illumination for the security and safety of on-site areas such as building entrances, parking, loading, shipping and receiving, walkways, and working areas. The design of light fixtures and their structural support shall be architecturally compatible with main buildings on-site. 
b.  Provide decorative pedestrian-oriented site amenities, such as seating, planters and pots, fountains or water features, and tree grates and tree guards in commercial settings. 
c.  Exterior lighting should be adequate, but not overly bright. It shall be located and designed to avoid direct glare onto adjacent properties and public rights-of-way. All lighting fixtures must be hooded and directed downward to minimize light and glare impacts on neighboring properties and public rights-of-way. In addition, the lighting shall have cut-off luminaries that limit the amount of light pollution on nighttime skies. 
d.  Buildings and landscaping can be illuminated indirectly to create a strong positive image. Concealing light features within buildings and landscaping can highlight attractive features and avoid intrusion into neighboring properties and public rights-of-way. 
e.  Lighting should be designed to satisfy both functional and decorative needs. Storefront lighting should complement the architectural style of the building. 
f.  Lighting designs for parking areas should take into account color rendition and glare minimization. Color rendition allows a person to distinguish between colors. In a parking area with appropriate color rendition, a person will be able to identify the color of their car. Color rendition will vary according to the lamp type selected and should be considered as a factor in lamp style selection. During the design process, glare levels should be considered and efforts should be made to minimize glare. 
g.  All building entrances shall be well lit. If the entrance is recessed, a light from the ceiling of the entry vestibule is strongly encouraged to prevent any dark pockets or hiding places. 
h.  Transit stops, ATMs, and convenience stores shall be illuminated to facilitate their safe use at nighttime. In addition, the areas around these uses shall be well lit so that any hiding places are eliminated. 
i.  The height of light fixtures shall be reduced to a recommended height of eight feet, especially when adjacent to the residential areas. Floodlights are not permitted in areas adjacent to the residential areas. 
j.  Lighting fixtures should be compatible with the architectural character of the project and surrounding area. While some nondescript fixtures may be appropriate, significant use should be made of fixtures that have architectural value and accent the building and site. 
k.  Both building-mounted and freestanding fixtures may be used. 
l.  All portions of parking areas shall be illuminated at minimum 0.1 foot-candle intensity. A maximum illumination of 0.5 foot-candles at the property lines abutting a street or residentially designated property is allowed. 
( Ord. No. 2012-02, § 3(Exh. A), 2-7-12 ) 
ARTICLE XII. - INDUSTRIAL DESIGN GUIDELINES[12] 

Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2012-02, § 3(Exh. A), 2-7-12 , repealed the former Article XI, §§ 16.16.540-16.16.605 and renumbered § 16.16.610 as § 16.16.430 and enacted a new Article XII as set out herein. The former Article XII pertained to industrial districts and derived from Ord. No. 194, 1994 and Ord. No. 278, 1999. 

16.16.410 - Industrial design standards and guidelines. 
A.  General. 
1.  Purpose. This Article provides standards and guidelines for designing new industrial developments and for exterior alterations and additions to existing developments. Because of the size and scale of industrial buildings, it is especially important to consider design to ensure compatibility with other parts of the community. 
    As a category of structure types, industrial buildings often present unattractive and monotonous facades with large blank wall surfaces, untreated or false fronts, or highly reflective and glaring surfaces. In addition, the site development is often not pedestrian-friendly, not properly buffered from surrounding uses, insufficiently landscaped, and surrounded by unsightly fencing. 
    There is, however, a variety of design techniques that can be utilized to help overcome these situations and to direct development into a cohesive design statement that is both functional and aesthetically appealing. Property owners, developers, architects, building designers, and contractors seeking to construct new industrial developments, or alterations or additions to existing developments, should use these standards and guidelines in the early design stages of their projects. These standards and guidelines are not intended to limit creative site planning and architecture that are consistent with the stated goals and within the context of surrounding neighborhood patterns. Innovative design solutions are strongly encouraged. Refer to Chapter 16.16, Article X, of this development code for specific development standards pertaining to industrial uses. 
2.  Applicability. These design standards and guidelines apply to all new industrial development and business parks, including exterior alterations and additions to existing developments within the city. The standards and guidelines apply to smaller infill projects as well as larger master planned sites, and are in addition to the development standards set forth in Chapter 16.16, Article X, of this development code. 
3.  Design Goals. The design standards and guidelines have been established in order to accomplish the following goals: 
a.  Improve the quality of design for industrial developments, thereby improving the image and appearance of the city's industrial areas. 
b.  Create attractive and functional site arrangements of buildings, service and loading areas, open spaces, and parking areas; and develop a high quality architectural and landscape design. 
c.  Contribute to the character of the neighborhood by respecting the scale, proportion and architectural style of the surrounding area. 
d.  Create visual interest in industrial buildings, while maintaining a sense of harmony within the project. 
e.  Mitigate the negative impacts and views associated with industrial uses through effective site placement, screening, and buffering techniques. 
f.  Eliminate random development patterns and establish site planning and design relationships between new development and neighboring properties. 
g.  Encourage environmental sensitivity in development. 
h.  Improve pedestrian circulation and connections on industrial sites and within industrial areas. 
i.  Improve the appearance and character of the city. 
B.  Architectural Design Standards and Guidelines. While there is no mandated architectural style required for industrial structures in the city, each project should possess an identifiable architectural theme and be of high quality design and materials. Industrial buildings should display unique, visually attractive qualities while having a unified composition. Multi-building projects should also use a consistent architectural style. 
    Industrial projects should give neighboring development a sense of unity through consistent building scale and massing. Yet, visual interest should be created with the use of a variety of architectural styles and individual building details to avoid monotonous industrial neighborhoods and enliven the public's experience of the building. New projects should meet or exceed the standards of quality that have been set by surrounding development and contribute to the improvement of the area. 
1.  Building Articulation and Detailing. 
a.  Building articulation and detailing should be used to create an interesting and individual design, diminish the massing of large structures, and be compatible with the scale of surrounding development. Building design shall avoid large monotonous facades, long straight-line building fronts, plain box shapes, and barren exterior treatment. 
b.  All elevations should be architecturally treated, however, facades visible from major street corridors should be especially attractive and shall be fully articulated, and incorporate the chosen architectural theme in a consistent manner. 
c.  Articulation should include change of wall plane, door and window treatment, facade details, and other appropriate architectural treatment. A combination of compatible treatments should be used to create interest and variety, with attention given to treating particular architectural features in a balanced, yet uniquely detailed and decorative manner. 
d.  The staggering of planes along an exterior wall elevation creates pockets of light and shadow, providing relief from monotonous, uninterrupted expanses of wall. Wall planes should not run in one continuous direction for more than sixty (60) feet without an offset. 

e.  Facades having a recognizable "base" and "top" are encouraged. The base should visually relate to the proportion and scale of the building. Techniques for establishing a base may include richly textured materials (e.g. tile or masonry treatments), darker colored materials, mullion, panels, reveals and/or enriched landscaping. Tops take advantage of the visual prominence of a building's silhouette. Techniques for clearly expressing a top may include cornice treatments, roof overhangs with brackets, richly textured materials (e.g. tile, masonry or fluted concrete), and/or differently colored materials. Colored "stripes" are not acceptable as the only treatment. 

f.  Buildings should incorporate architectural details and elements, which will reduce building scale at the street level, especially along pedestrian walkways. Awnings, canopies, arbors, trellises, etc. are effective in this regard. The appropriate use of other architectural details, including reveals, course lines, decorative cornice, columns, etc., is also encouraged as a means of creating interest, variety, and distinctive design. Details should reflect the structural and material integrity of the building; overly gratuitous ornamentation is discouraged. 

2.  Height and Roof Lines. 
a.  The roof design should be considered as a component of the overall architectural design theme. 
b.  Roof forms should be simple, avoid a massive appearance, and reflect the internal organization of buildings. 
c.  Roof form and height should be varied to complement building mass and articulation. Vertical variations to the roof line should incorporate roof projections to avoid a false front/unfinished appearance. 

d.  The roof line at the top of the structure should not run in a continuous plane for more than sixty (60) feet without offsetting or jogging the roof plane. 
3.  Doors and Windows. 
a.  Doors and windows are key elements of any structure's form, and should relate to the scale of the elevation on which they appear. Windows and doors can establish character by their rhythm and variety and help to provide depth and contrast on elevation planes. Windows and doors should be used to help mitigate building mass, establish scale, give expression to otherwise blank walls, and create a distinctive building design. 
b.  All doors and windows should be related with the chosen architectural style. Windows with widely varying styles are strongly discouraged. All doors and window frames should be composed of consistent material. Wherever possible, window sizes should be coordinated vertically and horizontally and window design should be consistent in terms of style and general arrangement on all building sides. 
c.  Window exposure should be maximized along pedestrian walkways. The use of opaque glass adjacent to pedestrian walkways is discouraged. 
d.  Window frames should appear substantial and should not be flush with the exterior finish. Windows should be designed to enhance building interest and articulation. Recessed windows or inset glazing are possible design considerations. 
e.  Windows located on the sides and rear of the project should also be consistent with the look and style on the front of the project. 
4.  Materials and Finishes. 
a.  Materials and finishes should be suitable to the scale, character and design theme of the building and further lend variety and interest to the project. 
b.  The building and its elements should be unified by textures, colors and materials. Materials should be consistently applied and should be chosen to work harmoniously with adjacent materials. Piecemeal embellishment and frequent changes in materials should be avoided. 
c.  Buildings should be treated as a whole and finished appropriately on all sides to provide continuity. Materials tend to appear substantial and integral to the structure when material changes occur at changes in plane. Material changes not accompanied by changes in plane appear "tacked-on" and are strongly discouraged. Material changes should not occur at external corners. Material changes may occur at "reverse" or interior comers or as a "return" at least four feet from external corners, with extended returns provided for large buildings. 
d.  Exterior materials for industrial developments should be of high quality and low maintenance. Recommended materials include masonry, concrete, sandblasted concrete, textured block, brick, granite, marble, glass, painted metal elements and similar materials. Materials and detailing should have a substantial and long-lasting appearance. Metal siding should be avoided as the primary material, but may be used as an accent material if it is high quality and properly applied. Concrete blocks should also be avoided unless mitigated through careful and decorative design, texture and reveals. 
e.  Roofing materials should be durable. Where visible from the street, acceptable roofing materials include metal standing seam and concrete tile. Corrugated metal (standing rib metal roofs are permitted), highly reflective surfaces, and illuminated roofing are not permitted. 
f.  Materials that will withstand abuse by vandals or accidental damage from machinery are strongly encouraged, while high maintenance materials such as stained wood or shingles are not encouraged. 
g.  Accessory structures should be designed as an integral part of the project architecture and should be similar in material, color, and detail to the primary buildings. 
h.  The use of sustainable building materials is strongly encouraged. This includes using quality materials with a long life span, selecting materials that are not energy-intensive to manufacture, using building products made from recycled materials, and repairing and maintaining well-built existing structures to the fullest extent possible. 
5.  Color and Texture. 
a.  For most architectural styles, the number of colors on the exterior should be limited to a maximum of three, with an additional contrasting color for accent. In general, the lighter colors should be used for the main body, with darker shades for trim and accent. The larger and simpler the building design, the subtler the color should be to reduce the massiveness of large wall planes. 

b.  Off-whites, light grays, and muted earth tones are best suited and are appropriate for industrial developments. The use of strong or bright, unnatural colors, including the bright "white-on-white" color schemes. However, a greater variety of brighter, more intense colors are permitted to highlight architectural features such as awnings, canopies, doorways, window framing and trim, reveals, etc. 
c.  Color and finishes on exteriors of all elevations of a building should be coordinated to provide a total continuity of design. Unusual patterns and color schemes should be avoided. Garish, non-harmonious, or out-of-character colors should not be used. 
d.  The blending of compatible colors in a single facade or composition is a good way to add character and variety, while reducing, or breaking up the mass of a building. Lower wall wainscots and built-up or recessed reveals may be employed to add interest and break up vertical monotony. 
( Ord. No. 2012-02, § 3(Exh. A), 2-7-12 ) 
16.16.415 - Site design standards and guidelines. 
A.  Industrial site design must be functional and efficient, as well as compatible with adjacent land uses and aesthetically appealing. Elements of sound industrial site design include emphasis on the main building entry and landscaping; provision of pedestrian walkways and connections; plazas and landscaped open space areas for employees; convenient and controlled access, visitor parking and on-site circulation; screening of outdoor storage and loading areas; and appropriate buffering between incompatible land uses. It is also important to consider a project's relationship to adjacent industrial properties in creating a unified development pattern for the surrounding area. 
1.  Setbacks. 
a.  While respecting the minimum setbacks established in Chapter 16.16, Article X (Commercial and Industrial Development Standards) of this development code, the front and street side setbacks of new industrial development should generally approximate that of adjacent properties to establish a consistent image along the street. Some variation, however, should be provided in building and parking setbacks to avoid long monotonous building facades and provide visual interest. 
b.  Building setbacks should be proportionate to the scale of the structure. Larger structures require more setback area for a balance of scale and so as not to impose on neighboring uses. 
c.  Front and street side setback areas shall be landscaped. 
d.  Building setbacks shall be increased when adjacent to residentially designated properties to mitigate negative impacts due to noise, vibration, light and glare, and aesthetics. Where an industrial project abuts a residentially designated property, a minimum of ten feet of the required setback shall be devoted entirely to shrubs and trees, at least six feet in height (exclusive of any planter area curb). 
e.  Where the parking area of an industrial project abuts another industrially or commercially designated property, a minimum three-foot wide perimeter landscape buffer (exclusive of the planter area curb) is required. Where feasible to do so, integrate the landscape buffer with that of the adjacent property. 
2.  Building Orientation, Siting and Entrances. 
a.  Buildings in an industrial development should be arranged to create a sense of unity and overall harmony. Avoid random and irregular building relationships. 
b.  Site development, including location of building, parking, and landscape areas, should consider compatible development patterns among neighboring properties. In addition, consideration should be given to how future neighboring developments, based on existing lot patterns, could relate to the project. As far as is feasible, a project should be designed to functionally integrate with adjacent properties by providing for reciprocal access easements, common drives, and common perimeter landscape planters. 

c.  Lot assembly is encouraged as it provides greater opportunity to create efficient master planned projects in conformance with the intent of the design guidelines. 
d.  Industrial buildings should have a positive street presence and contribute to an attractive street scene by orienting buildings toward the primary street frontage. Public entrances and administrative/office areas should front the street. Primary entries should be clearly distinguished from secondary and service entries. Projects with few employees should attempt to place entries and the most active areas near the street to avoid long, "unguarded" walkways. 
e.  Entry and edge design features such as landscaping, architectural signage and monumentation, and enhanced paving should be incorporated in the project. Special materials, color, detailing, or equivalent architectural treatment should be incorporated into the building design at major entries. 
f.  Buildings shall be sited so as to screen loading and storage areas from public view. Where industrial uses are adjacent to non-industrial uses, appropriate buffering techniques such as increased setbacks, screening, and landscaping shall be provided to mitigate any negative effects of industrial operations. 
g.  Building entries should read as such, and be integrated with the overall building form. Doors should be designed at human scale. Variation in building height, wall plane, roof treatment, window placement, architectural detailing, etc. will define and emphasize public entries. Variation in material, texture, and/or color is also recommended as a means of identifying, building entries. 
3.  Scale and Mass. 
a.  The scale and mass of a new industrial development should be consistent with neighboring developments and not overwhelm them with disproportionate size or a design that is out of character. 
b.  A single, dominant building mass should be avoided by using variations in massing and building form. 

c.  As appropriate to the function of a building, a combination of major and minor changes in building form should be incorporated to create visual interest and establish a transition to neighboring developments. Changes in building form should be used to emphasize office space and reception areas within industrial projects, emphasize public entrances and deemphasize service areas, and define and shelter pedestrian walks and exterior spaces. 
d.  Primary building entries should be highlighted through the massing of the building. Greater height can be used to highlight and accentuate entries in the form of corner tower elements, tall voids, or a central mass meeting an entry plaza. Conversely, smaller building masses can also communicate the location of entries. 

e.  Typically, horizontal masses for building elevations less than seven hundred (700) lineal feet shall not exceed a height to width ratio of 1:4 without a substantial architectural element that projects up or away from the building, such as towers, bays, lattices, or other architectural features. Buildings greater than seven hundred (700) lineal feet shall not exceed a height to width ratio of 1:5 without massing variations. The extent of massing breaks and building projections should relate visually to the overall scale of the building. 

4.  Plazas and Open Space. 
a.  Plazas and similar open space features are strongly encouraged as a site amenity and design detail. Buildings should be arranged to include opportunities for plazas, patios, open space areas, and employee gathering spaces with amenities such as outdoor seating, landscaping, water elements, pergolas, special lighting and other "place-making" features. These outdoor spaces should be functional and pleasant and should not appear as "left-over" spaces. 
b.  Plazas are encouraged where high levels of pedestrian activity are expected, such as adjacent to major entrances and food services, or between building clusters in an industrial/business park development. 
c.  Building entries and windows should look onto plazas and open space areas to enhance activity and security. 
d.  Outdoor employee break areas and lunch areas should be located away from loading areas or other high-traffic areas. 
5.  Environmental Considerations. 
a.  To the extent possible, site grading should relate to the natural surroundings and be designed to minimize grading by following the natural ground contours and recognizing existing drainage patterns. Graded slopes should be rounded to blend with existing terrain. 
b.  Significant existing trees, vegetation and any other natural site attributes should be preserved to the greatest extent possible in the design and development of the industrial project. Site design that requires altering landforms and removing trees is discouraged. 
c.  Buildings should be designed and sited to maximize the use of sunlight and shade for energy savings, and respect the solar access of adjacent buildings. 
d.  Consideration should be given to the reduction of landscape maintenance and water consumption when selecting landscape materials. 
6.  Vehicle Circulation and Access. 
a.  Site access and internal circulation in industrial developments should promote safety, efficiency, and convenience. Vehicular traffic should be adequately separated from pedestrian circulation. Vehicular entrances should be clearly identified and easily accessible to minimize pedestrian/vehicle conflict. 
b.  Adequate areas for maneuvering, stacking and emergency vehicle access should be provided. Internal circulation routes and parking areas should be separated. Continuous circulation should be provided throughout the site to the greatest extent possible to prevent awkward vehicular maneuvers. Dead-end driveways should be minimized. Vehicles should not be required to enter the street in order to move from one area to another on the same site. 
c.  The number of site access points or driveway aprons shall be minimized for aesthetic purposes, to achieve efficient and productive use of paved access ways, and to eliminate traffic hazards. A minimum distance for driveway aprons shall be required as outlined in Table 1 of Section 12.08.020 of the Hesperia Municipal Code and may be increased based upon safety considerations. They should be coordinated with existing or planned median openings and driveways on the opposite side of the roadway. Entrances and exits to and from parking and loading facilities should be clearly marked with appropriate directional signage where multiple access points are provided. 
d.  Vehicular access, drives and circulation routes shall be designed so that all movements involved in loading, parking, or turning shall occur on-site, and not within the public right-of-way. 
e.  Where a property abuts an alleyway, service and vehicular access should be taken off of the alleyway. This is most strongly encouraged for development on narrow lots (less than one hundred (100) feet in width). Where these properties exclusively use the alleyway for service and vehicular access, a consistent and uninterrupted building frontage can be established for the entire length of the street. Alley improvements should coincide with site planning to minimize alleyway deterioration and address problems such as debris, safety, and any nuisance odors or hazards. 
f.  Design provisions, which allow for present or future reciprocal access with adjacent properties, are encouraged. 
7.  Pedestrian Circulation. 
a.  Industrial developments shall incorporate pedestrian walkways into site design to provide pedestrian connections from building entries to public sidewalks, plazas, parking areas, and adjacent developments, and to buffer pedestrians from vehicular movement. Project entries and driveway areas should contain design features, including landscaping and textured paving, to break up the expanse of paving in a project. Paving materials should complement the architectural design. The use of stamped concrete, stone, brick, pavers, exposed aggregate or color concrete is encouraged. 

b.  Pedestrian walkways should be a minimum of four feet in width. Pedestrian walkways should be safe and clearly identifiable using varied surfaces, decorative paving, and landscaping to minimize pedestrian/vehicle conflict. At a minimum, varied surfaces should be used to delineate crossings at circulation drives and parking aisles. 
8.  Parking. 
a.  The industrial site should be a self-contained development capable of accommodating its own parking needs. The use of the public street for parking and staging of trucks is not allowed. 
b.  Parking areas should be accessed from the street so that circulation to parking areas does not interfere with other site activities. Visitor parking should be located at the front and sides of buildings to be near primary building entrances. 
c.  Parking areas shall be designed to avoid awkward turning maneuvers and the backing of vehicles into public streets. 
d.  Parking areas should not visually dominate the site. Large expansive paved areas located between the street and the building should be avoided in favor of smaller multiple lots separated by landscaping and buildings. 
e.  The visual impact of parking lots and structures shall be mitigated with landscaping. Parking lots adjacent to and visible from public streets must be adequately screened from view through the use of rolling earth berms, low screen walls, changes in elevation, landscaping or combinations thereof whenever possible. Landscaping materials should have adequate room to grow and be protected from abuse by cars. Continuous concrete curbs shall be provided as wheel stops where parking adjoins landscaping. 
f.  Parking areas, driveways and pedestrian areas shall contain automatically controlled lighting. 
9.  Loading Areas. 
a.  Loading areas shall be designed to prevent interference with vehicular circulation and parking, and to provide an unobstructed area for trucks to maneuver when accessing loading spaces. 
b.  Loading areas shall be located away from main customer entrances and the street, preferably toward the rear of the property, as per the development standards in Chapter 16.16, Article X (Commercial and Industrial Development Standards) of this development code. 
c.  Overhead (roll-up) doors shall not be directly open to public view, and shall be substantially screened from the street, the freeway, and residentially designated properties. Screening may be accomplished in a variety of ways, including the use of wing walls, the recessing of overhead doors (building articulation), landscaping, or a combination of these techniques. Fixed hardware for roll up doors shall be located on the inside of buildings to minimize visual clutter. 

d.  If located adjacent to residential areas, the design of overhead doors should minimize noise through devices such as rubber seals and/or other dampening features. 
e.  The grade of loading docks should be as low as feasible to minimize views from the street and the need for tall walls or fencing. Building segments above loading doors visible from the street and surrounding properties should conform with other guidelines pertaining to building features, materials and finishes. 
10.  Outdoor Storage and Service Areas. 
a.  Outdoor storage and service areas (including, but not limited to, service entrances, loading docks and bays, outdoor storage of commercial vehicles) should be clearly defined and designated for convenient access. They shall not conflict with vehicular access, on-site parking facilities, pedestrian walkways, and customer entrances. 
b.  Outdoor storage and service areas should be located to the rear of a property so as not to face a public street. They shall not be open to view from the street, freeway, or residentially designated properties. 
c.  Outdoor storage and service areas shall be screened from on-site and off-site public view with a combination of building features, decorative walls, and landscaping consistent with the architectural style and design of the building. 
11.  Refuse Collection Facilities. 
a.  Refuse collection facilities shall be located so that there will be minimal intrusion (i.e. impacts associated with site views and odors) upon neighboring residentially designated properties. 
b.  Refuse collection facilities should be located for convenient access. Where the Hesperia Municipal Code requires a number of trash bins for a given project, disperse the location of trash facilities for more convenient waste disposal by individual trash generators. 
c.  The location of refuse collection facilities should be coordinated with the location of loading/service areas, and not readily visible to public view. 
d.  Decorative treatment of trash and storage enclosures shall be used to minimize the adverse visual impact of these areas. Trash disposal areas, including dumpsters, shall be screened from view by a six-foot high enclosure with gates. Trash and storage enclosures shall be architecturally compatible with the project design, and landscaping shall be incorporated into their design to screen them and deter graffiti. Screening materials shall consist of fences, landscaping, and/or berming, and the use of natural terrain where possible. 

e.  Outdoor storage and service areas shall be located so as to minimize negative impacts (visual, noise, dust, vibration, etc.) upon any neighboring residentially designated properties. 
12.  Utility and Mechanical Equipment. 
a.  All utility and mechanical equipment (wall-mounted meters, air conditioners, etc.) shall be screened from public view. This includes all ground, wall, and roof mounted equipment. Screening elements shall be an integral part of the building; no screening method shall give the appearance of being "tacked on." 
b.  Where possible, integrate rooftop equipment into the overall mass of a building. At a minimum, roof mounted equipment shall be screened through the use of parapets, screening walls, equipment wells, mechanical room enclosures and similar design features. Screening devices other than parapet walls shall be designed as an integral element of the building massing. Picket fencing, chain-link fencing and metal boxes shall be avoided. The top of screens should be at least as high as the top of the equipment, with additional height provided where larger equipment units could be used in the future. 
c.  Typical ground-mounted equipment (such as transformers and heating units) shall be adequately screened with walls and/or landscaping. Large structures and/or equipment should be screened by the building from view of adjacent streets and properties. 
d.  All vents, gutters and downspouts, louvers, exposed flashing, etc. should be treated as design elements and be compatible with the rest of the building, or hidden from public view. 
13.  Fences and Walls. 
a.  Walls and fences serve a major function in the industrial landscape and are used to screen vehicles, loading and storage areas, and utility structures. However, if not required for a specific screening or security purpose, they should not be utilized. The intent is to keep the walls as low as possible while performing their screening and security functions. The height of walls and fences on industrial properties is set forth in Section 16.20.070 of this development code. 
b.  Walls and fences should be planned and designed as integral parts of industrial development, and should be consistent with the landscaping and building design. 
c.  If street fencing is necessary, decorative types of view fencing, such as wrought iron, are encouraged. Solid fencing, such as stucco or masonry, is strongly discouraged when they will block the view of the buildings or provide hiding places. Chain link and barbed wire fencing is prohibited. 

d.  Perimeter walls or fencing that do not front a public street should be of decorative masonry (split-face block, plaster/stucco finish), decorative metal (wrought iron), wood, hedges, or a combination of materials. They should be designed in a style, material and color to complement the development. Both sides of walls should be architecturally treated. 
e.  Tiered planting should be provided adjacent to project perimeter walls along street frontages to soften their appearance. 
f.  Walls should be eliminated or sited to provide additional setback areas at project entries to accommodate landscaping, signage, or street furniture. 
g.  Wall sections greater than eighty (80) feet in length fronting a street shall incorporate at least two of the following design features, in proportion to the length of the wall. 
h.  A minimum two-foot change in horizontal plane for at least ten feet. 
i.  A minimum eighteen (18) inch change in height for at least ten feet. 
j.  A minimum eighteen (18) inch high raised planter for at least half the length of the wall. 
k.  Use of pilasters at twenty-five (25) foot maximum intervals and at changes in wall planes. 
l.  Gates or comparable design solutions should be provided in perimeter walls or fences to allow emergency access and facilitate convenient pedestrian access. 
m.  Walls should be curved or angled at corner locations along street frontages to allow sight line views around the corner. 
14.  Exterior Lighting. 
a.  Exterior lighting shall be used to provide illumination for the security and safety of on-site areas such as building entrances, parking, loading, shipping and receiving, walkways, and working areas. The design of light fixtures and their structural support shall be architecturally compatible with main buildings on-site. 
b.  Exterior lighting should be adequate but not overly bright. It shall be located and designed to avoid direct glare onto adjacent properties and public rights-of-way. In addition, the lighting shall have cut-off luminaries that limit the amount of light pollution on nighttime skies. 
c.  Buildings and landscaping can be illuminated indirectly to create a strong positive image. Concealing light features within buildings and landscaping can highlight attractive features and avoid intrusion into neighboring properties and public rights-of-way. 
d.  All portions of parking areas shall be illuminated at minimum 0.1 foot-candle intensity. A maximum illumination of 0.5 foot-candles at the property lines abutting a street or residentially designated property is allowed. 
( Ord. No. 2012-02, § 3(Exh. A), 2-7-12 ) 
ARTICLE XIII. - PUBLIC LAND USE DESIGNATION 

16.16.430 - Public (P) designation. 
A.  Purpose and Intent. This designation is intended to preserve and protect public facilities and those privately owned facilities which provide a service to the general public, including schools, churches, post offices, fire stations, hospitals, civic centers, and publicly owned land. Due to the broad service function of this designation and the difficulty of planning all public uses in advance, the public institutional designation may be designated throughout the plan area, provided the uses do not conflict with other established uses. The P-GOVT, P-SCHOOL, and P-PARK/REC general plan designations shall be considered public in this development code, and are subject to this article. 
B.  Locational Standards. 
1.  The area is occupied or will be occupied by public or closely related private facilities providing services or functions for the general public. 
2.  The uses are compatible with and not detrimental to adjacent land uses. 
3.  The area has adequate public services and access to accommodate the needs of the proposed use on a given site. 
4.  The location shall be consistent with the general plan text and maps. 
C.  Review Procedures. In order to ensure compliance with the general plan, and development code, permitted uses within this designation may be subject to a conditional use permit, site approval or tenant improvement review, in accordance with Chapter 16.12. 
D.  Permitted Uses. 
1.  Electrical, gas, water and sewage transmission facilities. 
2.  Radio and television stations and towers. 
3.  Microwave communication towers and facilities. 
4.  Government protective functions and postal services. 
5.  Public works maintenance and storage yards. 
6.  Vocational, trade and special training schools. 
7.  Museums and art galleries. 
8.  Planetariums, aquariums, botanical gardens and zoos. 
9.  Historical and monument sites. 
10.  Convention facilities. 
11.  Parks, playgrounds and athletic fields. 
12.  Recreation and community centers. 
13.  Churches, synagogues, mosques or other houses of worship. 
14.  Elementary, intermediate and senior high schools, public or private. 
15.  Colleges and universities. 
E.  Intensity. The maximum Floor Area Ratio for P-GOV shall be 2.0. 
F.  After approval, the public designation is automatically applied to the general plan land use map, without the necessity of any additional land use or zone change applications. 
(Ord. 126 § 6, 1991) 
( Ord. No. 2012-02, § 3(Exh. A), 2-7-12 ) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2012-02, § 3(Exh. A), adopted February 7, 2012, renumbered § 16.16.610 as § 16.16.330. For purposes of classification, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as § 16.16.430. 
ARTICLE XIV. - CANNABIS RELATED USES AND PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES 

16.16.440 - Purpose and intent. 
A.  In order to preserve public health, safety and welfare of the residents and businesses within the city, the declared purpose of this article is to prohibit all cannabis-related businesses, activities and uses (unless local control is otherwise preempted by state law), with a limited exception for medical cannabis deliveries and personal indoor cannabis cultivation, as provided for herein. 
B.  This article is not intended to interfere with a patient's right to obtain medical cannabis, as provided for in California Health & Safety Code § 11362.5. This article is not intended to conflict with federal law as contained in the Controlled Substances Act, 21 USC 800 et seq., nor to otherwise permit any activity that is prohibited under that Act or any other local, state or federal law, statute, rule or regulation. 
(Ord. No. 2017-15 , § 4(Exh. A), 12-5-17) 
16.16.445 - Definitions. 
    The definition of all terms used in this article shall be as defined below and as defined by Chapter 16.08 (with this section taking precedence over Chapter 16.08 in the event of conflict). Any ambiguity in the definitions used herein shall be resolved in favor of the city's understanding of the term. 
    "Accrediting body" means a nonprofit organization that requires conformance to ISO/IEC 17025 requirements and is a signatory to the International Laboratory Accreditation Cooperation Mutual Recognition Arrangement for Testing. 
    "Applicant," (consistent with exemptions provided by the Business and Professions Code § 19319, means the following: 
(1)  Owner or owners of a proposed facility, including all persons or entities having ownership interest other than a security interest, lien, or encumbrance on property that will be used by the facility. 
(2)  If the owner is an entity, "owner" includes within the entity each person participating in the direction, control, or management of, or having a financial interest in, the proposed facility. 
(3)  If the applicant is a publicly traded company, "owner" means the chief executive officer or any person or entity with an aggregate ownership interest of five percent or more. 
    "Bureau" means the Bureau of Marijuana Control within the Department of Consumer Affairs. 
    "Cannabinoid" or "phytocannabinoid" means a chemical compound that is unique to and derived from cannabis. 
    "Cannabis" means all parts of the plant Cannabis sativa Linnaeus, Cannabis indica, or Cannabis ruderalis, whether growing or not; the seeds thereof; the resin, whether crude or purified, extracted from any part of the plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant, its seeds, or resin. "Cannabis" also means the separated resin, whether crude or purified, obtained from marijuana. "Cannabis" also means marijuana as defined by Section 11018 of the Health and Safety Code as enacted by Chapter 1407 of the Statutes of 1972. "Cannabis" does not include the mature stalks of the plant, fiber produced from the stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of the plant, any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the mature stalks (except the resin extracted therefrom), fiber, oil, or cake, or the sterilized seed of the plant which is incapable of germination. For the purpose of this chapter, "cannabis" does not mean "industrial hemp" as defined by the Food and Agricultural Code § 81000 or the Health and Safety Code § 11018.5. 
    "Cannabis accessories" means any equipment, products or materials of any kind which are used, intended for use, or designed for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, smoking, vaporizing, or containing cannabis, or for ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing cannabis or cannabis products into the human body. 
    "Cannabis concentrate" means manufactured cannabis that has undergone a process to concentrate the cannabinoid active ingredient, thereby increasing the product's potency. An edible cannabis product is not considered food, as defined by the Health and Safety Code § 109935, or a drug, as defined by the Health and Safety Code § 109925. 
    "Cannabis products" means cannabis that has undergone a process whereby the plant material has been transformed into a concentrate, including, but not limited to, concentrated cannabis, or an edible or topical product containing cannabis or concentrated cannabis and other ingredients. 
    "Certificate of accreditation" means a certificate issued by an accrediting body to a licensed testing laboratory, entity, or site to be registered in the state. 
    "Commercial cannabis activity" includes cultivation, possession, manufacture, processing, storing, laboratory testing, labeling, transporting, labeling, distribution, delivery or sale of cannabis or a cannabis product; except, as set forth in the Business and Professions Code § 19319, related to qualifying patients and primary caregivers; and, as applicable, except as set forth in Section 16.16.455 (Personal Cultivation of Cannabis) of this Article XIV. 
    "Cultivation" means any activity involving the planting, growing, harvesting, drying, curing, grading, or trimming of cannabis. 
    "Cultivation site" means a facility where cannabis is planted, grown, harvested, dried, cured, graded, or trimmed, or that does all or any combination of those activities. 
    "Delivery" means the commercial transfer of cannabis or cannabis products from a dispensary; in the case of delivery of medical cannabis or medical cannabis products, the commercial transfer of cannabis or cannabis products from a dispensary is up to an amount determined by the bureau to a primary caregiver or qualified patient as defined in the Health and Safety Code § 11362.7. "Delivery" also includes the use by a dispensary of any technology platform owned and controlled by the dispensary, or independently licensed under state law, that enables customers (or in the case of medical cannabis or medical cannabis products, qualified patients or primary caregivers) to arrange for or facilitate the commercial transfer by a licensed dispensary of cannabis or cannabis products. 
    "Delivery dispensary" means a dispensary, with a permanent fixed location within the city, limited to retail sales of medical cannabis, or medical cannabis products, occurring exclusively through delivery. All retail sales are prohibited at the physical location of the delivery dispensary. 
    "Director" means the city of Hesperia Director of Development Services, and includes his/her designee(s). 
    "Dispensary" means a facility where cannabis, cannabis products, or devices for the use of cannabis or cannabis products are offered, either individually or in any combination, for retail sale, including an establishment that delivers, pursuant to express authorization under the provisions of this article, cannabis and cannabis products as part of a retail sale. 
    "Dispensing" means any activity involving the retail sale of cannabis or cannabis products from a dispensary. 
    "Distribution" means the procurement, sale, and transport of cannabis and cannabis products between entities licensed for commercial cannabis activities. 
    "Distributor" means a person licensed to engage in the business of purchasing cannabis from a licensed cultivator, or cannabis products from a licensed manufacturer, for sale to a licensed dispensary. 
    "Dried flower" means all dead cannabis that has been harvested, dried, cured, or otherwise processed, excluding leaves and stems. 
    "Edible cannabis product" means manufactured cannabis that is intended to be used, in whole or in part, for human consumption, including, but not limited to, chewing gum, but excluding products set forth in Division 15 (commencing with Section 32501) of the Food and Agricultural Code. An edible cannabis product is not considered food as defined by the Health and Safety Code § 109935 or a drug as defined by the Health and Safety Code § 109925. 
    "Identification card" means a document issued by the State Department of Health Services that document identifies a person authorized to engage in the medical use of cannabis. 
    "Identification program" means the universal identification certificate program for commercial medical cannabis activity authorized by Chapter 3.5 (Medical Cannabis Regulation and Safety Act) of Division 8 of the Business and Professions Code. 
    "Industrial hemp" means a fiber or oilseed crop, or both, that is limited to types of the plant Cannabis sativa L. having no more than three-tenths of one percent tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) contained in the dried flowering tops, whether growing or not; the seeds of the plant; the resin extracted from any part of the plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant, its seeds or resin produced therefrom. 
    "Licensee" means a person issued a state license under Chapter 3.5 (Medical Cannabis Regulation and Safety Act) of Division 8 (Special Business Regulations) of the Business and Professions Code, or Division 10 (Marijuana) of the Business and Profession Code, to engage in commercial cannabis activity. 
    "Licensing authority" means the state agency responsible for the issuance, renewal, or reinstatement of the license. 
    "Live plants" means living cannabis flowers and plants, including seeds, immature plants, and vegetative stage plants. 
    "Manufactured cannabis" means raw cannabis that has undergone a process whereby the raw agricultural product has been transformed into a concentrate, an edible product, or a topical product. 
    "Manufacturer" means a person that conducts the production, preparation, propagation, or compounding of manufactured cannabis, as described in the term "manufacturing site" as defined herein, or cannabis products either directly or indirectly or by extraction methods, or independently by means of chemical synthesis or by a combination of extraction and chemical synthesis at a fixed location that packages or repackages cannabis or cannabis products or labels or relabels its container. 
    "Manufacturing site" means a location that produces, prepares, propagates, or compounds manufactured cannabis or cannabis products, directly or indirectly, by extraction methods, independently by means of chemical synthesis, or by a combination of extraction and chemical synthesis, and is owned and operated by a licensee for these activities. 
    "Marijuana" has the same definition as "cannabis" provided in this Article. 
    "Medical cannabis" or "medical cannabis product" means a product containing cannabis, including, but not limited to, concentrates and extractions, used for medical purposes in accordance with the Compassionate Use Act (Health and Safety Code § 11362.5), the Medical Marijuana Program Act (Health and Safety Code §§ 11362.7 et seq.), and the Medical Marijuana Regulation and Safety Act of 2015. For the purposes of this article, "medical cannabis" does not include "industrial hemp" as defined by the Food and Agricultural Code § 81000 or the Health and Safety Code § 11018.5. 
    "Nursery" means a licensee that produces only clones, immature plants, seeds, and other agricultural products used specifically for the planting, propagation, and cultivation of cannabis. 
    "Permit," "local license," or "local permit" means an official document granted by the City of Hesperia that specifically authorizes a person to conduct commercial cannabis activity in the city. 
    "Person with an identification card" means an individual who is a qualified patient who has applied for and received a valid identification card pursuant to Article 2.5 (Medical Marijuana Program), Chapter 6, Division 10 of the Health and Safety Code, and as may be amended. 
    "Place of worship" means an establishment which has the principal purpose of religious worship (e.g., church, synagogue, mosque, temple) 
    "Primary Caregiver" has the same meaning as the term "primary caregiver" is defined in the Health and Safety Code § 11362.7, and as may be amended, and is subject to the limitations of the Health and Safety Code § 11362.7(e), as may be amended, which provides that a "primary caregiver shall be at least eighteen (18) years of age, unless the primary caregiver is the parent of a minor child who is a qualified patient or a person with an identification card or the primary caregiver is a person otherwise entitled to make medical decisions under state law pursuant to the Family Code §§ 6922, 7002, 7050, or 7120." 
    "Private residence" has the same meaning as the term is defined in the Health and Safety Code § 11362.2(b)(5), and as many be amended, which provides that private residence "means a house, an apartment unit, a mobile home, or other similar dwelling." 
    "Qualified patient" has the same meaning as that term is defined in Health and Safety Code § 11362.7, and as may be amended, and which "means a person who is entitled to the protections of the Health and Safety Code § 11362.5, but who does not necessarily have an identification card." 
    "State license," "license," or "registration" means a state license issued pursuant to Chapter 3.5 (Medical Cannabis Regulation and Safety Act) of Division 8 (Special Business Regulations) of the Business and Professions Code, or Division 10 (Marijuana) of the Business and Professions Code. 
    "Testing laboratory" means the premises where tests are performed on cannabis or cannabis products and that hold a valid certificate of accreditation. 
    "Topical cannabis" means a product intended for external use. A topical cannabis product is not considered a drug as defined by the Health and Safety Code § 109925. 
    "Transport" means the transfer of cannabis or cannabis products from the permitted business location of one licensee to the permitted business location of another licensee, for the purposes of conducting commercial cannabis activity authorized under state law. 
    "Transporter" means a permitted person issued a state license by the bureau to transport cannabis or cannabis products in an amount above a threshold determined by the bureau between permitted facilities that have been issued a state license pursuant to state law. 
(Ord. No. 2017-15 , § 4(Exh. A), 12-5-17) 
16.16.450 - Prohibition of non-medical commercial cannabis activities. 
A.  All non-medical commercial cannabis activities (including non-profit operations) within the city are prohibited, including but not limited to the state license classifications listed below as provided for in Business and Professions Code § 26050, as well as California Code of Regulation's Division 42 of Title 16, Division 8 of Title 3 and Chapter 13 of Division 1 of Title 17: 
(1)  A-Type 1-Cultivation; Specialty outdoor; Small. 
(2)  A-Type 1A-Cultivation; Specialty indoor; Small. 
(3)  A-Type 1B-Cultivation; Specialty mixed-light; Small. 
(4)  A-Type 1C-Cultivation; Specialty cottage; Small. 
(5)  A-Type 2-Cultivation; Outdoor; Small. 
(6)  A-Type 2A-Cultivation; Indoor; Small. 
(7)  A-Type 2B-Cultivation; Mixed-light; Small. 
(8)  A-Type 3-Cultivation; Outdoor; Medium. 
(9)  A-Type 3A-Cultivation; Indoor; Medium. 
(10)  A-Type 3B-Cultivation; Mixed-light; Medium. 
(11)  A-Type 4-Cultivation; Nursery. 
(12)  A-Type 5-Cultivation; Outdoor; Large. 
(13)  A-Type 5A-Cultivation; Indoor; Large. 
(14)  A-Type 5B-Cultivation; Mixed-light; Large. 
(15)  A-Type 6-Manufacturer 1. 
(16)  A-Type 7-Manufacturer 2. 
(17)  A-Type 8-Testing laboratory. 
(18)  A-Type 9-Non-Storefront Retailer. 
(19)  A-Type 10-Retailer. 
(20)  A-Type 11-Distributor. 
(21)  A-Type 12-Microbusiness. 
(22)  A-Type 13-Distributor, Transport Only. 
(23)  A-Type 14-Cannabis Event Organizer. 
(24)  A-Type-Processor Only Cultivation. 
(25)  A-Type N-Manufacturer. 
(26)  A-Type P-Manufacturer. 
(27)  A-Type S-Manufacturer. 
B.  The prohibition provided by this section includes any activities authorized under new or revised state licenses, or any other state authorization, to allow any type, category or classification of non-medical cannabis commercial activities, or similar operations (including non-profit, collective or cooperative operations). 
(Ord. No. 2017-15 , § 4(Exh. A), 12-5-17; Ord. of 2018-03 , § 4(Exh. C), 3-20-18) 
16.16.455 - Personal cultivation of cannabis. 
    Individuals twenty-one (21) years of age or older desiring to possess, plant, cultivate, harvest, dry, or process not more than six living cannabis plants and possess the cannabis produced by the plants (as authorized by the Health and Safety Code § 11362.1, and as may be amended from time to time) shall comply with the following reasonable regulations: 
A.  Outdoor cultivation of cannabis is expressly prohibited in all zoning districts of the city. 
B.  The six living plants and any cannabis produced by the plants shall be planted, cultivated, harvested, dried, and processed within a private residence. 
C.  The six living plants and any cannabis produced by the plants in excess of twenty-eight and one-half (28.5) grams shall be kept within a locked room within the person's private residence, or be kept within an enclosed locked structure on, or within, the person's private residence. "Enclosed locked structure" means a structure that: 
1.  Does not allow for the visibility of the interior from the outside; 
2.  Is secured with locks; 
3.  Is completely surrounded on all sides by a wall or other barrier; and 
4.  Is roofed or otherwise secured from entry. 
D.  Enclosed locked structures may include greenhouses and accessory buildings meeting the requirements contained in this section. 
E.  Persons possessing, planting, cultivating, harvesting, drying, or processing not more than six living cannabis plants and possessing the cannabis produced by the plants pursuant to this section shall register with the director, provide information on forms provided by the director, and pay a fee as approved by city council resolution; said registration shall be renewed with the city annually. Consistent with the intent of this article, the director is authorized to clarify and/or supplement in writing these procedures. 
F.  If the registrant is not the property owner, the registration required pursuant to subsection (E) shall include written and notarized permission from the owner of the private residence; said permission shall be notarized within thirty (30) days of the date the registration is submitted to the city. 
(Ord. No. 2017-15 , § 4(Exh. A), 12-5-17) 
16.16.460 - Prohibition of medical commercial cannabis activities. 
A.  All medical commercial cannabis activities (including non-profit operations) within the city are prohibited, including but not limited to the state license classifications listed below as provided for in Business and Professions Code § § 26050, as well as California Code of Regulation's Division 42 of Title 16, Division 8 of Title 3 and Chapter 13 of Division 1 of Title 17 (notwithstanding the limited exemption provided in Section 16.16.465 for a M-Type 9 (Non-Storefront Retailer) license in conjunction with a valid and current delivery dispensary permit): 
(1)  M-Type 1-Cultivation; Specialty outdoor; Small. 
(2)  M-Type 1A-Cultivation; Specialty indoor; Small. 
(3)  M-Type 1B-Cultivation; Specialty mixed-light; Small. 
(4)  M-Type 1C-Cultivation; Specialty cottage; Small. 
(5)  M-Type 2-Cultivation; Outdoor; Small. 
(6)  M-Type 2A-Cultivation; Indoor; Small. 
(7)  M-Type 2B-Cultivation; Mixed-light; Small. 
(8)  M-Type 3-Cultivation; Outdoor; Medium. 
(9)  M-Type 3A-Cultivation; Indoor; Medium. 
(10)  M-Type 3B-Cultivation; Mixed-light; Medium. 
(11)  M-Type 4-Cultivation; Nursery. 
(12)  M-Type 5-Cultivation; Outdoor; Large. 
(13)  M-Type 5A-Cultivation; Indoor; Large. 
(14)  M-Type 5B-Cultivation; Mixed-light; Large. 
(15)  M-Type 6-Manufacturer 1. 
(16)  M-Type 7-Manufacturer 2. 
(17)  M-Type 8-Testing laboratory. 
(18)  M-Type 10-Retailer. 
(19)  M-Type 11-Distributor. 
(20)  M-Type 12-Microbusiness. 
(21)  M-Type 13-Distributor, Transport Only. 
(22)  M-Type 14-Cannabis Event Organizer. 
(23)  M-Type-Processor-Only Cultivation. 
(24)  M-Type N-Manufacturer. 
(25)  M-Type P-Manufacturer. 
(26)  M-Type S-Manufacturer. 
B.  This prohibition provided by this section includes any activities authorized under new or revised state licenses, or any other state authorization, to allow any type, category or classification of medical commercial cannabis activities, or similar operations (including non-profit, collective or cooperative operations). 
C.  The prohibition provided by this section includes medical cannabis collectives and cooperatives that operate pursuant to Health and Safety Code § 11362.775, the Compassionate Use Act, the Medical Marijuana Program Act, or otherwise. 
(Ord. No. 2017-15 , § 4(Exh. A), 12-5-17; Ord. of 2018-03 , § 4(Exh. C), 3-20-18) 
16.16.465 - Delivery of medical cannabis. 
A.  The delivery of medical cannabis within the city to qualified patients or persons with an identification card, in accordance with a doctor's recommendation, is prohibited except for as allowed by this section. 
B.  The establishment and operation of a medical cannabis delivery service with a permanent fixed location within the city, under state license M-Type 9 (Non-Storefront Retailer), as provided for in Business and Professions Code § 19300.7(n), is permitted subject to issuance by the city of a regulatory permit authorizing a delivery dispensary, as provided for in Title 5 ("Business Licenses and Regulations"), and the continued maintenance in good standing of such regulatory permit. 
(Ord. No. 2017-15 , § 4(Exh. A), 12-5-17) 
16.16.470 - Conditions for establishment and operation of a delivery dispensary. 
    The establishment and operation of a delivery dispensary is subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  A delivery dispensary shall only be permitted within the General Industrial (G-I) zone district or the Limited Manufacturing (I-1) or General Manufacturing (1-2) General Plan designations. 
(2)  A delivery dispensary shall be permitted within the Commercial Industrial Business Park (CIBP) zone district, and only within the area bounded by Smoke Tree Street, "I" Avenue, Juniper Street and Santa Fe Avenue East, and subject to the distance restrictions defined in this section. 
(3)  The maximum floor area of any delivery dispensary shall be ten thousand (10,000) square feet. 
(4)  A delivery dispensary shall be located at least six hundred (600) feet from any residential or agricultural zone, any place of worship, school, park, playground, day care center or other location where children regularly congregate. 
(5)  A delivery dispensary must be located at least six hundred (600) feet from any adult business, liquor store, hookah lounge, massage facility, or residential care facility. 
(6)  The distance between any delivery dispensary and any residential or agricultural zone, any place of worship, school, park, playground, day care center, or other location where children regularly congregate, shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures, from the closest exterior structural wall of the delivery dispensary office to the closest property line of the residential or agricultural zone, any place of worship, school, park, playground, day care center or other location where children regularly congregate. 
(7)  Where the six-hundred-foot (600) distance as measured from any of the uses listed above, except for a school, day care center or youth center, and the measurement crosses a property line, the entire property and any structures located therein, are deemed eligible for the location of a delivery service. 
(8)  The delivery dispensary shall be operated in accordance with all city codes, as well as the Medical Cannabis Regulation and Safety Act (including but not limited to the Business and Professions Code § 19340), the Compassionate Use Act, and the Medical Marijuana Program Act. 
(Ord. No. 2017-15 , § 4(Exh. A), 12-5-17; Ord. No. 2018-02 , § 2(Exh. B), 3-20-18) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2017-15 , § 5(Exh. B), adopted December 5, 2017, contains the map of Marijuana Shops-Restricted Areas for illustrative purposes only and is on file in the office of the city clerk (and may be amended from time to time); it can be found in this Code at the end of Article XIV. 
16.16.475 - Industrial hemp. 
    The possession, use, purchase, sale, cultivation, processing, manufacture, packaging, labeling, transporting, storage, distribution, use and transfer of industrial hemp shall not be subject to the provisions of this Article or of Division 10 (commencing with the Business and Professions Code § 26000), but instead shall be regulated by the Department of Food and Agriculture in accordance with the provisions of Division 24 (commencing with Section 81000) of the Food and Agricultural Code, inclusive. 
(Ord. No. 2017-15 , § 4(Exh. A), 12-5-17) 

(Ord. No. 2017-15 , § 5(Exh. B), 12-5-17) 
Chapter 16.20 - GENERAL REGULATIONS 
Sections: 
ARTICLE I. - SETBACK REGULATIONS 

16.20.010 - Applicability of provisions. 
    Except as provided in this article, all yards or setbacks shall be as set forth in the land use districts or zones. 
(SBCC § 87.0501) 
16.20.015 - General provisions. 
A.  Where setbacks are provided within a land use district, front yard setbacks shall mean distance from a road right-of-way unless otherwise specified within this section. 
B.  Where setbacks are provided within a land use district, side and rear yard setbacks are from adjacent lot lines unless otherwise specified within this section. 
C.  Yards or other open spaces required around an existing building or which are hereafter provided around any building for the purpose of complying with the yard provisions of a land use district or zone shall not be considered as providing a yard or open space for any other building. 
D.  Yards or required open space on an adjoining lot shall not be considered as providing a yard or open space on a lot whereon a building is to be erected. 
E.  On through lots, front yards shall be provided on all street frontages. 
F.  If any future right-of-way line has been established by provisions of a specific ordinance, community plan, zoning or similar document, the measurement of the yard shall be made from the future right-of-way or future property line. 
G.  All street setbacks shall include provision for a minimum half-width of thirty (30) feet for any valley or desert right-of-way and twenty (20) feet for any mountain right-of-way unless otherwise specified by provisions of a specific ordinance, community plan, zoning or similar document. 
H.  Side yards on the street sides of corner lots require the same building setback as do front yards unless otherwise specified within the provisions of a specific ordinance, community plan, zoning or similar document. 
I.  When the side lines of a lot converge to a point or to a rear lot line narrower than ten feet, for setback purposes the rear lot line is considered to be a line parallel to the front lot line measuring ten feet between the two side lot lines. The rear yard depth is measured from the ten foot line to the nearest part of the principal building on the lot. 
J.  For the purposes of side yard regulations, the following dwellings with common party walls shall be considered as one building occupying one lot: semi-detached two- and four-family dwellings, row dwellings, group dwellings and court apartments. 
K.  Street setback lines, as delineated on all final maps, parcel maps and records of survey maps recorded in the city between March 1, 1948, and January 1, 1987, or on composite development plans on file with the community development department shall be the street and yard setback distances required on the property within said final maps, parcel maps, or records of survey. Notwithstanding any other provision of the development code, any request to modify or deviate from a building setback line designated on a recorded map or final map shall be revised through the issuance of a certificate of correction to the parcel map or final map. 
L.  Any primary use structure which is constructed upon a portion of two or more lots which are held in a common contiguous ownership shall not be required to adhere to the yard setback requirements specified for those lot lines upon which the construction has taken place. All other requirements specified by this code shall apply to this type of construction, including those requirements for distance between structures and required setbacks as measured from the combined perimeter boundary of the contiguous parcels. 
M.  Front street setback lines shall be established, so wherever possible the yard width at such a setback line is at least the minimum width specified by the applicable zone/land use district, unless otherwise allowed by this title. 
(Ord. 2001-09 Exh. A (part), 2001: amended during 12/98 supplement; SBCC § 87.0505) 
16.20.020 - Exceptions. 
    In computing the depth of a rear yard where such yard opens into an alley, one-half (1/2) the width of such alley may be assumed to be a portion of the required rear yard. 
(SBCC § 87.0510) 
16.20.025 - Street setbacks-Applicability of provisions. 
    Unless otherwise specified in the development code, the regulations in this chapter shall apply only to zone districts and only when specifically cited within said zone districts. 
(Amended during 12/98 supplement; SBCC § 87.0601) 
16.20.030 - General provisions-Street setbacks. 
    Any structure hereafter erected, enlarged, relocated or structurally altered, which is located or is to be located on property abutting any street, road easement or freeway, shall conform to the street setbacks as set forth in the following subsections: 
A.  Where the street is located on a right-of-way width of sixty (60) feet or less, the minimum street setback shall be fifty-five (55) feet, measured from the centerline. 
B.  Where the street is located on a right-of-way width of more than sixty (60) feet, the minimum street setback shall be twenty-five (25) feet in addition to one-half (1/2) of the width of the existing right-of-way measured from the centerline. 
C.  Where the roadway is a private road easement, the minimum street setback shall be twenty-five (25) feet measured from the recognized easement line. 
D.  Where residential buildings and accessory structures are constructed or remodeled on reversed corner lots, the applicable building setbacks in the street side yard may be reduced to twenty-five (25) feet along major arterial and arterial streets and to fifteen (15) feet along secondary arterial, collector and local streets. 
(Ord. 2001-09 Exh. A (part): amended during 1997 codification; SBCC § 87.0605) 
16.20.035 - Service station setbacks. 
A.  Protective pump island canopies shall maintain a setback of five feet from the right-of-way shown on the adopted master plan of highways. 
B.  Pump islands, when designed parallel to the nearest right-of-way, shall maintain a setback of fifteen (15) feet from the right-of-way shown on the circulation element of the general plan, specific plan or adopted community plan. 
C.  Pump islands, when designed at an angle of thirty (30) degrees or more to the nearest right-of-way, shall maintain a setback of twenty-five (25) feet from the right-of-way shown on the circulation element of the general plan, specific plan or adopted community plan. 
D.  Area lighters shall maintain a setback of one foot from the right-of-way shown on the circulation element of the general plan, specific plan or adopted community plan. 
E.  All other structures over four feet in height shall maintain setbacks as required in the street setback section for zone districts or as required by the applicable specific plan or community plan. 
(SBCC § 87.0701(a)) 
16.20.040 - Apartment building separations. 
    On any lot containing residential buildings with a total of two or more dwelling units in separate buildings, spaces with the minimum dimensions prescribed in the following cases shall be provided between opposite exterior walls of the same or separate buildings on the lot. The walls shall be considered opposite one another if a line drawn in a horizontal plane perpendicularly from any portion of a wall intersects the other wall. 
A.  Buildings side-to-side: 10 feet 
B.  Buildings rear-to-rear or front-to-side: 15 feet 
C.  Buildings front-to-rear: 20 feet 
D.  Buildings front-to-front or interior court space: 25 feet 
E.  Interior court space with parking access: 30 feet 
F.  Minimum space in all other cases: 20 feet 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 87.0701(b)) 
16.20.045 - Clear sight triangles. 
A.  Adequate visibility for vehicular and pedestrian traffic shall be provided at clear sight triangles at all ninety (90) degree angle intersections of public rights-of-way and private driveways, through the following measures: 
1.  There shall be no man made visual obstruction in clear sight triangles which exceed thirty-six (36) inches above grade level, except by no more than seven posts or columns each with a width no greater than twenty-six (26) inches within the clear sight triangle formed at a street intersection and no more than three posts or columns not to exceed twenty-six (26) inches in width be within the clear sight triangle at the intersection of a driveway and a street. These columns may include a decorative cap not to exceed thirty (30) inches in width. Open wire fences, including chain link, shall not exceed seventy-two (72) inches in height above grade within clear sight triangles. 
2.  There shall be no monument signs, walls, or non-open wire fences allowed within a clear sight triangle, which is higher than thirty-six (36) inches above grade except as permitted by Section 16.20.070. 
B.  Clear sight triangles are right triangles which are measured as follows: 
1.  The ninety (90) degree angle is formed by the intersection of either; 
a.  The intersection of the edges of two roadways as measured from the face of curb, top of asphalt dike, or if unpaved, the location of the curb or dike as per the standard street cross section of the right-of-way; or 
b.  The intersection of the edge of a private driveway or alley as measured from the face of curb, top of asphalt dike, or if unpaved, the location of the curb or dike as per the standard street cross section of the right-of-way of an intersecting roadway. 
2.  The two forty-five (45) degree angles of a clear sight triangle shall each be located as follows: 
a.  Roadway Intersections. Thirty (30) feet from the roadway intersection. 
b.  Private Driveway or Alleyway. Fifteen (15) feet from the intersection. 
3.  Diagrams: 

(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; Ord. 43 § 1, 1989; SBCC § 87.0701(c)) 
(Ord. No. 2009-09, § 3(Exh. A), 10-20-09) 
16.20.050 - Open animal enclosures. 
A.  Open animal enclosures shall be kept at least seventy (70) feet from buildings used for human habitation, public park, school, hospital or church buildings on adjoining lots or parcels, and shall maintain a clearance of at least five feet from interior side and rear property lines, and fifteen (15) feet from side street rights-of-way, excepting an alley or bridle path, unless the animals are confined by a five foot chain link fence or a five foot wood fence with horizontal members no more than six inches apart, which fence may be located on an interior side or rear lot line and fifteen (15) feet from a side street right-of-way. The area of human habitation shall not include cabanas, patios, attached or detached private garages or storage buildings. 
B.  Exception. Those parcels of land upon which a use of keeping and maintaining a horse, or horses, has been established prior to the date of construction of a building used for human habitation located on a neighboring parcel, regardless of any other provisions of this code, shall have applicable to them a nonconforming use right. Such nonconforming use right shall be only that a horse or horses may be kept at a minimum of fifty (50) feet from buildings used for human habitation on adjoining lots or parcels providing the following are complied with: 
1.  Shall maintain a clearance of at least five feet from interior side and rear property lines; 
2.  Shall maintain a clearance of fifteen (15) feet from side street rights-of-way excepting an alley or bridle path; 
3.  Fences shall maintain a height of at least five feet and shall be of such construction as to preclude the escape of animals within the enclosure. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 87.0701(d)) 
ARTICLE II. - HEIGHT REGULATIONS 

16.20.055 - Height increases. 
A.  Single household dwellings in land use districts or zone districts that impose a height limitation of thirty-five (35) feet or less may exceed the height limit by up to twenty-five (25) feet, when two side yards of at least twenty (20) feet are provided. 
B.  Public buildings in land use districts or zone districts that impose a height limitation of thirty-five (35) feet or less may exceed the thirty-five (35) foot height limit by up to twenty-five (25) feet when the required front, side and rear yards are increased an additional one foot in excess of minimum requirements for each four feet in height above thirty-five (35) feet. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 87.0401) 
16.20.060 - Special height limits. 
A.  Special height limits up to fifty (50) percent greater than that specified in the land use districts or zones may be granted for the following structures, by the building official, subject to department review: 
1.  Cupolas, domes, skylights and gables; 
2.  Ornamental towers and spheres; 
3.  Church steeples and towers; 
4.  Flag poles; 
5.  Birdhouses; 
6.  Residential chimneys, flues, smokestacks and enclosures; 
7.  Mechanical equipment and its screening; 
8.  Elevator housings; 
9.  Bulkheads and skylights; 
10.  Monuments; 
11.  Barns, silos, grain elevators, windmills and other farm buildings or structures in rural conservation or agricultural districts; 
12.  Noncommercial antennae up to sixty-five (65) feet in residential districts; 
13.  Fire or parapet walls; 
14.  Fire and hose towers; 
15.  Stairway housing; 
16.  Water tanks; 
17.  Cooling towers, gas holders, smokestacks or other structures in industrial districts which are required by permitted industrial processes; 
18.  Windmills and solar energy collectors in residential or commercial districts; 
19.  Water towers; 
20.  Observation and carillon towers; 
21.  Radio and television station towers; 
22.  Distribution and transmission cables and towers; 
23.  Outdoor theater screens; 
24.  Sign spires; 
25.  Penthouses; 
26.  Other roof structures and mechanical appurtenances similar to those listed above. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 87.0405) 
ARTICLE III. - PROJECTION INTO YARDS 

16.20.065 - General provisions. 
    All required yards or court areas shall be open and unobstructed from finished grade or from such other specified level at which the yard or court is required, to the sky, except for structures allowed in yard or court by the table in Section 16.20.075. The architectural projections listed in Section 16.20.075 must be attached to the principal building allowed on the lot. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 87.0801) 
(Ord. No. 2009-09, § 3(Exh. A), 10-20-09) 
16.20.070 - Clear areas. 
    The projections listed in the table in Section 16.20.075 may not, in any event, encroach on the following: 
A.  The clear sight triangle required at traffic intersections by Sections 16.20.045. 
B.  Within five feet of any yard in which the projection is not allowed. 
C.  Within five feet of any lot line (three feet for substandard lots). (Exception: Projections listed in items 1 and 6 in Section 16.20.075 may encroach to within three feet of a lot line.) 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 87.0805) 
(Ord. No. 2009-09, § 3(Exh. A), 10-20-09) 
(Ord. No. 2019-01 , § 3(Exh. A), 2-5-19) 
16.20.072 - Fences and walls. 
A.  Fences and walls within the front yard setback may be approved by the director of development services or his designee as provided in subsection B and shall require the approval of a plot plan. 
B.  Standards for Fences and Walls within the Front Yard Setback Area. The maximum height of a wall, fence or hedge shall be limited to a maximum of thirty-six (36) inches above grade when view-obscuring; however, non-view-obscuring estate type fences (i.e., those constructed of ornamental metal and masonry pillars) may be constructed in the front yard up to a maximum of six (6) feet above grade (Chain link with slats is not considered an ornamental fence, and is limited in height to thirty-six (36) inches unless on a lot at least fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet or larger). The director of development services or his designee may limit the height and alter the size and location of fences and pillars, based on the position of the residence as well as other factors, which may include the topography of the site, development on adjacent parcels, and legally located structures and utilities. In no event shall any view-obscuring portion of the estate type fence, other than pillars consistent with Section 16.20.045, exceed the maximum height of thirty-six (36) inches above grade. The maximum height of fences, walls, and hedges shall be as provided within the table below: 
Fencing Front and Street Side Yards Rear and Interior 
Side Yards Fences, screening, safety guard rails, walls Allowed Allowed Commercial and all zones other than Agricultural, Residential or Industrial 6 ft. max. height 10 ft. max. height Industrial  In accordance with Section 16.16.585 12 ft. max. height 12 ft. max. height Agricultural & Residential 3 ft. max. high solid and open wire with slats fencing. 4 ft. open wire max. height in the front yard of lots under 15,000 square feet in net area. (16.20.080 A & B) 
6 ft. max. height in front yards for open wire fencing without slats on lots at least 15,000 square feet in net area. 6 ft. high solid or open wire fencing with slats shall be allowed in the area of the front yard which overlaps the street side yard if the fence does not encroach within a required clear sight triangle. The fence may also extend across the front yard to connect to a logical portion of the residence to form a private yard as approved by the director of development services or his designee (chain link is not considered an ornamental fence and is limited in height as provided herein). 
6 ft. max. height within street side yards 6 ft. max. height  
C.  Fences, walls or yard enclosures (not including animal enclosures) shall be constructed of approved materials. Approved materials include masonry block, split face block, wrought iron, chain link, wood or plastic slats, vinyl fencing, and split rail. Any other material must be approved by the Director or designee as a fencing material. Fencing constructed of approved materials must still meet all other requirements of this code, including but not limited to design standards and permitting requirements. 
D.  All fencing shall be constructed to add to the overall look of the property, installed in a professional manner using treated materials to withstand the environment. In no case shall a fence be constructed of secondhand or castoff materials not originally designed for fencing. Examples of prohibited materials include, but are not limited to garage doors, corrugated metal scrap, mattresses, tires, car parts, and plywood less than five-eighths inches thick, plywood not of a grade approved by the director or designee, particle board, paper, visgueen plastic, plastic tarp, cloth or similar material. 
E.  Animal enclosures shall be constructed of materials treated and installed to withstand the environment, be appropriate for the keeping of animals, and be properly maintained. Animal enclosures shall meet all other requirements of this code. The materials listed as prohibited in Section D are also prohibited for use as an animal enclosure. 
(Ord. No. 2019-01 , § 3(Exh. A), 2-5-19) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2019-01 , § 3(Exh. A), adopted February 5, 2019, set out provisions intended for use as § 16.20.080. For purposes of classification, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as 16.20.072. 
16.20.075 - Table of projections into yards and courts. 
Facilities Front and Street 
Side Yards Interior Side Yards 
and Courts Rear Yard 1. Eaves; awnings, canopies, louvers and similar shading devices; sills, cornices, planting boxes and similar features; skylights, flues, chimneys, and bay windows and media alcoves not exceeding 7 ft. in width and not constituting floor area; similar architectural features (May encroach to within 3 feet from lot line.). Eaves, awnings, and canopies may 
encroach up to 10 ft., provided 
they are a minimum of 6 ft. from 
the right-of-way and do not extend 
over any portion of a septic 
system. 4 ft. for all others. 2 ft. 4 ft. 2. HVAC and other mechanical equipment, and pool/spa equipment. 4 ft. when screened 
from view 5 ft. from side 
property line 4 ft. 3. Attached patio, portico, or similar residential accessory structure having open, unwalled sides along not less than 50% of their perimeters. 10 ft. The structure shall be a 
minimum of 6 ft. from the 
right-of-way and shall not 
extend over any portion of a 
septic system. Not Allowed May occupy no more 
than 25% of 15 ft. 
rear yard. Minimum 
5 ft. separation from 
rear lot line. 4. Breezeways and similar roofed passageways projecting from a residential building. 10 ft. The structure shall be a 
minimum of 6 ft. from the 
right-of-way and shall not 
extend over any portion of a 
septic system. Allowed 2 ft. 5. Cantilevered decks; and cantilevered bay windows located above the first story of a building, if the total width of bay windows on any one story does not exceed 50% of the length of the wall containing them. 4 ft. 3 ft. 
(May encroach to 
within3 ft. 
of lot line.) 4 ft. 6. Roofed stairways, landings corridors and fire escapes that are enclosed. (May encroach to within 3 feet from lot line.) 5 ft. 3 ft. 10 ft. 7. Porches, platforms or stairways that are uncovered, or landings of average height not greater than 4 feet above required yard or court level, plus railings up to 4 feet high. 10 ft. The structure shall be a 
minimum of 6 ft. from the 
right-of-way and shall not 
extend over any portion of a 
septic system. 4 ft. 10 ft. 8. Open storage of boats, trailers, appliances and similar materials and temporary trash storage. (Not applicable to parking of commercial vehicles.) Not Allowed Not Allowed Allowed 9. Slides, clotheslines and similar equipment and radio or television masts or antennas. Not Allowed Not Allowed Allowed 10. Non-metallic Garages, carports, sheds and other detached, enclosed accessory buildings. Metal residential and agricultural accessory buildings, cargo containers, trailers without axles and similar storage structures are also regulated by Section 16.20.420, whichever is more restrictive. Not Allowed Not Allowed Allowed 
May occupy no 
more than 
25% of 
rear yard. 
Minimum 5 ft. 
separation 
from rear lot line. 11. Unroofed parking and loading areas. Commercial and Industrial. Includes parking of commercial vehicles in Residential and Agricultural Zones. (Per Residential Parking Standards.) Allowed Allowed in Side 
Yards. 
Not Allowed 
in Courts. Allowed 12. Covered, underground or partially excavated structures, such as garages, fallout shelters, wine cellars and basements. Allowed, provided that: 
1. The top surfaces of the facilities are landscaped or developed as patios or terraces without roofs. 
2. The facilities do not extend more than 30 inches above the average adjoining level of finished grade. 13. Permanently mounted barbeque equipment Permitted if screened within a 
porch or other approved 
accessory structure Min. 3 ft. from 
property line Min. 3 ft. from 
property line 14. Trees, shrubs and landscaping, other than dense hedges with a screening effect; sculpture and similar decorations; flagpoles; unroofed paving; driveways; walkways; and utility poles and lines. Allowed Allowed Allowed 15. Signs Allowed subject to Sign Standards as specified in the applicable 
zone/land use district and/or Chapter 16.36. 16. Swimming pools Not allowed in front 
yards. Allowed in 
street side yards no 
closer than 5 ft. to 
property line. 5 ft. from side 
property line 5 ft. from rear 
property line 17. Residential and agricultural accessory structures, including metal accessory structures (not metal buildings) and other accessory structures not enumerated elsewhere in this table Not allowed Not allowed Allowed  
(Ord. 2006-23 § 5 (Exh. A), 2006; Ord. 2001-09 Exh. A (part), 2001: Ord. 2001-14 § 2, 2001; Ord. 250 Exh. A (part), 1998; Ord. 237 § 5, 1996; Ord. 43 § 2, 1989; SBCC § 87.0810) 
(Ord. No. 2009-09, § 3(Exh. A), 10-20-09) 
ARTICLE IV. - PARKING AND LOADING STANDARDS[13] 

Footnotes: 
--- (13) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2010-07, § 3(Exh. A), adopted Oct. 5, 2010, amended Art. IV, in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. IV, §§ 16.20.077-16.20.120, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. 135, Exh. A (Art. 3, §§ 1-5), adopted 1992; Ord. 238, § 4(D), adopted 1996; Ord. 250, Exh. A(part), adopted 1998; and Ord. 2007-15, § 5(Exh. A)(part), adopted 2007. 

16.20.077 - Parking standards of calculation. 
A.  When the minimum number of parking spaces required is based upon building area, the parking formula within this chapter shall be calculated using the gross building floor area in square feet. The gross building floor area is defined as the entire area of the building(s) within the exterior building walls, inclusive of the wall thickness. The area within a mezzanine, as defined by the building code, used solely for storage shall not be included in parking calculations. 
B.  If the calculation of required parking spaces results in a fractional number, that number shall be rounded to the nearest whole number with 0.5 rounded up to the next whole number. 
C.  A project site for purposes of the parking ordinance is defined as the gross site acreage. Gross site acreage is defined as the net property site acreage in addition to the area from the property line to the centerline of all public rights-of-way and alleys across the site frontage. The project site shall be defined as the net developed site acreage if less than seventy-five (75) percent of the site area is to be developed. The net developed site acreage shall also be used in phased projects, requiring that a larger proportion of the required parking spaces be provided earlier during the project's development. A project adjacent to an existing project shall not be considered part of the adjacent project unless irrevocable reciprocal access and parking easements between the two sites are executed and coordination of site design is accomplished to city standards. This includes but is not limited to use of shared driveways and drive aisles and compliance with the standards within Sections 16.16.490, 16.16.495, 16.16.500, and 16.16.505. 
(Ord. No. 2010-07, § 3(Exh. A), 10-5-10) 
16.20.080 - Parking requirements. 
    Adequate parking shall be provided on-site for each use, with minimum parking requirements established per Tables 16.20.080 (A) and 16.20.080 (B). Where deemed appropriate by the reviewing authority, additional parking may be required. 
Table 16.20.080 (A) 
Residential Parking Requirements 
Use Parking Required Special Considerations Single-family detached A bonus room, den, library, recreation room, study, or similar habitable room which functionally can be used as a bedroom or may be converted to a bedroom shall be considered to be a bedroom for purposes of this section. 1-4 bedrooms 2-car garage 5 or more bedrooms 3-car garage Model home complex 3 spaces/model Condominiums and townhomes Guest parking spaces shall be designated and dispersed throughout the development. Guest parking shall be handled in the same manner for multiple-family units and mobile home parks. At unit 2-car garage Guest parking 0.25 spaces/unit Multiple-family A minimum of one space per unit is to be covered. Each space shall contain a minimum of 100 cubic feet of lockable storage space per unit. As an alternative, the required storage may be provided at the dwelling unit, accessible from the outside on a private patio or balcony for the unit. Storage area is not required if each unit is served by an enclosed garage in lieu of a carport. All-age units Studio 1.25 spaces/unit 1 bedroom 1.75 spaces/unit 2 or more bedrooms 2.25 spaces/unit Senior units Studio 1.25 spaces/unit 1 bedroom 1.50 spaces/unit 2 or more bedrooms 1.75 spaces/unit Mixed-use developments Residential use(s) Use the applicable residential parking standard above Non-residential use(s) Use three-fourths of the applicable parking standard for all non-residential uses in accordance with Table 16.20.080(B) Pedestrian connections will be required within the project and the parking spaces for the residential development reserved for the residents. Mobile home park A minimum of two spaces, which may be in tandem are required. One of the spaces shall be within a garage or carport. At unit 2.00 spaces/unit Guest parking 1.00 space/5 units RV parking 1.00 space/5 units Group homes, boarding homes, and large residential care facilities 3 spaces + 1 space/sleeping room  
Table 16.20.080 (B) 
Commercial and Industrial Parking Requirements 
Use Parking Required Special Considerations Retail and office (general) single-use or multi-tenant developments Consult Section 16.20.077(C) for defining site acreage. The number of parking spaces required is per 1,000 square feet of gross building floor area. Consult Section 16.20.077(A) for defining gross building floor area. The number of parking spaces for a restaurant or other use listed within this table which requires a higher parking ratio than the retail and office (general) standard shall be calculated at the parking standard for that use if it is not part of a multi-tenant retail building or on a pad within a center. Likewise, a single-use medical/dental building on a single parcel or multi-tenant center exclusively for medical/dental is required 5.00 spaces/1,000 square feet gross floor area. A restaurant, single-tenant medical or other use which requires a higher parking ratio occupying over one-fourth of the total gross building floor area of the development shall be subject to the higher parking ratio. Less than 1.0-acre sites 5.00 spaces/1,000 1.0 to 9.9-acre sites 4.00 spaces/1,000 10.0-acre and larger sites 3.33 spaces/1,000 Furniture, major 
appliance 2.00 spaces/1,000 Medical/dental offices 5.00 spaces/1,000 An 8-foot wide by 36-foot long vehicle drop-off lane shall be provided in front of the building(s) on properties 150 feet or wider. Restaurants, bars, 
eateries 10.00 spaces/1,000 A restaurant or use which sells food for takeout or delivery only shall be subject to the retail and office (general) parking requirements. Sales/service uses Car and light truck sales/rental 1.00 space/1,000 vehicle display area + 2.50 spaces/1,000 showroom area + 4.00 spaces/1,000 office and shop area Diesel truck (excluding light truck) sales/rental 0.10 space/vehicle display area + 2.50 spaces/1,000 showroom area + 4.00 spaces/1,000 office area Recreational vehicle (RV) sales/rental 0.20 space/1,000 vehicle display area + 2.50 spaces/1,000 showroom area + 4.00 spaces/1,000 office area Automobile, RV, and diesel truck repair, plumbing and other service-oriented uses 3 spaces/service bay + 4.00 spaces/1,000 non-service bay area Car and truck wash Automated/hand 10 spaces Self-service carwash 2 spaces/wash stall Open air retail sales nurseries/equipment 1.00 space/5,000 sales and display area (min. 6 spaces) Hotels, motels Less than 50 rooms 1.1 spaces/room 50 rooms and over 1.1 spaces/room + RV parking (5% of total) Entertainment uses Bowling alleys 5 spaces/lane Commercial stable 1 space/5 horses Commercial swimming pools/skating rinks 4.00 spaces/1,000 Golf courses Regulation course 5 spaces/hole Additional parking spaces shall not be required for a driving range within a regulation course. Driving range 1 space/tee Miniature golf 4 spaces/hole Gyms, health clubs, dance studios, lodge halls, clubs 6.67 spaces/1,000 Auditoriums, churches, chapels, mortuaries, theatres, rodeo and other similar uses 1 space/4 seats or 30.00 spaces/1,000 assembly area A seat is defined as 18 lineal inches on a bench. The 30.00 spaces/assembly area parking ratio is to be used only when an assembly area does not contain fixed seating. Churches require 1 space for each classroom and secondary assembly area in addition to the parking required for the sanctuary. Convalescent/group home 1 space/3 beds Hospital 1.75 spaces/bed Library, museum 2.00 spaces/1,000 Parks Active recreation areas 20 spaces/acre Tennis or racquetball 3 spaces/court Passive recreation areas 10 spaces/acre Government administrative offices 5.00 spaces/1,000 These are government facilities frequented by the public; not for fire and police stations and other public uses not frequented by the public. Public uses not frequented by the public (fire/police stations) 2.00 spaces/1,000 0.5 spaces/1,000 of the 2.0 spaces/1,000 shall be provided for the public. Public utility facilities 2.00 spaces/1,000 A minimum of two parking spaces shall be provided. Schools Schools (private) Pre-school/day care 1 space/employee + 1 space/10 children The number of spaces is based upon the facility's maximum student capacity. Grades K thru 8th 10 spaces + 2/classroom Grades 9th and above 10 spaces + 6/classroom Trade/business schools 1 space/employee + 1 space/3 students Industrial uses Industrial (nonspecific) 2.00 spaces/1,000 The number of parking spaces required is per 1,000 square feet of gross building floor area. Consult Section 16.20.077(A) for defining gross building floor area. Industrial storage/salvage 0.40 spaces/1,000 Warehouse Less than 10,000 sq. ft. 2.00 spaces/1,000 10,000 sq. ft. and over 20 spaces + 0.40 space/ 1,000 over 10,000 sq. ft. Mini-storage 6 spaces  
(Ord. 2007-15 § 5 (Exh. A) (part), 2007: Ord. 135 Exh. A (Art. 3 § 1), 1992) 
(Ord. No. 2010-07, § 3(Exh. A), 10-5-10) 
16.20.085 - Parking standards. 
A.  The required parking spaces shall be located on the same site with the main use or building except as provided herein. Property within the ultimate right-of-way of a street or highway shall not be used to provide required parking or loading facilities. 
B.  On-site parking shall be restricted to those areas which are paved and designated for vehicle parking unless authorized through an approved temporary special event, site plan review or conditional use permit. 
C.  When the occupancy or use of any premises is changed to a different use, parking to meet the requirements of Section 16.20.080 shall be provided for the new use or occupancy unless the use is similar to a legally established use and the prior use did not abandon the site for more than six months. A period of one year applies for properties within the Main Street and Freeway Corridor Specific Plan. 
D.  When the occupancy or use of any premises is altered, enlarged, expanded or intensified, additional parking to meet the requirements of Section 16.20.080 shall be provided for the additional area and/or use. 
E.  No required parking space or loading area shall be discontinued, reduced or altered in any manner below the requirements established in this article unless replacement parking facilities are provided in accordance with Chapter 16.20. 
F.  Where two or more uses are located in a single building or a single premises, required parking shall be provided for each specific use except as part of a mixed-use development as approved by a site plan review or conditional use permit. 
G.  Shared parking may be approved by the reviewing authority; provided, that times of operation of the involved businesses are not the same, as specified herein. 
1.  Up to fifty (50) percent of the parking facilities required by this article for a use considered to be primarily a daytime use may be provided by a use considered to be primarily a nighttime use; up to fifty (50) percent of the parking facilities required by this article for a use considered to be primarily a nighttime or Sunday use may be provided by a use considered to be primarily a daytime use; provided, that such reciprocal parking area shall be subject to conditions as set forth in subsection (G)(3) of this section. 
2.  The following uses are typical daytime uses: banks, business and professional offices, clothing or repair or service shops, and similar uses. The following uses are typical of nighttime and/or Sunday uses: auditoriums, fraternal lodges, churches and theaters. The reviewing authority shall determine the parking requirements of the uses proposed for joint parking. 
3.  Conditions Required for Joint Use. 
a.  A building or use for which application is being made for authority to utilize the existing off-street parking facilities provided by another building or use, shall be located within one hundred fifty (150) feet of such parking facilities and shall be authorized as part of a recorded irrevocable reciprocal access and parking agreement. 
b.  The applicant shall provide written documentation as approved by the reviewing authority that there will be no substantial conflict in the principal operating hours for the buildings or uses for which the joint use of off-street parking facilities is proposed. 
c.  Parties concerned in the joint use of off-street parking facilities shall provide evidence of agreement for such joint use by a proper legal instrument approved by the city attorney as to form and content. 
H.  Parking Spaces. Each full-sized off-street parking space shall have dimensions not less than nine feet in width and eighteen (18) feet in length, except parallel parking stalls which shall be a minimum of eight feet in width and twenty-four (24) feet in length. A maximum of twenty-five (25) percent of the total number of parking spaces provided may be a minimum of eight feet, six inches in width and eighteen (18) feet in length. These reduced-width spaces should not be located in close proximity to a primary building entrance(s). These reduced-width spaces may be provided at the end(s) of a row(s) of nine-foot-wide spaces as needed due to site constraints. However, these spaces shall not be alternated with nine-foot-wide spaces within an individual row(s) of spaces. 
I.  Parking spaces may overhang sidewalks and landscaped areas by up to two feet, provided the encroachment does not reduce a required handicapped accessible path of travel below four feet in width and landscaping does not interfere with the allowed encroachment. 
J.  Those areas designated for use by motorcycles shall consist of a minimum usable area of fifty-six (56) square feet. 
K.  Parking spaces for recreational vehicles, when required, shall measure a minimum of ten feet by thirty (30) feet. Number and location shall be approved by the reviewing authority. 
L.  A portion of the required parking spaces for medical office uses and government facilities may be designated for employees. The number and location shall be approved by the reviewing authority. 
M.  Handicapped parking shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of state law. 
N.  Individual parking stalls shall be legibly marked off on the pavement by means of painting, texture, or contrasting materials as approved by the reviewing authority. Arrows painted on paving shall dictate direction of traffic flow. Parking stall striping, directional arrows and parking stall identification shall meet the following standards: 
1.  All parking stalls shall be clearly striped and permanently maintained with four-inch-wide double or hairpin lines on the surface of the parking facility, with the two lines located an equal distance of nine inches on either side of the stall sidelines as shown on Figure 1; 
2.  All aisles, entrances and exits shall be clearly marked with directional arrows painted on the parking surface. 
3.  All parking space rows shall be separated from drive aisles by landscaped areas at least four feet in width as shown in Figure 4. In addition, a minimum one foot wide concrete sidewalk shall be provided adjacent to the parking space to allow drivers and passengers to exit the vehicle without stepping into landscaped areas as shown on Figure 2. 
O.  Entryways to parking areas shall be well-defined and recognizable with adequate lighting and signage provided to facilitate the traffic flow. All portions of parking areas shall be illuminated at minimum 0.1 foot-candle intensity. A maximum illumination of 0.5 foot-candles at the property lines abutting a street or residentially designated property is allowed. 
P.  Parking and maneuvering areas shall be so arranged that any vehicle entering the public right-of-way must do so traveling in a forward direction. The parking area shall be designed so that a car entering the parking area shall not be required to enter a street to move from one location to any other location within the parking area or premises or make an abrupt turn upon entering the site. 
Q.  Parking areas shall be designed so as to prevent vehicles from maneuvering within the first twenty (20) feet of a vehicular entrance as measured from the curb as shown on Figure 2. 
R.  Minimum aisle widths for two-way traffic shall be twenty-six (26) feet as shown in Figure 3. In areas commonly used by oversized vehicles, such as delivery areas and loading zones, the minimum aisle width shall be thirty (30) feet. 
S.  Minimum aisle widths for one-way traffic shall be in accordance with Figure 3; unless adjacent to loading areas, in which case a sixteen-foot drive aisle width is required; or if wider access is required by the fire department. 
T.  The required off-street parking and loading areas and access drives shall be surfaced per specifications of the reviewing authority. Parking and loading facilities shall be surfaced and maintained with asphaltic, concrete, or other permanent, impervious surfacing material. Alternate surface material may be considered by the reviewing authority, if shown that such material will not cause adverse effects and that it will remain in a usable condition. 
U.  All parking and loading facilities shall be graded and provided with permanent storm drainage facilities. Surfacing, curbing, and drainage improvements shall be sufficient to preclude free flow of water onto adjacent properties or public streets or alleys, and to preclude standing pools of water within the parking facility, unless otherwise approved by the reviewing authority. 
V.  Head-in parking, which would necessitate full frontage access to the street or highway, shall not be permitted. 
W.  Parking areas shall be designed to facilitate sweeping and reduce trash buildup; wheel stops or a minimum two-foot wide raised sidewalk in accordance with Figure 1 shall be provided as approved by the reviewing authority. 
Figure 1

Figure 2

Figure 3

Figure 4

X.  Visitor parking areas shall be provided near visitor entrances. Where appropriate, visitor drop-off zones shall be provided near visitor entrances. 
Y.  Pedestrian walkways shall be provided to connect parking areas to destination points. Walkways shall be paved, lighted and have adequate signage to direct pedestrian traffic. 
Z.  Lights shall be provided to illuminate parking facilities pursuant to the provisions of this code. 
AA.  Areas used for primary circulation, or for frequent idling of vehicle engines, or for loading activities, shall be designed and located to minimize impacts on adjoining properties, including provisions for screening or sound baffling. 
BB.  Parking structures shall be permitted. Exterior design shall be architecturally compatible with the main building. The parking structure should merge with or extend from the main building, rather than be an isolated structure. Automobiles should be screened to a height of three feet, six inches to four feet on each level, and the space remaining above the screening element, up to the ceiling of the next floor, shall remain open and unobstructed. Facades should be multi-textured or have other architectural relief. 
    Where the height of the structure is limited by other sections of the development code, or other adopted city ordinance, resolution or code, one additional floor or story may be allowed subject to approval of the reviewing authority under the following conditions: 
1.  At least seventy-five (75) percent of the ground floor is used for off-street parking, access and maneuvering; 
2.  Use of the remaining ground floor area is limited to manager's offices, elevators, service facilities, and building access facilities including entrance foyer or lobby; 
3.  Ground floor parking shall be screened, insofar as practical, from surrounding uses and from public view. 
CC.  Vehicle Parking. No person shall park or permit the parking of a vehicle on private property for the purpose of selling or offering the vehicle for sale, unless this activity is the primary permitted use on the property and all licenses and permits have first been obtained and all regulatory requirements have first been satisfied. 
    Exception: Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary, a property owner or tenant in lawful possession thereof, may park a vehicle for sale on his or her property; provided that, at all times the vehicle is parked and offered for sale on the property, under the following conditions: 
1.  The owner or tenant is actually occupying said property; 
2.  The vehicle which is offered for sale is owned by and where applicable, registered to the property owner or tenant with the California Department of Motor Vehicles or other appropriate agency; 
3.  The activity of offering the vehicle for sale and/or its location on the property does not violate any other section of the Hesperia Municipal Code, including, without limitation, front and side yard setback requirements; 
4.  No more than one vehicle is offered for sale on the property at any one time. 
DD.  Definitions. The following words and phrases shall have the meanings as ascribed to them by this section: 
    "Person" as used in this section means and includes, but is not limited to, any individual, partnership, firm, association, corporations, joint venture, or legal entity or any combination thereof. 
    "Sale" is defined to include the activities of selling, leasing, renting or hiring out of any vehicle. 
    "Vehicle" as used in this section means a device by which any person or property may be propelled, moved, or drawn upon a highway, excepting a device moved exclusively by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
    This includes, without limitation, any automobile, truck, trailer, motorcycle, semi-trailer, moped, camper, commercial or recreational vehicles. "Vehicle" as used herein also means to include, without limitation, boats of any kind, camper shells, and any portable commercial or recreational equipment which is attached to, transported by or capable of being transported, upon a highway by another vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 2010-07, § 3(Exh. A), 10-5-10) 
16.20.090 - Residential parking standards. 
    In addition to those standards contained in Section 16.20.085 of this article, the following design standards shall apply to residential districts and developments: 
A.  Covered off-street parking spaces in a garage or carport shall be a minimum of nine feet in width and nineteen (19) feet in depth of unobstructed area provided for parking purposes. A fully enclosed two-car garage shall have a minimum interior size of nineteen (19) feet in width and nineteen (19) feet in depth. The required minimum measurements may not include the exterior walls or supports of the structure. 
B.  Driveways providing access to garages, carports and parking areas serving two or less dwelling units shall be a minimum of twelve (12) feet in width. When an accessory garage is proposed, which is required for either the principal residence or a second dwelling unit, the driveway requirements shall be as follows: 
1.  For developed residential lots less than two acres in size, the driveway providing access to an accessory garage shall be surfaced with asphalt paving a minimum of two inches in thickness or concrete with a minimum thickness of three and one-half inches or other permanent, impervious surfacing material per the specifications of the reviewing authority. An alternate surface material may be considered by the reviewing authority, if shown that such material will not cause adverse effects and that it will remain in a usable condition. 
2.  For developed residential lots greater than two acres in size which front upon an unpaved street, the driveway providing access to an accessory garage shall be dust-proofed with either slag, gravel, or similar surface material as approved by the reviewing authority, if shown that such material will not cause adverse effects and that it will remain in a usable condition. 
C.  Driveways providing access to garages, carports, and open parking spaces serving three or more dwelling units shall be a minimum of thirteen (13) feet in width for one-way traffic, and twenty-six (26) feet for two-way traffic. Where garages or carports are located on both sides of the driveway, a thirty-foot wide accessway between garage or carport spaces for two-way traffic shall be provided. 
D.  Driveways which are separate from the right-of-way or common drive aisle and which provide access to garages shall be a minimum length of twenty (20) feet, excluding that portion within the public right-of-way or common drive aisle. 
E.  No property owner shall sublease, subrent or otherwise make available to residents of other properties, the off-street parking spaces required by this article, except for parking of commercial vehicles, as defined in Section 16.20.090(H). 
F.  All required covered off-street parking spaces shall be located so as to be conveniently accessible to the dwelling unit served by such parking space, not to exceed one hundred fifty (150) feet or as approved by the reviewing authority. 
G.  All recreational vehicle parking and/or storage areas located within the front yard as allowed by the development code, or other applicable adopted city ordinance, resolution, or code shall be surfaced with either concrete, asphalt, gravel, or crushed rock. Recreational vehicles shall not be stored in the public right-of-way. "Stored" is defined as being parked in the public right-of-way for more than seventy-two (72) hours. 
H.  Commercial Vehicle Parking in Residential and Agricultural Areas. 
1.  Definitions. 
a.  This subsection shall apply to commercial vehicles having a manufacturer's gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR) of twenty-six thousand (26,000) pounds, or more, parked or left standing in residential or agricultural areas. 
b.  For purposes of this subsection, and unless otherwise stated, a truck shall be considered to be one truck or tractor and up to two trailers (Note: a set of double trailers is considered as one trailer). 
2.  Parking Requirements in General. 
a.  No commercial vehicle shall be left to idle for longer than five minutes, nor blow air horns. 
b.  No commercial vehicle shall have cargo transferred from such commercial vehicle to another. 
c.  No refrigeration unit on any commercial vehicle shall be operated within three hundred (300) feet of any inhabited place, except with the consent of the person in charge of each such inhabited place. 
d.  Commercial vehicles used for the transportation of hazardous waste, materials, or garbage, or which harbor vermin or pestilence, or which emit noxious or noisome odors, shall not be parked or stored in residential or agricultural areas. 
3.  Street Parking. 
a.  It shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave standing on any public street, including within the public right-of-way, any commercial vehicle. 
    Exceptions: 
i.  During the first twenty-four (24) hours during which the vehicle is mechanically disabled. 
ii.  While a commercial vehicle is making a pick-up or delivery of materials or goods to or from any building or site. 
b.  No commercial vehicle shall be parked or left standing on any street or right-of-way unless it is a minimum of twelve (12) feet from the centerline of the street, or twelve (12) feet per lane, if more than one lane, and under no circumstances parked in any travel lanes. 
c.  No commercial vehicle shall be parked or left standing within one hundred (100) feet of any street intersection. 
4.  Parking on Private Property. 
a.  One commercial vehicle may be parked on the operator's lot if such lot is at least eighteen thousand (18,000) square feet in area. 
b.  One additional commercial vehicle, up to a maximum of three such vehicles, may be parked on the operator's lot for each additional one-half acre of land. 
c.  No commercial vehicle shall be parked or left standing unless all parts of such vehicle are at least fifteen (15) feet from houses on adjacent properties. 
d.  A commercial vehicle may be parked in the driveway of the operator's lot, provided that such vehicle is fully on private property so as not to obstruct the view on the public street. 
e.  Storage of trailers in front setback areas is prohibited. 
f.  Parking of commercial vehicles on property immediately adjacent to and with the same street frontage as an operator's residential property is permitted when the adjacent property is under the same ownership, or with the express written consent of the property owner. 
I.  A maximum of two of each type of accessory vehicle, up to a maximum of six accessory vehicles, may be stored outside of a building on any residentially or agriculturally zoned property. No accessory vehicle shall be stored on a residentially or agriculturally zoned property unless a lawfully established and occupied residence exists on the property. Accessory vehicles shall not be stored between the front property line and the primary residential structure, except within the driveway. In addition, each accessory vehicle shall be at least fifteen (15) feet from the primary residential structure on adjacent properties and at least ten feet behind the street side yard property line. In no event shall an accessory vehicle be used as a dwelling unit. 
(Ord. No. 2010-07, § 3(Exh. A), 10-5-10; Ord. No. 2012-12, § 3(Exh. A), 7-3-12) 
16.20.095 - Nonresidential parking standards. 
A.  Motorcycles. Facilities with twenty-five (25) or more parking spaces shall provide at least one designated parking area for use by motorcycles. Developments with over one hundred (100) spaces shall provide motorcycle parking at the rate of one percent. Areas delineated for use by motorcycles shall meet standards set forth in Section 16.20.085(J). 
B.  Bicycles. Commercial and office areas may provide locking facilities for bicycle parking at any location convenient to the facility for which they are designated. Whenever possible, weatherproofing or facility covering should be used. 
C.  Transportation Plans. Facilities may decrease their required number of parking spaces, subject to the adoption by the reviewing authority of an approved transportation management plan supplied by the applicant which may include, but is not limited to, provisions for mass transit, car pooling, staggered work hours, etc. 
D.  Where nonresidential parking areas abut residential land use districts, they shall be screened pursuant to the Development Code. 
E.  Parking on Undeveloped Lots in Nonresidential Areas. It is unlawful for commercial vehicles, passenger cars, light trucks, or any other type of vehicle to be located on vacant, nonresidential lots. This prohibition applies whether vehicles are parked to allow the drivers to patronize a business or make a pick-up or delivery of materials or goods to or from any building or site, are displayed for sale on a lot owned by the registered vehicle owner, or any other purpose except: 
i.  As part of an approved temporary use permit for the sale of Christmas trees or pumpkins, a circus or carnival, or other use authorized by Section 16.12.382. 
ii.  A use authorized by an approved site plan review or conditional use permit. 
iii.  During development of the site pursuant to approved building and grading permits. 
F.  Street Parking in Nonresidential Areas. 
1.  It shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave standing on any public street, including within the public right-of-way, any commercial vehicle, except: 
i.  During the first twenty-four (24) hours during which the vehicle is mechanically disabled. 
ii.  While a commercial vehicle is making a pick-up or delivery of materials or goods to or from any building or site, provided parking is allowed within the street. 
iii.  No commercial vehicle shall be parked or left standing on any street or right-of-way unless it is a minimum of twelve (12) feet from the centerline of the street, or twelve (12) feet per lane, if more than one lane, and under no circumstances parked in any travel lanes. 
iv.  No commercial vehicle shall be parked or left standing within one hundred (100) feet of any street intersection. 
a.  The city manager or designee is authorized to issue permits for exceptional circumstances based on criteria developed by the city council and adopted by resolution, to the public street parking requirements in this subsection under the terms and conditions set forth below: 
b.  Any bona fide resident of the city who is an operator of a commercial vehicle may apply to the city manager, or designee thereof, for a permit exempting such commercial vehicle from the provisions of this subsection. The permit shall be in such form as may be approved by the city manager. Application for such a permit shall be made on a form approved by, and subject to such verification as may be required by the city manager, and shall be accompanied by such fee as may be prescribed by resolution of the city council. 
c.  Each permit issued shall be valid for a period of one year. Applications for renewal of a permit shall be submitted to the city manager at least ten days prior to the expiration date of the then current permit. Each application for a renewal of a permit hereunder shall be accompanied by such fee as fixed by resolution of the city council. 
d.  Each permit issued shall be nontransferable and shall apply only to the particular vehicle or vehicles described in the application. Each person receiving a permit hereunder shall attach the permit sticker to the inside of the driver's side window or wind wing. The permit sticker shall be in such form as is approved by the city manager and police chief. 
e.  Vehicles for which permits have been issued, and upon which permit tags are properly affixed as required by this subsection may be parked within the public right-of-way in accordance with the provisions of this subsection. 
f.  A parking permit issued hereunder may be revoked for good cause following a hearing conducted by the city manager. In such instance, written notice of the city manager's intent to revoke the permit shall be provided to the affected permittee by first class mail, sent to the address set forth in the permittee's application, and a hearing before the city manager shall be scheduled to occur within fifteen (15) days. At the conclusion of such hearing, the city manager may take no action, revoke the permit, or attach conditions to the permit which, if not satisfied, will cause the permit to be deemed revoked; provided, no less than five (5) days' prior written notice of revocation is given to the permittee at the address specified above. The city manager's decision shall be final. For purposes of this subsection, "good cause" includes, but is not limited to, violation by the permittee of any provision of this article or any other provision of law pertaining to the parking of vehicles, occurring in connection with use of the permitted commercial vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 2010-07, § 3(Exh. A), 10-5-10; Ord. No. 2011-07, 8-2-11; Ord. No. 2012-12, § 3(Exh. A), 7-3-12) 
16.20.100 - Loading areas. 
A.  All hospitals, institutions, hotels, commercial and industrial uses shall provide loading spaces not less than ten feet in width, twenty (20) feet in length, and fourteen (14) feet in height, except for those spaces intended for use by tractor trailers which shall be a minimum of twelve (12) feet in width, forty-five (45) feet in length and fourteen (14) feet in height, as follows: 
Square Feet of Building Area 
(Gross Floor Area) Loading Spaces 
Required Commercial Buildings 6,000-15,000 1 15,001-45,000 2 45,001-75,000 3 75,001-105,000 4 105,001 and over 5 Industrial Buildings 3,500-40,000l 1 40,001-80,000 2 80,001-120,000 3 120,001-160,000 4 160,001 and over 5 Hospitals and Institutions 20,000 and under 1 20,001-50,000 2 50,001-80,000 3 80,001-110,000 4 Hotels and Offices Buildings 3,500-50,000 1 50,001-100,000 2 100,001 and over 3  
B.  All loading and delivery facilities shall be situated to ensure that all loading and unloading takes place on-site and in no case within adjacent public rights-of-way, or other traffic areas on-site. 
C.  Wherever possible, sites shall be designed so that parking areas are separate from loading areas. 
D.  Backing of trucks from the public right-of-way onto a site for loading shall be allowed only at the ends of cul-de-sac streets, except in cases where it is determined by the reviewing authority that site constraints exist and where a safe alternative is provided. 
E.  Loading facilities shall be located in the rear and interior side yard areas wherever possible. 
F.  Any door in a building where such door abuts a vehicular area and provides an opening of eight feet by eight feet or larger, shall be considered to be a loading door. No loading door or loading bay shall face a public right-of-way, unless such loading facilities are adequately screened from public view by use of walling, landscaping or other means approved by the reviewing authority. 
G.  For sites within view of freeways or major arterials, loading areas should be oriented away from public view from the freeway or major arterials. 
H.  Loading areas shall be designed as an integral part of the building's architecture. 
I.  Concrete pads shall be required at all loading bays. 
J.  Truck terminals or yards and motor vehicle storage/impound facilities or other uses which do not require paving, shall be provided at the minimum with an approved dust-binding agent, slag, crushed rock or the equivalent thereof, as approved by the reviewing authority. 
(Ord. No. 2010-07, § 3(Exh. A), 10-5-10) 
16.20.120 - Civil remedies. 
    The violation of any of the provisions of this article shall constitute a nuisance and may be abated by the city through civil process by means of restraining order, preliminary or permanent injunction or in any other manner provided by law for the abatement of such nuisances. 
(Ord. No. 2010-07, § 3(Exh. A), 10-5-10) 
ARTICLE V. - GENERAL PERFORMANCE STANDARDS 

16.20.125 - Noise. 
A.  Noise Measurement. Noise will be measured with a sound level meter, which meets the standards of the American National Standards Institute (ANSI Section S1.4-1979, Type 1 or Type 2). Noise levels shall be measured using the "A" weighted sound pressure level scale in decibels (ref. pressure = 20 micro-newtons per meter squared). The unit of measure shall be designated as dB(A). The building official shall be the noise control officer. 
B.  Noise Standards. 
1.  The following table describes the noise standard for emanations from any source, as it affects adjacent properties: 
NOISE STANDARDS 
Affected Land Use 
(Receiving Noise) Maximum 
Noise Level Time Period A-1, A-2, R-1, R-3 and RR Zone Districts 55 dB(A) 10:00 p.m. - 7:00 a.m. A-1, A-2, R-1, R-3 and RR Zone Districts 60 dB(A)* 7:00 a.m. - 10:00 p.m. C-1, C-2, C-3, C-4, C-R, AP, and P-I Zone Districts 65 dB(A)* Anytime I-1 and I-2 Zone Districts 70 dB(A)* Anytime  
* Due to wind noise, the maximum permissible noise level may be adjusted so that it is no greater than five dB(A) above the ambient noise level. 
2.  No person shall operate or cause to be operated any source of sound at any location or allow the creation of any noise on property owned, leased, occupied or otherwise controlled by such person, which causes the noise level, when measured on any other property, either incorporated or unincorporated, to exceed: 
a.  The noise standard for that receiving land use (as specified in subsection (B)(1) of this section) for a cumulative period of more than thirty (30) minutes in any hour; or 
b.  The noise standard plus five dB(A) for a cumulative period of more than fifteen (15) minutes in any hour; or 
c.  The noise standard plus ten dB(A) for a cumulative period of more than five minutes in any hour; or 
d.  The noise standard plus fifteen (15) dB(A) for a cumulative period of more than one minute in any hour; or 
e.  The noise standard plus twenty (20) dB(A) for any period of time. 
C.  If the measured ambient level exceeds any of the first four noise limit categories above, the allowable noise exposure standard shall be increased to reflect the ambient noise level. If the ambient noise level exceeds the fifth noise limit category, the maximum allowable noise level under this category shall be increased to reflect the maximum ambient noise level. 
D.  If the alleged offense consists entirely of impact noise or simple tone noise, each of the noise levels in subsection (B)(1) of this section shall be reduced by five dB(A). 
E.  Exempt Noises. The following sources of noise are exempt: 
1.  Motor vehicles not under the control of the industrial use; 
2.  Emergency equipment, vehicles and devices; 
3.  Temporary construction, repair, or demolition activities between seven a.m. and seven p.m. except Sundays and federal holidays. 
(Ord. 2002-07 Exh. A, 2002; Amended during 1997 codification; Ord. 75 § 2 (part), 1990; SBCC § 87.1305) 
16.20.130 - Vibration. 
A.  Vibration Standard. No ground vibration shall be allowed which can be felt without the aid of instruments at or beyond the lot line; nor will any vibration be permitted which produces a particle velocity greater than or equal to 0.2 inches per second measured at or beyond the lot line. 
B.  Vibration Measurement. Vibration velocity shall be measured with a seismograph or other instrument capable of measuring and recording displacement and frequency, particle velocity or acceleration. Readings are to be made at points of maximum vibration along any lot line next to a residential or commercial district or a community industrial lot. 
C.  Exempt Vibrations. The following sources of vibration are not regulated by this code: 
1.  Motor vehicles not under the control of the industrial use; 
2.  Temporary construction, maintenance or demolition activities between seven a.m. and seven p.m. except Sundays and federal holidays. 
(SBCC § 87.1310) 
16.20.135 - Glare. 
A.  Glare levels shall be measured with a photoelectric photometer, following the standard spectral luminous efficiency curve adopted by the International Commission on Illumination. 
B.  Any activity producing glare in a community industrial or regional industrial district shall be carried on so that direct or indirect light from the source shall not cause glare above 0.5 footcandles when measured in a residential district or lot. 
(Amended during 1997 codification; SBCC § 87.1320) 
16.20.140 - Electrical disturbances. 
    No activity or land use shall cause electrical disturbance that adversely affects persons or the operation of any equipment across lot lines and is not in conformance with the regulations of the Federal Communications Commission. 
(SBCC § 87.1330) 
16.20.150 - Desert soil erosion and fugitive dust control. 
    On parcels of one acre or greater in size, land being utilized for residential purposes may only be cleared or natural vegetation removed in order to provide for the installation of building pads, driveways, landscaping, agriculture or for some other structure or reasonable use normally appurtenant to residential uses. The office of building and safety may issue permits for further grading or clearance of vegetation subject to department review or in furtherance of weed abatement actions by the city or fire district. The purpose of this regulation is to reduce disturbances to fragile desert soils as much as practical in order to reduce the amount of fugitive dust that can for long periods of time adversely affect residents on the subject parcel and those residents and land uses downwind of the subject parcel. 
(SBCC § 87.1401) 
16.20.160 - Minimum residential construction standards. 
A.  The following standards shall be applied to all permitted construction or installation within the city of all detached single-family residential structures unless otherwise specified within this code. 
1.  Manufactured home foundation systems shall comply with either Section 18551 of the State Health and Safety Code or California Administrative Code, Title 25, Chapter 2, Sections 1333 and 1334, which shall include tie down, clip, or anchoring systems designed by a registered civil engineer to resist lateral forces for the subject manufactured home. 
2.  Siding material shall consist of stucco, wood, brick, stone, or decorative concrete block. Synthetic products of a similar appearance, equivalent durability and providing equivalent fire resistance shall be permitted. Metal siding, if utilized, shall be non-reflective and horizontally lapping. The exterior covering material shall extend to a point at or near grade except if an approved solid wood, metal, concrete or masonry perimeter foundation is used, the exterior covering material need not extend below the top of the foundation. 
3.  The roofing material shall be of materials customarily used in the local area and shall be approved by the building official. All residential structures shall have eave and gable overhangs of not less than twelve (12) inches measured from the vertical side of the residential structure, unless overhangs are architecturally incompatible with the design of the structure as approved by the building official. 
4.  All entries/exits shall be completed per Chapter 33 of the Uniform Building Code. 
5.  The minimum habitable floor area for detached single-family residential units shall be one thousand (1,000) square feet measured from the exterior of the structure. The minimum habitable floor area shall be one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet within the residentially zoned area known as the Mesa, generally bounded by Lime Street, Main Street and Rock Springs Road on the north; Glendale Road and the Mojave River on the east; the southern boundary of T4N, R4W on the south; and Santa Fe Avenue East and "I" Avenue on the west, except for Tract 8019, known as Hesperia Mobilehome Estates. The minimum habitable floor area shall be one thousand four hundred (1,400) square feet in Tract 6082, generally bounded by Maple Avenue on the east; Hercules Street on the north; Tamarisk Avenue on the west; and Willow Street on the south. The minimum habitable floor area for single-family homes within small lot subdivisions as defined in the Hesperia development code, shall be eight hundred (800) square feet. 
    These minimum habitable floor area requirements do not apply to below market rate units, adopted specific plans, or to second dwelling units constructed on lots where a primary dwelling unit is constructed. 
    The provisions of this subsection shall also not apply to any existing structures, or projects which have been issued building permits as of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this subsection. Any such existing structure may be altered, repaired or reconstructed with a minimum habitable floor area greater than or equal to its originally approved dimensions without regard to the provisions of this subsection. 
6.  Minimum floor width and depth shall each average twenty (20) feet measured from the exterior of the structure excluding garages, porches, patio, eaves, cabanas and pop-outs. 
7.  All residential structures shall have a fully enclosed two-car garage with a minimum interior size of nineteen (19) feet wide and nineteen (19) feet long, and constructed in compliance with the Uniform Building Code. 
8.  Utility hookups and an area to accommodate installation of a clothes washer and dryer shall be provided within the primary structure or within an enclosed accessory structure. 
B.  Except as otherwise provided within this code, any manufactured home installed or constructed in accordance with the provisions of this section shall be allowed where this code allows the construction of a detached single-family residential structure. 
C.  A building permit for the installation of a manufactured home not within an approved and properly licensed manufactured home development shall not be issued, if more than ten years have elapsed between the date of manufacture and the date of the application for the issuance of the permit to install such manufactured home. 
D.  All dwellings constructed after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section shall be served by a community water purveyor or by an approved private system. Approval shall be based upon availability and production of an adequate potable water source and fire flow supply. 
E.  All dwellings constructed after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section shall be served by a public utility electrical service or by an approved private system. Approval of a private system shall be based upon the substitution of a continuous, dependable and safe alternative supply. 
F.  Approval of alternate private utilities shall be based upon the proximity of public utilities and the submittal of a proven alternate system. All approvals shall be made by the building official and plans, specifications, engineering and testing may be requested prior to the approval. 
(Ord. 251 § 4, 1997; Ord. 84 § 6(G, H), 1990) 
ARTICLE VI. - DEDICATIONS AND STREET IMPROVEMENTS 

16.20.165 - Dedication of additional highway right-of-way. 
    Before building permits are issued and the construction of the structure or improvement for which the building permit is requested would result in increase or change in vehicular traffic, the dedication of additional highway right-of-way may, at the discretion of the director of transportation/flood control/airports, be required to the extent necessary to achieve the purposes in accordance with the county general plan, any adopted specific plan or the provisions of any specific ordinance which has established a future right-of-way line. Where none of the foregoing exist, the required dedication shall be a thirty (30) foot half-width from centerline, except that on section lines, quarter section lines, and sixteenth section lines in the desert areas, a forty (40) foot half-width from section lines and quarter section lines and a thirty (30) foot half-width from sixteenth section lines shall be required. 
(Amended during 1997 codification; SBCC § 87.1101) 
16.20.170 - Installations of street improvements. 
    Before building permits are issued for residential, commercial, administrative, professional, industrial and public uses, and the construction of the structure or improvement for which the building permit is requested would result in an increase or change of vehicular traffic such that the construction of street improvements as defined is necessary for the purposes of protecting adequately public safety and health as a result of the increase or change in vehicular traffic, or surface drainage, the installation of the street improvements may, at the discretion of the city engineer, be required to the extent necessary to achieve the purposes and in accordance with the current adopted county standards. "Street improvements" include any or all of curb and gutter, sidewalks, concrete driveway approaches, drainage structures, paving, back-filling and preparation of the road surface to rough grade for the placement of paving and other necessary improvements as determined by the city engineer. 
(Amended during 1997 codification; SBCC § 87.1105) 
16.20.175 - Delayed improvements-Bonding. 
    Such right-of-way dedication and installation of street improvements shall be required prior to the occupancy of the premises or commencement of the above-referenced uses, and where it is impractical to install the required improvements at the time of the proposed development, an agreement in writing shall be entered into with the city to make such improvements, and a cash deposit, a surety bond or such other form of surety as may be acceptable to the city engineer in an amount equal to the estimated cost of the improvements as determined by the county engineer, shall be posted with the city in lieu thereof, to guarantee the installation of such improvements. In the latter event, the actual installation of street improvements may be delayed until written demand therefor is made by the city. If surety bonds are submitted, they shall be furnished by a surety company authorized to write such bonds in the state of California. 
(Amended during 1997 codification; SBCC § 87.1110) 
16.20.180 - Waiver of requirements-Procedure. 
    Requirements for all improvements in the public right-of-way will be specified by the city. Request for a waiver of any of these requirements may be made to the city engineer who shall have the authority to approve modifications or reject any of the requirements. 
A.  Prior to waiving or modifying any improvement requirement, the city engineer shall find as follows: 
1.  That the waiver or modification of the required improvement would not adversely affect the public health and safety; 
2.  That neither the improvements being waived nor the modifications authorized delete improvements which are a necessary prerequisite to the orderly development of the surrounding area. 
B.  Prior to waiving any improvement requirement, the city engineer may require a written agreement from the applicant, agreeing to participate in any street improvement program for the area in which the property is located, whether privately or publicly initiated. This agreement shall be recorded with the county recorder. 
C.  Appeal of Action by City Engineer. Any decision by the city engineer pertaining to a request to waive or modify required improvements may be appealed to the planning commission. 
(Amended during 1997 codification; SBCC § 87.1115) 
16.20.185 - Building and safety department determination. 
    Before an occupancy permit shall be issued for any such building or structure, the building and safety department shall determine the following: 
A.  That all of the required dedications have been provided; 
B.  That all of the required street improvements have either been installed or that a cash deposit, surety bond or other form of acceptable surety in an amount equal to the estimated cost of the street improvements has been posted with the county department of transportation/flood control/airports to assure the installation of said street improvements. 
(Amended during 1997 codification; SBCC § 87.1120) 
ARTICLE VII. - DENSITY BONUS PROGRAM[14] 

Footnotes: 
--- (14) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2011-03, § 3(Exh. A), adopted May 3, 2011, amended Art. VII in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. VII pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. 149, Exh. A, adopted 1992; and Ord. 232, § 4, adopted 1996. 

16.20.190 - Purpose and intent. 
    The purpose of the density bonus program is to encourage the production of housing for lower income households by offering developers density increases beyond the maximum allowed under the applicable zoning district and land use element of the general plan in exchange for the construction of below-market rate units. In addition, other development incentives may be permitted. Further, the intent of the density bonus program is to implement state law and the city's housing element. 
(Ord. 2011-03, § 3(Exh. A), 5-3-11) 
16.20.195 - Definitions. 
    As used in this article, the following terms are defined in this section: 
    "Additional incentive" means a regulatory concession as described in Government Code Section 65915 that may include, but not be limited to, the reduction of site development standards or zoning code requirements, approval of mixed-use zoning in conjunction with the housing development or any other regulatory incentive, which would result in identifiable cost avoidance or deductions, that are offered in addition to a density bonus. 
    "Affordable rent" means monthly housing expenses, including a reasonable allowance for utilities, for rental target units reserved for very low, lower-or moderate-income households, not exceeding the following calculation" 
1.  Extremely Low-Income - Unless otherwise provided by law, households at thirty (30) percent of the area median income, adjusted for household size, multiplied by thirty (30) percent and divided by twelve (12); 
2.  Very Low-Income - Unless otherwise provided by law, households at fifty (50) percent of the area median income, adjusted for household size, multiplied by thirty (30) percent and divided by twelve (12); 
3.  Low-Income - Unless otherwise provided by law, households at eighty (80) percent of the area median income, adjusted for household size, multiplied by thirty (30) percent and divided by twelve (12); 
4.  Moderate-Income - Unless otherwise provided by law, households at one hundred twenty (120) percent of the area median income, adjusted for household size, multiplied by thirty percent and divided by twelve (12); 
5.  Above Moderate - Unless otherwise provided by law, households greater than one hundred twenty (120) percent of the area median income, adjusted for household size, multiplied by thirty (30) percent and divided by twelve (12). 
    "Area median income" means median income levels for San Bernardino County as calculated annually by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) based on the Primary Metropolitan Statistical Area (PMSA) median income levels by family size. Such levels are calculated on the basis of gross annual household income, considering household size and number of dependents, income of all wage earners, and all other sources of household income. 
    "Below-market rate (BMR) units" means dwelling units that are affordable to very low and low-income groups as defined in this section. 
    "Density bonus" means a density increase over the otherwise maximum allowable residential density permitted under the zone district and general plan. 
    "Density bonus unit" means those residential units granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, which exceed the maximum residential density of the development site. 
    "Dwelling unit" means one or more rooms, designed, occupied, or intended for occupancy as separate living quarters, with full cooking, sleeping, and bathroom facilities for the exclusive use of a single household. 
    "Housing development" means construction of projects consisting of five or more residential units or lots, including single-family and multi-family, that are proposed to be constructed pursuant to this chapter. 
    "Liveable floor area" means and shall refer to the living area as measured from the outside of walls and excluding garages, carports, exterior courtyards, patios or balconies. 
    "Low-income household" means households whose income does not exceed eighty (80) percent of the area median income. 
    "Senior citizens" means persons at least sixty-two (62) years of age (or fifty-five (55) years of age if the project is at least thirty-five (35) dwelling units). 
    "Senior citizen housing" means a housing development consistent with the California Fair Employment and Housing Act, that has been "designed to meet the physical and social needs of senior citizens," and which otherwise qualifies as "housing for older persons"; as that phrase is used in the Federal fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988 and its implementing regulations, and as that phrase is used in Civil Code Section 51.3. 
    "Target unit" means a dwelling unit within a housing development, which will be reserved for sale or rent to, and affordable to, very low-, lower, or moderate-income households. 
(Ord. 2011-03, § 3(Exh. A), 5-3-11) 
16.20.200 - Approval required. 
    Density bonuses may be granted as part of the normal approval process for site plans, subdivisions, planned developments or other land use applications in accordance with Chapter 16.12 and other adopted applicable ordinances, resolutions or standards. Any additional incentives, as specified in Section 16.20.230, and density bonus agreements shall be approved by the city council. 
(Ord. 2011-03, § 3(Exh. A), 5-3-11) 
16.20.205 - Density bonus provisions. 
A.  Percent density bonus or other incentives of equivalent financial value based upon the land cost per dwelling unit shall be granted as follows: 
Affordable Units/ 
Category % Units Bonus Granted Additional Bonus 
for Each 
1% Increase % Units Required 
for Maximum 
35% Bonus Note: A density bonus may be selected form only one category, except that bonuses for land donation may be combined with others, up to a maximum of 35% and an additional sq. ft. bonus may be granted for a day care center. Very-low income 5% 20% 2.5% 11% Lower-income 10% 20% 1.5% 20% Moderate-income (ownership units only) 10% 5% 1% 40% Senior housing (35 units or more; no affordable units required) 100% 20% - - Land donation for very-low income housing 10% of market-rate units 15% 1% 30% Condominium conversion-moderate-income 33% 25% (a) - - Condominium conversion-lower-income 15% 25% (a) - - Day Care Center - Sq. Ft.=day care center (a) Notes: (a) Or an incentive of equal value, at the City's option  
1.  Ten percent of the total units of a housing development are designated for low-income households; 
2.  Five percent of the total units of a housing development are designated for very-low-income households; 
3.  A housing development designated for senior citizens as defined in Section 16.20.195. 
    Note: A developer requesting a density bonus above twenty (20) percent is strongly encouraged to arrange a pre-application conference in accordance with the provisions specified in Chapter 16.12 prior to submittal of a formal application. 
(Ord. 2011-03, § 3(Exh. A), 5-3-11) 
16.20.207 - Additional density bonus. 
A.  The maximum density bonus for any project, even when combined with other available bonuses, is thirty-five (35) percent. 
1.  For each one percent above the ten percent threshold of lower income households, the bonus shall be increased by 1.5 percent. 
2.  For each one percent above the five percent threshold of very-low income households, the bonus shall be increased by 2.5 percent. 
3.  For each one percent above the ten percent threshold of moderate-income households in condominium projects, the bonus shall be increase by one percent. 
(Ord. 2011-03, § 3(Exh. A), 5-3-11) 
16.20.210 - Required findings for approval. 
A.  Notwithstanding Section 16.20.205(A), the following findings shall be made in order to approve the proposed development: 
1.  The proposed development conforms to the General Plan; 
2.  The proposed development will not have a specific, adverse impact upon the public health or safety, and there are feasible methods available to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the adverse impact(s) identified. 
B.  The above findings shall be made in addition to findings specified in Chapter 16.12 or other adopted applicable ordinances, resolutions or standards. 
(Ord. 2011-03, § 3(Exh. A), 5-3-11) 
16.20.215 - Minimum development size. 
    The density bonus provisions of this article shall only apply to residential developments of five or more dwelling units. 
(Ord. 2011-03, § 3(Exh. A), 5-3-11) 
16.20.220 - Below Market Rate (BMR) unit characteristics. 
    BMR units shall be evenly distributed throughout the project. The applicant may reduce either the size or interior amenities of the BMR units as long as there are not significant identifiable differences between the BMR units and the market rate units visible from the exterior of the units and the size and design of the units are reasonably consistent with the market rate units in the project; provided, that all units conform to the requirements of the applicable adopted city codes, ordinances, resolutions or policies. BMR units provided shall have at least the same number of bedrooms as the average unit in the project and if the floor area of the BMR units is not the same as the floor area of the market rate units within the project, each of the BMR units shall satisfy the following minimum total floor area: 
Single-family Dwellings: Minimum liveable area in square feet: 750 sq. ft. Multi-family Units: Studio 500 sq. ft. 1 bedroom 600 sq. ft. 2 bedrooms 750 sq. ft. 3 bedrooms 1,000 sq. ft. 3+ bedrooms 1,200 sq. ft.  
(Ord. 2011-03, § 3(Exh. A), 5-3-11) 
16.20.225 - Phasing requirements. 
    BMR units in a residential project or phase of a residential project shall be constructed concurrently with the construction of market rate units in the residential project or phase of that residential project. 
(Ord. 2011-03, § 3(Exh. A), 5-3-11) 
16.20.230 - Incentives and concessions. 
A.  If requested by the applicant, a qualifying project shall be entitled to at least one of the following incentives, unless the city makes the findings required by Government Code Section 65915(d)(1). The applicant shall receive the following number of incentives or concessions: 
1.  Once incentive or concession for projects that include ten percent of lower income units, or five percent of very-low income units or ten percent of moderate-income units in condominium projects. 
2.  Two incentive or concessions for projects that include twenty (20) percent of lower income units, or ten percent of very-low income units or twenty (20) percent of moderate income units in condominium projects. 
3.  Three incentives or concessions for projects that include thirty (30) percent of lower income units, or fifteen (15) percent of very-low income units or thirty (30) percent of moderate income units in condominium projects. 
B.  The following incentives may be utilized in conjunction with a density bonus to help facilitate increased density on the project site and to reduce construction costs. Incentives for each project shall be determined on a case-by-case basis, based upon project conditions such as proximity to community services, infrastructure capacity, topographical constraints, site size; and occupancy type. At least one of the following additional incentives shall be permitted in addition to the density bonus; unless the city makes a written finding that the additional concession or incentive is not required in order to provide for affordable housing costs as defined in Section 50052.5 of the Health and Safety Code: 
1.  A reduction in site development standards or a modification of zoning code requirements where it can be demonstrated that said flexibility will result in improved circulation within the site, increased open space areas, provision of recreational amenities, or other improvement to the overall design of the site, including, but not limited to, a reduction in setback and square footage requirements and in the ratio of vehicular parking spaces that would otherwise be required. A reduction in parking spaces for density bonus projects may be requested and requires approval from the city, using the following formula: 
i.  Studio and one-bedroom units - one space. 
ii.  Two to three bedroom units - two spaces. 
iii.  Four or more bedroom units - two and one-half spaces. 
iv.  The required parking spaces include handicap spaces and guest parking. Required parking must be on-site and may be uncovered. Tandem parking is permitted. 
2.  Approval of mixed use zoning in conjunction with the housing project if commercial, office, industrial, or other land uses will reduce the cost of the housing development and if the commercial, office, industrial, or other land uses are compatible with the housing project and the existing or planned development in the area where the proposed housing project will be located; 
3.  The integration of child care facilities, either on-site or adjacent to the project may grant the project one of the following, provided that the childcare facility must remain open as long as the units are to remain affordable, and the children attending the facility come from dwelling units in proportion to the income categories required within the associated project. 
i.  Additional residential floor area equal to the area of the childcare facility 
ii.  An additional incentive or concession that contributes to the economic feasibility of the construction of the childcare facility. 
4.  The integration of mixed structures, such as duplexes, triplexes, and four-plexes, within a single housing development in a single-family residential zone district, where it can be demonstrated that such integration can be designed so as to maintain a single-family residential atmosphere and make more efficient use of infrastructure; 
5.  Applications for density bonuses shall be given priority status over other development projects in an effort to reduce processing time as much as possible; 
6.  Deferment of certain development fees as approved by the city; 
7.  Other regulatory incentives or concessions which result in identifiable cost reductions. 
(Ord. 2011-03, § 3(Exh. A), 5-3-11) 
16.20.232 - Land donations. 
    Donation of land to the city, entities the applicant to a density bonus of up to fifteen (15) percent, provided that all of the following conditions are met: 
A.  The land must be transferred to the city or a housing developer approved by the city, no later than the approval of the final subdivision map or approval of the development application. 
B.  The land must have developable acreage and zoning to permit the development of units for very-low income households of not less that ten percent of the total of the units in the proposed development project. The density bonus may be increased by one percent for every additional one percent of land donated. The maximum density bonus may be up to thirty-five (35) percent. 
C.  The transferred land must be at least one acre in size or permit the development of forty (40) units, have the appropriate land use designation and be served by adequate public infrastructure. 
D.  The transferred land shall have all the necessary approvals in place, other than building permits, for development of the very-low income units. 
E.  The units on the transferred land shall be deed-restricted, consistent with other below market rate units as required by the city. 
F.  The land is transferred to the local agency or to a housing developer approved by the local agency. The local agency may require the applicant to identify and transfer the land to the developer. 
G.  The transferred land may be within the development project, or within one-quarter mile of the boundary of the proposed development. 
H.  A proposed source of funding for the very low income units shall be identified not later than the date of approval of the final subdivision map, parcel map, or residential development application. 
(Ord. 2011-03, § 3(Exh. A), 5-3-11) 
16.20.233 - Condo conversion incentives for low income housing development. 
A.  The city shall grant a density bonus or provide incentives of equivalent financial value when a project to convert apartments to condominiums provides at least thirty-three (33) percent of the total units of the proposed condominium project to persons and families of low to moderate income or fifteen (15) percent of the total units of the proposed condominium project of lower income households. 
B.  An applicant shall be ineligible for a density bonus or other incentives under this section if the apartments proposed for conversion constitute a housing development for which a density bonus or other incentives were provided under Section 16.20.205. 
(Ord. 2011-03, § 3(Exh. A), 5-3-11) 
16.20.235 - Preliminary proposal. 
    A developer may submit a preliminary proposal for a density bonus prior to a formal application. The city shall respond within ninety (90) days of receipt of a written proposal, notifying the developer in writing of the procedures which will be followed in processing the application. 
(Ord. 2011-03, § 3(Exh. A), 5-3-11) 
16.20.240 - Density bonus agreement. 
    A developer requesting a density bonus shall submit a density bonus agreement in a form approved by the city attorney. The density bonus agreement shall be approved by the city council and shall run with the land. The agreement may include, but not be limited to, the following provisions: 
A.  The number of requested housing units above the amount allowed by the existing zoning and general plan designation, and the additional incentives requested; 
B.  The number of BMR units by number of bedrooms and income group to be provided in the project; 
C.  The term of affordability for BMR units, as specified in Section 16.20.250; 
D.  The standards for maximum qualifying income for BMR units; 
E.  The standards for maximum rents or sales prices for the BMR units; 
F.  The process to be used to certify tenant/homeowner incomes; 
G.  The arrangements for monitoring of the BMR units; 
H.  How vacancies will be marketed and filled; 
I.  Restrictions and enforcement mechanisms binding on property upon sale or transfer; 
J.  Penalties and enforcement mechanisms in event of failure to maintain affordability provisions; 
K.  The process and criteria for selection of a manager or management agency of multi-family projects which shall include provisions for review and approval by the city; 
L.  Any other provisions deemed necessary by the city. 
(Ord. 2011-03, § 3(Exh. A), 5-3-11) 
16.20.245 - Calculating BMR and density bonus units. 
    In determining the number of BMR units proposed pursuant to Section 16.20.205, any decimal fraction less than 0.5 shall be rounded down to the nearest whole number, and any decimal fraction of 0.5 or more shall be rounded up to the nearest whole number. 
(Ord. 2011-03, § 3(Exh. A), 5-3-11) 
16.20.250 - Term of affordability. 
A.  If only twenty (20) to thirty-five (35) percent density bonus is granted, then affordability of the approved low-income or very-low-income BMR units shall be maintained for a period of thirty (30) years, beginning on the date of issuance of the certificate of occupancy for the unit. 
B.  If a density bonus is granted for moderate income units, then affordability of the approved moderate income BMR units shall be maintained for a period of forty-five (45) years (ownership units) or fifty-five (55) years (rental units), beginning on the date of issuance of the certificate of occupancy for the unit. 
(Ord. 2011-03, § 3(Exh. A), 5-3-11) 
16.20.255 - Rental housing units. 
A.  Rents for those units in a rental housing development designated for very-low-income households shall not exceed thirty (30) percent of fifty (50) percent of the monthly area median income, as adjusted annually by HCD for household size. If the BMR units are rented to Section 8 certificate holders, then the maximum rents for those units shall be as determined by the San Bernardino County Housing Authority. 
B.  Rents for units designated for low-income households shall not exceed thirty (30) percent of sixty (60) percent of the monthly area median income, as adjusted annually by HUD for household size. If the BMR units are rented to Section 8 certificate holders, then the maximum rents for those units shall be as determined by the San Bernardino County Housing Authority. 
C.  In calculating rents for senior citizen BMR units, any services, such as meals or individual medical care, offered above those normally provided for independent living units, shall be optional, and shall not be included in calculating maximum rents. 
D.  The following table shall be used in determining the household size for BMR units: 
Unit Size 
(number of bedrooms) Minimum Household Size 
(number of persons) Studio 1 1 2 2 3 3 4 4 5  
An exception to the above table shall be made for units designated for senior citizens. The exception is that a household size of one shall be assumed for a single bedroom unit. 
(Ord. 2011-03, § 3(Exh. A), 5-3-11) 
16.20.260 - Ownership housing units. 
A.  Sales prices of BMR ownership units shall be established at levels affordable to very-low low-income, and moderate-income households. Original sales prices shall be stated, per unit, in each development's approved tentative tract map, planned development or specific plan. 
B.  The total required down payment, excluding closing costs, for the BMR units, shall not exceed ten percent of the purchase price. 
C.  The provisions of this section shall be included in the density bonus agreement, and shall run with the land. 
(Ord. 2011-03, § 3(Exh. A), 5-3-11) 
16.20.265 - Eligibility requirements for BMR unit occupants. 
    Only low and very-low and moderate-income (ownership units) households shall be eligible to occupy BMR units. The city shall select potential occupants of BMR units from a list of those persons qualified on the basis of household income, the median combined household income statistics calculated annually by HCD, all sources of household income and assets, a relationship between household size and the size of available units, and further criteria and an equitable selection method to be established in conformance with the terms of this article. No distinction shall be made between adults and children, unless BMR units are designated for senior citizens. 
(Ord. 2011-03, § 3(Exh. A), 5-3-11) 
16.20.267 - Changes in state density bonus laws. 
    It is the intent of the city council that the provisions of this chapter shall be interpreted so as to fulfill the requirements of Government Code Section 65915 et seq., notwithstanding changes in state laws revising percentages, numerical thresholds and/or other standards applicable to the granting of density bonuses or related incentives that may occur after the effective date of this chapter. Accordingly, it is the further intent of the city council that any such changed percentages, numerical thresholds or other standards shall be deemed to supersede and govern any conflicting percentages, numerical thresholds or other standards contained in this chapter, to the maximum extent permitted by law. 
(Ord. 2011-03, § 3(Exh. A), 5-3-11) 
ARTICLE VIII. - HISTORICAL RESOURCES DESIGNATION AND PROTECTION 

16.20.270 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to ensure the protection, enhancement, perpetuation and use of structures and sites of historic architectural, and engineering significance, located within the city, that are of cultural and aesthetic benefit to the community. 
(Ord. 77 § 2 (§ 810.0701), 1990) 
16.20.275 - Authority to declare a registered landmark. 
A.  The sole authority to declare registered landmarks or other historic resources shall be vested in the city council. 
B.  When necessary, the city council shall conduct a public hearing for the purpose of evaluating matters relating to preservation of historical resources. 
(Ord. 77 § 2 (§ 810.0705), 1990) 
16.20.280 - Powers and duties of city council. 
    The following powers and duties shall be assigned to the city council on all matters relating to historic resources: 
A.  To administer the provisions of this article; 
B.  To initiate public hearings to consider matters relating to historic resources; 
C.  To create and maintain a current register of landmark designations for public use and information; 
D.  To review, evaluate and make a determination on the designation of a site, structure, or object as a registered landmark, and cause a resolution to be prepared stating findings in support of the determination. 
(Ord. 77 § 2 (§ 810.0710), 1990) 
16.20.285 - Definition of a registered landmark. 
    A registered historic, cultural or natural landmark shall be any real property such as a building, structure, site, archeological excavation, or object that is unique or significant because of its location, design, setting, materials, workmanship or aesthetic feeling, and which meets one or more of the criteria specified in Section 16.20.290. 
(Ord. 77 § 2 (§ 810.0715), 1990) 
16.20.290 - Landmark designation review criteria. 
    When designating a landmark, the city council shall consider the following criteria in making its determination: 
A.  Historical and Cultural Significance. 
1.  The proposed landmark is particularly representative of an historical period, type, style, region, or way of life. 
2.  The proposed landmark is an example of a type of building which was once common but is now rare. 
3.  The proposed landmark is of greater age than most of its kind. 
4.  The proposed landmark was connected with someone who is or was renowned, important, or a local personality. 
5.  The proposed landmark is connected with a business or use which was once common but is now rare. 
6.  The architect or builder was significant. 
7.  The site is the location of an important historic event or building. 
B.  Historic Architectural and Engineering Significance. 
1.  The construction materials or engineering methods used in the proposed landmark are unusual, significant, or uniquely effective. 
2.  The design of the proposed landmark contains details and materials that possess extraordinary or unique aesthetic qualities. 
C.  Neighborhood and Geographic Setting. 
1.  The proposed landmark materially benefits the historic character of the neighborhood. 
2.  The proposed landmark in its location represents an established and familiar visual feature of the neighborhood, community or city. 
(Ord. 77 § 2 (§ 810.0720), 1990) 
16.20.295 - List of declared registered landmarks. 
    The city council shall authorize the preparation and maintenance of a list of all such declared landmarks and historic resources. The list shall be made available to the general public by the community development department. 
(Ord. 77 § 2 (§ 810.0725), 1990) 
16.20.300 - Markers for a registered landmark. 
    Upon declaration of a landmark or historic resource, the city council shall determine which landmarks or historic resources shall receive markers. The markers shall be approved by the council. 
(Ord. 77 § 2 (§ 810.0730), 1990) 
16.20.305 - Change of use, alteration or demolition of a registered landmark or historic resource. 
    Demolishing, defacing, altering, adding to, changing the use, or in any way altering a registered landmark or historic resource shall be permitted only as specified in this section. 
A.  Change of use or the initiation of any structural change of a designated landmark or historic resource shall require site approval pursuant to Chapter 16.12; 
B.  Prior to approval of the application, the reviewing authority shall make the following findings in addition to the findings listed under Chapter 16.12: 
1.  The use or structural change proposed will not be detrimental to a structure or feature of significant aesthetic, cultural, architectural or engineering interest or value of an historic nature; or 
2.  The applicant has demonstrated that denial of the application will result in immediate and substantial hardship; 
3.  The action proposed is necessary to correct an unsafe, unhealthful or dangerous condition on the property. 
C.  Any proposed change of use shall be consistent with the zone designation and the goals and policies contained within the general plan. 
(Ord. 250 Exh. A (part), 1998; Ord. 77 § 2 (§ 810.0735), 1990) 
16.20.310 - Unsafe or dangerous conditions. 
    None of the provisions of this article shall be construed to prevent any measures of construction, alteration, removal, demolition or relocation necessary to correct the unsafe or dangerous conditions of any structure, other feature, or part thereof, when such condition has been declared unsafe or dangerous by the building official, after informing the city council when the structure is a landmark, and where the proposed measures have been declared necessary by such official to correct the condition; provided, however, that only such work as is necessary to correct the unsafe or dangerous condition may be performed pursuant to this section. In the event any structure or other feature shall be damaged by fire or other calamity, the building official may authorize, prior to the council's review, that amount of repair or demolition necessary to correct an unsafe condition. 
(Ord. 77 § 2 (§ 810.0740), 1990) 
ARTICLE IX. - DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR ADULT ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESS 

16.20.315 - Purpose. 
    It is the intent of these regulations to mitigate or prevent community wide problems of blight and deterioration which can be brought about by the concentration of adult entertainment businesses in close proximity to each other or proximity to other incompatible uses such as schools for minors, public parks and residentially zoned districts. The city council finds that it has been demonstrated in various communities that the concentration of adult entertainment businesses causes an increase in the number of transients in the area, an increase in crime, and can cause other businesses and residents to move elsewhere because of harmful secondary effects of such businesses. It is, therefore, the purpose of these regulations to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the concentration of adult establishments or their close proximity to incompatible uses, while permitting the location of adult businesses in certain areas. 
(Ord. 266 § 3 (part), 1998) 
16.20.320 - Definitions. 
A.  It is the intent of this article that the definitions set forth in the Hesperia development code shall apply but only where they do not conflict with any definition set forth in this article. 
B.  Establishment of an Adult Entertainment Business. As used herein, to "establish" an adult entertainment business means and includes any of the following: 
1.  The opening or commencement of operation of any adult entertainment business as a new business. 
2.  The conversion of any existing business, whether or not an adult entertainment business, to any adult entertainment business as described herein. 
3.  The addition of any adult entertainment business as defined herein to any existing adult entertainment business if the addition results in expansion of the place of business. For purposes of this paragraph, "expansion" means any increase in the size of the building within which the business is conducted by either construction or use of an adjacent building or any portion thereof, or any temporary facility or area, whether located on the same or an adjacent lot or parcel of land. 
C.  Specified Anatomical Areas. As used herein, "specified anatomical areas" means and includes any of the following: 
1.  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus or female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or 
2.  Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
3.  Any device, costume, or covering that simulates any of the body parts specified in subdivisions 1 or 2 of this subsection. 
D.  Specified Sexual Activities. As used herein, "specified sexual activities" means and includes any of the following, whether performed directly or indirectly through clothing or other covering: 
1.  The fondling or other erotic touching, actually or simulated, of human genitals, pubic region, buttock or female breast; 
2.  Sex acts, actual or simulated, including acts of sexual intercourse, oral copulation, sodomy, or bestiality; or 
3.  Masturbation, actual or simulated; or 
4.  Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in subdivisions 1 through 3 of this subsection. 
E.  Adult Entertainment Establishment. An "adult entertainment establishment" is any place of business in which one or more of the following activities are conducted: 
1.  "Adult bookstore" means a commercial establishment which, as a regular and substantial part of its business, devotes inventory or product lines for display, shelf, rack, table, stand, or floor area used for the display and sale of the following: 
a.  Books, magazines, periodicals, or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, tapes, records, or other forms of visual or audio representation which are characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas"; and/or 
b.  Instruments, artificial devices or paraphernalia which are designed for use in connection with "specified sexual activities." The term "product line" refers to items which are all identical, such as numerous copies of the same book or periodical. 
2.  "Adult motion picture establishment" means a commercial establishment with a capacity of more than fifty (50) persons, used for the presentation, exhibition or display of films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or similar photographic reproductions projected on a screen, which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." For purposes of this subdivision and subdivisions 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8 and 12, "substantial portion of the total presentation time" means a regular and substantial course of conduct. 
3.  "Adult mini-motion picture theater" means a commercial establishment with a capacity of more than five but less than fifty (50) persons, used for the presentation, exhibition or display of films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or similar photographic reproductions projected on a screen, and in which a substantial portion of the presentation time is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
4.  "Adult motion picture arcade" means any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin or slug-operated or electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, in which a substantial portion of the presentation time is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
5.  "Adult drive-in theater" means an open lot or part thereof, with appurtenant facilities, devoted primarily to the presentation of motion pictures, films, theatrical productions and other forms of visual productions, for any form of consideration to persons in motor vehicles or on outdoor seats, in which a substantial portion of the total presentation time of the material being presented is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
6.  "Adult cabaret" means a nightclub, bar, restaurant or similar establishment during which a substantial portion of the total presentation time features live performances which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on "specified sexual activities" or by exposure of "specified anatomical areas" and/or feature films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" for observation by patrons. 
7.  "Adult motel or hotel" means a hotel or motel or similar commercial establishment offering public accommodations for any form of consideration which provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions, a substantial portion of the presentation time of which is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" for observation by patrons. 
8.  "Adult theater" means a theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar commercial establishment either indoor or outdoor in nature which, for any form of consideration, regularly features live performances, a substantial portion of the total presentation time of which is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" for observation by patrons. 
9.  "Adult model studio" means any establishment open to the public where, for any form of consideration or gratuity, figure models who display "specified anatomical areas" are provided to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculpted, photographed, or similarly depicted by persons, other than the proprietor, paying such consideration or gratuity. 
    This provision shall not apply to any school of art which is operated by an individual, firm, association, partnership, corporation or institution which meets the requirements established in the Education Code of the state of California for the issuance or conferring of, and is in fact authorized thereunder to issue and confer, a diploma. 
10.  "Sexual encounter establishment" means a commercial establishment, other than a hotel, motel or similar establishment offering public accommodations which, for any form of consideration, provides a place where two or more persons may congregate, associate, or consort in connection with "specified sexual acts" or the exposure of "specified anatomical areas." 
    This definition does not include an establishment where a medical practitioner, psychologist, psychiatrist or similar professional person licensed by the state of California engages in sexual therapy. 
11.  "Body painting studio" means any establishment or business which provides the service of applying paint or other substance whether transparent or nontransparent to or on the human body when such body is wholly or partially nude in terms of "specified anatomical areas." 
12.  "Other adult entertainment businesses" means any other business or commercial establishment not herein defined: 
a.  Wherein for any form of consideration the establishment provides entertainment to patrons in which a substantial portion of the total presentation time is characterized by an emphasis on depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas"; or 
b.  Which devotes more than fifty (50) percent of the total area used for display of its stock in trade to items, instruments and paraphernalia which are characterized by an emphasis on depicting, describing, or relating to "specified sexual activities"; 
c.  "Characterized by an emphasis upon" means the dominant or essential theme of the object described by such theme. 
13.  "Lingerie modeling studio" means an establishment where, for any form of consideration, lingerie is modeled by a person or persons for viewing by persons paying such consideration. 
(Ord. 266 § 3 (part), 1998) 
16.20.325 - Zones for adult entertainment establishments-Development standards. 
    For the purpose of these regulations, adult uses are permitted uses only in those areas of the city designated on the land use element of the Hesperia general plan as industrial/commercial and as set forth herein. In addition to the standards imposed herein, the development standards applicable to the establishment of an adult business shall be as set forth in the Hesperia development code for a zone and use most comparable to the proposed adult business, as determined by the planning director. 
(Ord. 266 § 3 (part), 1998) 
16.20.330 - Minimum proximity requirements. 
    No adult entertainment establishment shall be established within specified distances of certain specified land uses as set forth below: 
A.  No such establishment shall be established within five hundred (500) feet of any other adult entertainment establishment. 
B.  No such establishment shall be established within five hundred (500) feet of any residence, residential zone, church, chapel or similar place of worship, any funeral parlor, mortuary or similar facility, any school, licensed day care center, hospital, clinic or medical facility, park, playground or any other recreational facility where large numbers of minors travel or congregate. 
C.  No such establishment shall be established within one thousand (1,000) feet of the centerline of Interstate 15 or the centerline of Main Street. 
(Ord. 266 § 3 (part), 1998) 
16.20.335 - Measurement of distance between uses. 
    The distance between any two adult entertainment establishments shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures, from the closest exterior structural wall off each business. The distance between any adult entertainment establishment and any school, day care facility, public park or residential zone, etc., shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures, from the closest exterior structural wall of the adult entertainment business to the closest property line of the school, day care facility, public park, or residential zone. 
(Ord. 266 § 3 (part), 1998) 
16.20.340 - Closed viewing areas. 
    No adult use or adult entertainment business shall maintain closed areas, booths, cubicles, rooms or other areas within its place of business that are used, designed, or furnished for private sexual activity. No nudity or specified sexual activities by customers shall be permitted on the premises. All portions of the premises shall be available by access and visual inspection at all times during normal business hours by representatives of the sheriffs department, health department, fire department or any city inspectors for the purpose of insuring compliance with all applicable laws. 
(Ord. 266 § 3 (part), 1998) 
16.20.345 - Adult entertainment zoning permit required. 
    It is unlawful to establish or operate, or cause to permit to be operated, any adult entertainment establishment without first obtaining an adult entertainment zoning permit from the planning director. 
(Ord. 266 § 3 (part), 1998) 
16.20.350 - Permit application. 
A.  Any person, association, partnership, corporation or other entity desiring to obtain an adult entertainment zoning permit shall file an application with the director on a form provided by the director. The application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable application processing fee in the amount established by city council resolution. 
B.  The application for a permit shall contain the following information: 
1.  The name, address and telephone of the applicant. If the applicant is a corporation, the applicant shall set forth the name of the corporation exactly as shown in its articles of incorporation, the date and place of incorporation, the names and addresses of the officers, directors, and each stockholder owning more than ten percent of the stock of the corporation. If the applicant is a partnership, the applicant shall set forth the name and residence address of each of the partners, including limited partners. If one or more of the partners is a corporation, the provision of this section pertaining to a corporate applicant shall apply. The applicant corporation or partnership shall designate one of its officers or general partners to act as its responsible managing officer. 
2.  Name, address and telephone number of the person who shall manage and operate the establishment for which the permit is requested. The name and address of a person authorized to accept service of legal notices. 
3.  The proposed business name of the adult entertainment establishment and description of the type of adult establishment. 
4.  Street address of the proposed adult entertainment establishment and parcel number for the property. 
5.  A plot plan for the property depicting the location of the building housing the adult entertainment establishment on the property. 
6.  If the adult entertainment establishment was in existence as of the effective date of these regulations, the date the establishment first commenced operation. 
7.  Any other information reasonably necessary to accomplish the purposes of these regulations. 
8.  The signature of the record owners of the property consenting to the establishment of an adult entertainment business. 
9.  A statement signed by the applicant that he or she has not had an adult entertainment business permit or substantially similar permit, revoked or suspended by any governmental jurisdiction in the previous twelve (12) calendar months and a statement, under penalty of perjury, that the information submitted is true and correct. 
C.  Referral to Other City Departments. The director may refer the application to other city departments to determine whether the premises where the adult entertainment establishment is located, or will be located, complies with the city's building, health, zoning and fire ordinances or other applicable ordinances or laws. City departments may conduct an inspection of the premises to determine compliance with the ordinances and laws they administer. 
D.  Action on Application. The director shall determine whether to grant or deny the permit within thirty (30) working days after receipt of a complete application. 
(Ord. 266 § 3 (part), 1998) 
16.20.355 - Grounds for permit denial/revocation. 
A.  The director shall approve the permit unless he or she determines from a consideration of the application, city inspection of the premises or other pertinent information that: 
1.  Information contained in the application or supplemental information requested from the applicant is false in any material detail. 
2.  The proposed location of the adult entertainment business would not comply with the requirements of Section 16.20.325 or 16.20.330. 
3.  The operation of the adult entertainment business is or will be in violation of one or more provisions of these regulations. 
4.  The premises where the adult entertainment business is or will be located does not comply with all applicable laws, including but not limited to the city's building, health, zoning, and fire ordinances. 
5.  That a permit to operate any adult entertainment establishment has been issued to the applicant, a partner of the applicant, or a stockholder of the applicant which stockholder owns more than ten percent of the applicant's corporate stock, which permit has been suspended and the period of suspension has not yet ended. 
B.  Notice of permit denial shall be in writing and shall state the grounds therefor, and notify the applicant of the applicant's right to appeal. Notice shall be personally served on the permit applicant or mailed to the address listed on the application form. 
C.  After notice and a hearing, an adult entertainment permit may be suspended for up to one year or revoked for any of the reasons specified as grounds for permit denial in subsection (A) of this section. 
D.  Any interested person may appeal a decision of the director as provided for in Section 16.12.055 of the development code. 
(Ord. 266 § 3 (part), 1998) 
16.20.360 - Permit conditions. 
    The director may condition the issuance of an adult entertainment zoning permit by imposing reasonable conditions to insure compliance with these provisions and other sections of the Hesperia Municipal Code. 
(Ord. 266 § 3 (part), 1998) 
16.20.365 - Sale or transfer of business. 
A.  No permit issued pursuant to this article may be assigned or transferred without the prior written approval of the director. The applicant shall apply for a transfer on a form provided by the director, and shall pay a nonrefundable application processing fee in the amount established by city council resolution. 
B.  Transfer of Partnership or Corporate Ownership. An application for approval of a transfer of a permit shall be required prior to any change in an interest in a partnership or ownership of ten percent or more of the stock of a corporation to any person not listed on the application filed by said applicant. 
C.  An application for transfer of a permit may be denied for any of the grounds specified for denial of an original permit application in Section 16.20.355. Procedures for notice of denial of a transfer and appeal thereof shall be identical to those procedures for denial of a permit application specified in Section 16.20.355. 
(Ord. 266 § 3 (part), 1998) 
16.20.370 - New permit required. 
    The permittee must apply for a new adult entertainment permit as follows: 
A.  Prior to any change in the location of the adult entertainment establishment. 
B.  Prior to the conversion of any existing adult entertainment establishment to any other type of adult entertainment establishment as described herein. 
C.  Prior to any change in the business name of the adult entertainment establishment. 
D.  Prior to the enlargement of any existing adult entertainment establishment. 
(Ord. 266 § 3 (part), 1998) 
16.20.375 - Display of permit. 
    Each person to whom or for who a permit has been granted shall display said permit in a conspicuous place within the adult entertainment establishment so the same may be readily seen by persons entering the premises. 
(Ord. 266 § 3 (part), 1998) 
16.20.380 - Appeal procedures for adult entertainment permits. 
A.  Who May Appeal. Any interested person may appeal the issuance, denial of issuance, suspension or revocation of an adult entertainment permit to the city council in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
B.  Appeal Period. A written appeal petition must be filed with the city clerk no later than fourteen (14) calendar days after the decision sought to be appealed; provided, however, that if fourteen (14) days expires on a date that city hall is not open for business, then the appeal period shall be extended to the next business day. Failure to file a timely appeal petition deprives the city council of jurisdiction to hear the appeal. 
C.  Form of Appeal Petition. The appeal petition must indicate why the applicant contends the decision was incorrect or must provide extenuating circumstances which the applicant contends would justify reversal or modification of the decision. A fee in an amount established by resolution of the city council shall be submitted with the appeal petition. 
D.  Stay of Decision. The effectiveness of any decision to suspend or revoke an adult entertainment permit shall be stayed during: (1) the appeal period set forth in subsection (B) of this section; and (2) the pendency of any appeal. 
E.  City Council Consideration. The city council shall consider a timely filed appeal at its first available regular meeting following submission of the appeal, unless the applicant consents in writing to an extension. At least ten days prior to the appeal hearing before the city council, written notice of such hearing shall be mailed to the applicant. The city council may continue the appeal hearing as necessary or convenient. 
F.  City Council Decision. No later than forty-five (45) days from the filing of a timely appeal, unless the appellant consents in writing to an extension, the city council shall render a decision on the appeal. The city council may affirm, modify or reverse the decision being appealed. The decision of the city council shall be made by resolution and shall be final. No later than three city business days after the city council's decision, notice of the decision and a copy of the resolution shall be mailed by first class mail, postage prepaid, to the appellant. Such notice shall contain the substance of the following statement: "You are hereby notified that the time within which judicial review may be sought is governed by California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.6." 
G.  Judicial Review. The appellant may seek judicial review of the city council's decision in accordance with California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.5 et seq., or as otherwise permitted by law. 
(Ord. 266 § 3 (part), 1998) 
ARTICLE X. - DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR RESIDENTIAL AND AGRICULTURAL ACCESSORY STRUCTURES 

16.20.385 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of these provisions is to establish reasonable limits for the size and number of accessory structures allowed in all residential and agricultural zone districts in order to ensure land use compatibility. These provisions balance the existing rights of property owners to develop and use their properties for residential and agricultural purposes with the desires of the surrounding residents to collectively regulate development to protect the unique character of the neighborhood. 
(Ord. 2001-13 Exh. A § 9 (part), 2001) 
16.20.390 - Allowable accessory building area. 
    The size of accessory buildings permitted upon lots within the A-2 (General Agricultural) zone district shall be unlimited. Lots within all other residential and agricultural zone districts shall be permitted a one thousand (1,000) square foot aggregate accessory building up to a maximum aggregate accessory building area not to exceed five percent of the net lot area. Each accessory building shall be in compliance with all Title 16 regulations. The area of a guest house, second dwelling unit, or temporary dependent housing unit shall be in addition to and shall not be considered as part of the allowable accessory building area authorized under this section. 
(Ord. 2001-13 Exh. A § 9 (part), 2001) 
16.20.395 - Allowable accessory building area increases. 
    The maximum allowable aggregate accessory building area upon lots within residential and agricultural zone districts may be increased to seven and one-half percent of the net lot area with approval of a minor exception application pursuant to Chapter 16.12. 
(Ord. 2001-13 Exh. A § 9 (part), 2001) 
16.20.400 - Allowable accessory structure area. 
    The size of accessory structures permitted upon lots within the A-2 (General Agricultural) zone district shall be unlimited. Lots within all other residential and agricultural zone districts shall be permitted a maximum aggregate accessory structure area not to exceed ten percent of the net lot area. The allowable accessory structure area shall be in addition to, and not a part of the allowable accessory building area. Each accessory structure shall be in compliance with all Title 16 regulations. 
(Ord. 2001-13 Exh. A § 9 (part), 2001) 
16.20.405 - Allowable accessory structure area increases. 
    The maximum allowable aggregate accessory structure area upon lots within residential and agricultural zone districts may be increased to fifteen (15) percent of the net lot area with approval of a minor exception application pursuant to Chapter 16.12. 
(Ord. 2001-13 Exh. A § 9 (part), 2001) 
16.20.410 - Accessory building height limitations. 
    Accessory buildings shall not exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height and a maximum of two and one-half stories. Accessory buildings within thirty (30) feet of any side or rear property line shall not exceed sixteen (16) feet in height. The allowable height increases within Section 16.20.055 shall not apply to accessory buildings. 
(Ord. 2001-14 Exh. A § 1 (part), 2001) 
16.20.415 - Accessory structure height limitations. 
    Accessory structures shall not exceed sixteen (16) feet in height except agricultural accessory structures such as windmills, silos, water tanks and similar accessory farm structures, and other specific structures which are regulated by Section 16.20.060. The allowable height increases within Section 16.20.055 shall not apply to accessory structures. 
(Ord. 2001-14 Exh. A § 1 (part), 2001) 
16.20.420 - Metal accessory buildings. 
    Metal accessory buildings shall only be allowed upon lots at least thirty thousand (30,000) square feet in net area. Metal buildings shall be located between the rear of the primary residence and the rear property line and not within thirty (30) feet of any side or rear property line. 
(Ord. 2001-14 Exh. A § 1 (part), 2001) 
16.20.425 - Cargo containers, trailers without axles and similar storage structures. 
    The number of storage structures upon lots within the A-2 (General Agricultural) zone district shall be unlimited. Individual storage structures shall not exceed four hundred (400) square feet in individual area and nine and one-half feet in height. Storage structures within all other residential and agricultural zone districts shall not be allowed on lots less than thirty thousand (30,000) square feet in net area. In these zone districts, a maximum of one storage structure per acre shall be allowed (rounding up is not permissible). Storage structures shall be located between the rear of the primary residence and the rear property line and not within thirty (30) feet of any side or rear property line. Each storage structure shall be in compliance with all Title 16 regulations. 
(Ord. 2001-14 Exh. A § 1 (part), 2001) 
ARTICLE XI. - OAK HILLS COMMUNITY PLAN DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS 

16.20.430 - Applicability of provisions. 
    These development standards are applicable to the Oak Hills Community Plan area as defined on the city's land use plan. These standards shall be applicable in lieu of similar standards within the city's development code, otherwise, the city's standards shall apply. 
(Ord. 2002-09 Exh. A (part), 2002) 
16.20.440 - A-1-2 1/2 Zone District, property development standards. 
A-1-2 1/2 ZONE DISTRICT 

DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS Maximum Structure Height (ft.) 35 Minimum Lot Size (acres)  map suffix will modify 2.5 Maximum Lot Coverage (building coverage) 20% Maximum Lot Dimensions (width to depth ratio) > 10 acres 
< 10 acres 1:4 
1:3 Minimum Lot Dimensions (width/depth in ft.) 150/150 Front Yard Setback (ft.) 25 Side Yard Setbacks (ft.) 15 Rear Yard Setbacks (ft.) 15 Street Side Yard Setbacks (ft.) 25 Maximum Housing Density (dwelling unit/acre) 1/2.5 Minimum District Size (acres) 30  
(Ord. 2002-09 Exh. A (part), 2002) 
16.20.450 - R-1 and RR Zone Districts, property development standards. 
R-1 AND RR ZONE DISTRICTS 

DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS Maximum Structure Height (ft.) 35 Minimum Lot Size (sq. ft.)  map suffix will modify  See A. below 7,200 Maximum Lot Coverage (building coverage) 40% Maximum Lot Dimensions (width to depth ratio) > 10 acres 
< 10 acres 1:4 
1:3 Minimum Lot Dimensions (width/depth in ft.) > 1 acre 
< 1 acre 100/100 
60/100 Front Yard Setback (ft.)  See B. below 25 Side Yard Setbacks (ft.) 10 
5 Rear Yard Setbacks (ft.) 15 Street Side Yard Setbacks (ft.) street type: local 
collector or wider 15 
25 Minimum District Size (acres) 10  
A.  Within areas which contain significant environmental or topographic constraints, clustering of residential uses may be encouraged to preserve natural resources and mitigate environmental impacts. Maximum permitted density will be determined through the development review process, based upon environmental and infrastructure conditions. 
B.  A final or parcel map may establish front yard setbacks no less than twenty-two (22) feet provided the average setback of all parcels is at least twenty-five (25) feet. 
(Ord. 2002-09 Exh. A (part), 2002) 
16.20.460 - R-3 Zone District, property development standards. 
R-3 ZONE DISTRICT 

DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS Maximum Structure Height (ft.) 35 Minimum Lot Size (sq. ft.)  map suffix will modify  See A. below 7,200 Maximum Lot Coverage (building coverage) 60% Maximum Lot Dimensions (width to depth ratio) 1:3 Minimum Lot Dimensions (width/depth in ft.) 60/120 Front Yard Setback (ft.)  See B. below 25 Side Yard Setbacks (ft.) one side 
other sides 10 
5 Rear Yard Setbacks (ft.) 15 Street Side Yard Setbacks (ft.) 25 Maximum Housing Density (dwelling unit/acre)  map prefix may modify 10 Minimum District Size (acres) 10  
A.  Maximum permitted density will be determined through the development review process, based upon environmental and infrastructure conditions. 
B.  A final or parcel map may establish front yard setbacks no less than twenty-two (22) feet provided the average setback of all parcels is at least twenty-five (25) feet. 
(Ord. 2002-09 Exh. A (part), 2002) 
16.20.470 - C-1 Zone District, property development standards. 
C-1 ZONE DISTRICT 

DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS Maximum Structure Height (ft.) 35 Minimum Lot Size (acre)  map suffix will modify  See A. below 2.5 Maximum Lot Coverage (building coverage) 40% Maximum Lot Dimensions (width to depth ratio) 1:3 Minimum Lot Dimensions (width/depth in ft.)  See A. below 300/300 Front Yard Setback (ft.) 25 Side Yard Setbacks (ft.)  See B. below 10 Rear Yard Setbacks (ft.)  See C. below 10 Street Side Yard Setbacks (ft.) 15 Maximum Floor Area Ratio (FAR - floor area/lot area) 0.47 Minimum District Size (acres) 2.5  
A.  Minimum lot size can be less than two and one-half acres if the subdivision application is filed concurrently with a planned development, site plan review or conditional use permit application. 
B.  Only one side yard is required to provide for emergency access. If the adjacent property is not designated commercial or industrial, a side yard shall be required along that side of the property. 
C.  A rear yard is required only when the adjacent property is not designated commercial or industrial. 
D.  Site design should incorporate effective internal circulation for both vehicular and pedestrian traffic, as well as buffering if adjacent to residential uses. 
(Ord. 2002-09 Exh. A (part), 2002) 
16.20.480 - C-2 and C-4 Zone Districts, property development standards. 
C-2 AND C-4 ZONE DISTRICTS 

DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS Maximum Structure Height (ft.) 35 Minimum Lot Size (acres)  map suffix will modify  See A. and E. below 5 Maximum Lot Coverage (building coverage) 60% Maximum Lot Dimensions (width to depth ratio) 1:3 Minimum Lot Dimensions (width/depth in ft.) 300/300 Front Yard Setback (ft.) 25 Side Yard Setbacks (ft.)  See B. below 10 Rear Yard Setbacks (ft.)  See C. below 10 Street Side Yard Setbacks (ft.) 25 Maximum Floor Area Ratio (FAR - fl. area/lot area) 1.20 Minimum District Size (acres) 5  
A.  Minimum lot size can be less than five acres if the subdivision application is filed concurrently with a planned development, site plan review or conditional use permit application. 
B.  Only one side yard is required to provide for emergency access. If the adjacent property is not designated commercial or industrial, a side yard shall be required along that side of the property. 
C.  A rear yard is required only when the adjacent property is not designated commercial or industrial. 
D.  Site design within general commercial use areas should include effective internal circulation, designed to minimize traffic impacts on adjacent arterial streets. 
E.  Regional commercial uses should have access from major highways or arterials, and be of a size and configuration to facilitate development of businesses attracting consumers from a regional market area. Minimum site area for a development project within a regional commercial area should be ten acres. 
(Ord. 2002-09 Exh. A (part), 2002) 
16.20.490 - C-3 Zone District, property development standards. 
C-3 ZONE DISTRICT 

DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS Maximum Structure Height (ft.) 35 Minimum Lot Size (acres)  map suffix will modify  See A. below 5 Maximum Lot Coverage (building coverage) 65% Maximum Lot Dimensions (width to depth ratio) 1:3 Minimum Lot Dimensions (width/depth in ft.) 300/300 Front Yard Setback (ft.) 25 Side Yard Setbacks (ft.)  See B. below 10 Rear Yard Setbacks (ft.)  See C. below 10 Street Side Yard Setbacks (ft.) 25 Maximum Floor Area Ratio (FAR - fl. area/lot area) 1.20 Minimum District Size (acres) 5  
A.  Minimum lot size can be less than five acres if the subdivision application is filed concurrently with a planned development, site plan review or conditional use permit application. 
B.  Only one side yard is required to provide for emergency access. If the adjacent property is not designated commercial or industrial, a side yard shall be required along that side of the property. 
C.  A rear yard is required only when the adjacent property is not designated commercial or industrial. 
(Ord. 2002-09 Exh. A (part), 2002) 
16.20.500 - I-1 and I-2 Zone Districts, property development standards. 
I-1 AND I-2 ZONE DISTRICTS 

DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS Maximum Structure Height (ft.) 50 Minimum Lot Size (acres)  map suffix will modify  See A. below 5 Maximum Lot Coverage (building coverage) 70% Maximum Lot Dimensions (width to depth ratio) 1:3 Minimum Lot Dimensions (width/depth in ft.) 150/200 Front Yard Setback (ft.) 25 Side Yard Setbacks (ft.)  See B. below 10 Rear Yard Setbacks (ft.)  See C. below 10 Street Side Yard Setbacks (ft.) 15 Maximum Floor Area Ratio (FAR - fl. area/lot area) 0.97 Minimum District Size (acres) 5  
A.  Minimum lot size can be less than five acres if the subdivision application is filed concurrently with a planned development, site plan review or conditional use permit application. 
B.  Only one side yard is required to provide for emergency access. If the adjacent property is not designated commercial or industrial, a side yard shall be required along that side of the property. 
C.  A rear yard is required only when the adjacent property is not designated commercial or industrial. 
D.  Where possible, industrial areas should be separated from residential areas by natural or manmade barriers, such as drainage courses, utility easements, railroad tracks, or major arterials. Adequate land use and design buffers to mitigate impacts of truck traffic, noise, emissions, and other potential land use conflicts, must be addressed through the design review process. 
(Ord. 2002-09 Exh. A (part), 2002) 
16.20.510 - Resource conservation designation, property development standards. 
RESOURCE CONSERVATION (OH/RC) DESIGNATION 

DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS Maximum Structure Height (ft.) 35 Minimum Lot Size (acres)  map suffix will modify 40 Maximum Lot Coverage (building coverage) None Required Maximum Lot Dimensions (width to depth ratio) 1:4 Minimum Lot Frontage (ft.) 150 Front Yard Setback (ft.) 25 Side Yard Setbacks (ft.) 15 Rear Yard Setbacks (ft.) 15 Street Side Yard Setbacks (ft.) 25 Maximum Housing Density (dwelling unit/acre) 1/40 Minimum District Size (acres) 200  
(Ord. 2002-09 Exh. A (part), 2002) 
16.20.520 - Public/institutional zone district, property development standards. 
PUBLIC/INSTITUTIONAL ZONE DISTRICT 

DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS Maximum Structure Height (ft.) 50 Minimum Lot Size (acres) map suffix will modify None Required Maximum Lot Coverage (building coverage) 70% Maximum Lot Dimensions (width to depth ratio) 1:4 Minimum Lot Dimensions (width/depth in ft.) 60/100 Front Yard Setback (ft.) 15 Side Yard Setbacks (ft.) 10 Rear Yard Setbacks (ft.) 10 Street Side Yard Setbacks (ft.) 15 Maximum Floor Area Ratio (FAR - fl. area/lot area) 1.20 Minimum District Size (acres) None Required  
(Ord. 2002-09 Exh. A (part), 2002) 
16.20.530 - Flood hazard protection areas, property development standards. 
FLOOD HAZARD PROTECTION AREAS 

DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS Maximum Structure Height (ft.) 35 Minimum Lot Size (acres)  map suffix will modify 10 Maximum Lot Dimensions (width to depth ratio) 1:4 Minimum Lot Dimensions (width/depth in ft.) 60/100 Front Yard Setback (ft.) 75 Side Yard Setbacks (ft.) 15 Rear Yard Setbacks (ft.) 15 Street Side Yard Setbacks (ft.) 25 Minimum District Size (acres) None Required  
A.  No structure or use shall be constructed, located or substantially improved and no land shall be graded or developed in the applicable area, except upon approval of a plan which provides that the proposed development will not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
B.  All proposed land use permits within areas subject to the city's flood hazard protection regulations shall meet all of the requirements necessary for approval of a permit in accordance with Chapter 8.28 of the municipal code. 
(Ord. 2002-09 Exh. A (part), 2002) 
16.20.540 - SD, PCD, C/SD, FD and CCD land use designations, property development standards. 
SD, PCD, C/SD, FD AND CCD DESIGNATIONS 

DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS 

See A. below Maximum Structure Height (ft.) 50 Minimum Lot Size (acres)  map suffix will modify  See B. and C. below 10 Maximum Lot Coverage (building coverage) 70% Maximum Lot Dimensions (width to depth ratio) = 10 acres 
< 10 acres 1:4 
1:3 Minimum Lot Dimensions (width/depth in ft.) 400/400 Front Yard Setback (ft.) 15 Side Yard Setbacks (ft.)  See D. below 10 Rear Yard Setbacks (ft.)  See E. below 10 Street Side Yard Setbacks (ft.) 15 Maximum Floor Area Ratio (FAR - fl. area/lot area) 1.20 Minimum District Size (acres) 10  
A.  Alternate Standards. An approved development plan or specific plan may establish different design standards including accessory sign standards. See suffix modifications in the community plan text for limitations within the applicable land use designations. 
B.  A map suffix may allow minimum lot size to be more than one acre (e.g. CCD-5=Planned Development-five acre minimum). A map suffix may also indicate maximum dwelling units per acre (e.g. CCD-3/1=Planned Development-three dwelling units per acre). 
C.  Minimum Lot Size. An approved development plan or specific plan may approve lot sizes smaller than ten acres. The combination of open spaces and concentrations of smaller lot areas shall be compatible with the land uses on surrounding properties. 
D.  Only one side yard is required to provide for emergency access. If the adjacent property is not designated commercial or industrial, a side yard shall be required along that side of the property. 
E.  A rear yard is required only when the adjacent property is not designated commercial or industrial. 
F.  Uses Allowed. An approved development plan or specific plan may allow intermixing of residential, commercial and industrial uses, provided there is a determined need for such special development standards. See suffix modifications within the community plan text for limitations within the applicable land use designations. 
G.  Standards within approved developments shall apply in lieu of conflicting standards in the development code. All standards established by the development code which do not conflict with the approved development plan or specific plan shall apply to the project. 
(Ord. 2002-09 Exh. A (part), 2002) 
ARTICLE XII. - LANDSCAPE REGULATIONS[15] 

Footnotes: 
--- (15) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2010-06, § 2(Exh. A), adopted Aug. 17, 2010, amended Art. XII in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. XII, §§ 16.20.550-16.20.650, pertained to similar subject matter and derived Ord. 2006-18, § 4(Exh. A (part)), adopted 2007. 

16.20.550 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to provide water conservation and landscape development standards and guidelines that will promote the general welfare of city of Hesperia residents through creating responsible outdoor environment which will: 
A.  Decrease the use of water for landscaping purposes by requiring the efficient use of irrigation; aggregate materials; low water use plant materials; regular maintenance of landscaped areas and irrigation; utilizing xeriscaping principles, and restricting the use of turf and ornamental water features; 
B.  Achieve variety and diversity of landscaping within commercial, industrial, and residential developments using materials and plants that are appropriate to the high-desert climate with a common theme; 
C.  Enhance the appearance of all development by providing standards relating to the quality, quantity, and functional aspects of landscaping and landscape screening; 
D.  Create aesthetically pleasing views and vistas along public streets; 
E.  Complement and enhance the functional and aesthetic design of new building and site development projects so as to protect and enhance property values; 
F.  Provide visual screening of parking, loading, and storage areas; 
G.  Mitigate the adverse impacts of higher intensity land uses upon lower intensity uses through the provision of needed landscape buffers. 
H.  Use water efficiently by setting a maximum applied water allowance as an upper limit for water use and reduce water use to the lowest practical amount. 
(Ord. No. 2010-06, § 2(Exh. A), 8-17-10) 
16.20.560 - Definitions. 
    "Applied water" means the portion of water supplied by the irrigation system to the landscape. 
    "Approved plant list" means a list of plants that are approved for use within developments in the city of Hesperia. The list is continually updated and maintained by the development services department. 
    "Arterial corridor" includes all secondary arterials, arterials, and major arterials within the city of Hesperia, as mapped on the City of Hesperia Master Plan of Arterial Highways. 
    "Bark" means large chips of tree bark to be used as groundcover in landscape areas. 
    "Boulder" means a single rock larger than two feet in width by two feet in height. Boulders may be a natural material or pre-fabricated, but shall be approved by the development services director or his/her designee. 
    "Controller" means an irrigation controller that utilizes either sensors and electronic data regarding current wind, humidity, temperature, and other weather conditions or historical records to determine the amount of water necessary for irrigation. 
    "Ecological restoration project" means a project where the site is intentionally altered to establish a defined, indigenous, historic ecosystem. 
    "Estimated applied water use" means the average annual total amount of water estimated to be necessary to keep plants in a healthy state, calculated as provided in the guidelines. It is based on the reference evapotranspiration rate, the size of the landscape area, plant water use factors, and the relative irrigation efficiency of the irrigation system. 
    "ET adjustment factor" or "ETAF" is equal to the plant factor divided by the irrigation efficiency factor for a landscape project, as described in the guidelines. The ETAF is calculated in the context of local reference evapotranspiration, using site-specific plant factors and irrigation efficiency factors that influence the amount of water that needs to be applied to the specific landscaped area. 
    A combined plant mix with a site-wide average plant factor of 0.5 (indicating a moderate water need) and average irrigation efficiency of 0.71 produces and ET adjustment factor of (.07) = (0.5/0.71, which is the standard of water use efficiency generally required by the water efficient landscape ordinance and the guidelines, except that the ETAF for a special landscape area shall not exceed 1.0. 
    "Guidelines" refers to the Guidelines for Implementation of the Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance, as adopted by the city, which describes procedures calculations, and requirements for landscape project subject to this water efficient landscape ordinance. 
    "Hardscape" means materials such as concrete, asphalt, decorative pavers, walls, and tiles. Hardscape is not inclusive of rock groundcovers. 
    "Hydrozone" means a portion of the landscaped area having plants with similar water needs. A hydrozone may be irrigated or non-irrigated. 
    "Homeowner installed landscape" means any landscaping either installed by a private individual for a single-family residence or installed by a licensed contractor hired by a homeowner. A homeowner, for purposes of this ordinance, is a person who occupies the dwelling he or she owns. This definition excludes speculative homes, which are not owner-occupied dwellings and which are subject under this ordinance to the requirements applicable to developer-installed residential landscape projects. 
    "Irrigation efficiency" means the measurement of the amount of water beneficially used divided by the amount of water applied. Irrigation efficiency is derived from measurements and estimates of irrigation system characteristics and management practices. The minimum average irrigation efficiency for purposes of this water efficient landscape ordinance is 0.71. Greater irrigation efficiency can be expected from well designed and maintained systems. 
    "Land-use action means projects submitted to the development services department for review and approval, including but not limited to: site plan reviews; conditional use permits; and tentative tract maps, variances, and minor exceptions. 
    "Landscape area" means all the planting areas, turf areas, and water features in a landscape design plan subject to the maximum applied water allowance calculation. The landscape area does not include footprints of buildings or structures, sidewalks, driveways, parking lots, decks, patios, gravel or stone walks, other pervious or non-pervious hardscapes, and other non-irrigated areas designated for non-development (e.g., open spaces and existing native vegetation). 
    "Landscape contractor" means a person licensed by the state of California to construct, maintain, repair, install, or subcontract the development of landscape systems. 
    "Landscape documentation package" means the documents required to be provided to the city for review and approval of landscape design projects, as described in the guidelines. 
    "Landscape project" means total area of landscape in a project, as provide in the definition of "landscaped area," meeting the requirements under section of this Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance. 
    "Maximum applied water allowance" (MAWA) means the upper limit of annual applied water for the established landscaped area as specified in this section. It is based upon the area's reference evapotranspiration, the ET adjustment factor, and the size of the landscape area. The estimated total water use shall not exceed the maximum applied water allowance. Special landscape areas, including recreation areas, areas permanently and solely dedicated to edible plants such as orchards and vegetable gardens, and areas irrigated with recycled water are subject to the MAWA with an ETAF not to exceed 1.0. 
    "Mulch" means organic material that provides protection and improves the soil when applied to the soil surface. Shredded mulch is not permitted as groundcover. 
    "Non-living groundcover" means groundcover that does not include live plant materials, such as bark and rock. 
    "Non-residential" means all uses not categorized under residential, such as administrative professional, public/institutional, or agricultural uses. 
    "Plant factor" or "plant water use factor" is a factor, when multiplied by ETo, estimates the amount of water needed by plants. For purposes of this ordinance, the plant factor range for low water use plants is 0 to 0.3, the plant factor range for moderate water use plants is 0.4 to 0.6, and the plant factor range for high water use plants is 0.7 to 1.0. Plant factors cited in this ordinance are derived from the Department of Water Resources 2000 publication "Water Use Classification of Landscape Species". 
    "Production home" means single-family residential home to be built based on stock plans on file with the city of Hesperia. 
    "Recreational area" means areas dedicated to active play such as parks, sports fields, and golf courses where turf provides a playing surface. 
    "Recycled water", "reclaimed water", or "treated sewage effluent water" means treated or recycled waste water of a quality suitable for non-potable uses such as landscape irrigation and water features. This water is not intended for human consumption. 
    "Reference evapotranspiration" or "ETo" means a standard measurement of environmental parameters which affect the water use of plants. ETo is expressed in inches per day, month, or year and is an estimate of the evapotranspiration of a large field of four- to seven-inch tall, cool-season grass that is well watered. Reference evapotranspiration is used as the basis of determining the maximum applied water allowance so that regional differences in climate can be accommodated. 
    "Rehabilitated landscape" means any re-landscaping project that requires a permit, plan check, or design review, meets the requirements of Section 16.20.570 and the modified landscape area is equal to or greater than two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet, is fifty (50) percent of the total landscape area, and the modifications are completed within one year. 
    "Small lot subdivision": Single-family residential subdivisions consisting of lots less than seven thousand two hundred (7,200) square feet in size. 
    "Special landscape area" (SLA) means an area of the landscape dedicated solely to edible plants, areas irrigated with recycled water, water features using recycled water and areas dedicated to active play such as parks, sports fields, golf courses, and where turf provides a playing surface. 
    "Water-efficient desert plants" means plants that require minimal supplemental water upon initial planting, are native to desert climates, and survive well within the High Desert. These plants are identified within Hesperia's approved plant list. 
    "Water-efficient landscaping" means a landscape that is designed and maintained to function in a healthful and visually pleasing manner in compliance with the standards provided in this chapter. This generally involves the strategic use of plants which have minimal water requirements for subsistence, plants native to hot/dry environments (xeriscape), minimal use of turf, appropriate use of trees (help to lower air and soil temperatures, reducing the potential for moisture loss) and hardscape to achieve an overall landscape concept that is water conserving. 
    "WUCOLS" means the Water Use Classification of Landscape Species published by the University of California Cooperative Extension, the Department of Water Resources and the Bureau of Reclamation, 2000, and as may be revised from time to time. 
    "Xeriscape": A combination of seven common-sense gardening principles that save water while creating a lush and colorful landscape which include: 
 Planning and designing for water conservation 
 Create practical turf areas 
 Select low water usage plants and group plants of similar water needs together 
 Use soil amendments as needed for the site and type of plant to be used 
 Use woodchips (bark) to slow evaporation 
 Irrigate efficiently with equipment that delivers the correct amount of water at the correct time 
 Properly maintain landscaping 
(Ord. No. 2010-06, § 2(Exh. A), 8-17-10) 
16.20.570 - General provisions and administration. 
A.  All projects that require approval of a new or revised site plan review, conditional use permit, variance, tentative tract map or other discretionary approval after the effective date of this ordinance shall provide and maintain landscaping in compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  The landscaping standards and requirements established by Sections 16.20.550 through 16.20.610 shall apply to all new developments and projects that are: 
1.  New construction and rehabilitated landscapes for public agency projects and private development, projects with a landscape area equal to or greater than two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet requiring a building or landscape permit, plan check or design review; 
2.  New construction and rehabilitated landscapes which are developer-installed in a single-family and multi-family projects with a landscape area equal to or greater than two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet requiring a building or landscape permit, plan check or design review; 
3.  The landscape maintenance provisions of Section 16.20.650 shall apply to all new and/or existing development, including single-family residences. 
C.  This ordinance does not apply to: 
1.  Registered local, state or federal historical sites; 
2.  Cemeteries; or 
3.  Ecological restoration projects that do not require a permanent irrigation system; or 
4.  Mined-land reclamation projects that do not require a permanent irrigation system; or 
5.  Plant collections, as part of botanical gardens and arboretums open to the public; or 
6.  Homeowner provided landscaping for single-family homes as well as multifamily projects, such as in the case of a patio area of a condominium or townhome. 
D.  It is the duty of the development services department to enforce all permitting and entitlement provisions of this chapter. The director or his/her designee may impose such conditions deemed necessary to achieve the purpose of this chapter. 
E.  Application for a landscaping permit shall be made through submittal to the development services department. 
1.  No developer shall install landscaping within a project without first receiving a permit. 
2.  A permit shall be issued when the application is properly made, all fees are paid, and the proposed landscaping has been reviewed and approved by the planning division, water district, and Hesperia Recreation and Park District for compliance with all city ordinances. 
3.  Fees for landscaping permits shall be set by resolution of the city council. 
4.  All plant materials shall be consistent with Hesperia's approved plant list. 
5.  The installation of the landscaping and irrigation materials required by this chapter shall be completed and shall be approved by the development services director or his/her designee prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the structure, or prior to the use of the facility if no structure is involved. 
F.  Landscaping shall be installed and maintained in a manner that allows free ingress or egress from any door, window, fire escape, driveway parking space, sidewalk or other area required for pedestrian, bicycle motor vehicle or equestrian travel. 
G.  Abatement and removal may be ordered for any landscaping when the development services director, or his/her designee, determines the landscaping to be unsafe or a public nuisance as defined in development code Section 8.32.040.D. Landscaping constructed, altered, abandoned or maintained in violation with this chapter shall be determined to be a public nuisance and shall be subject to abatement and/or removal and replacement. 
H.  Landscaping shall be maintained in a manner consistent with this code. If approved landscaping is removed and/or replaced with materials that do not meet the minimum requirements of this code the property owner will be required to remove all non-compliant landscaping and install landscaping consistent with this code to the satisfaction of the development services director or his/her designee. 
I.  Projects within a specific plan shall meet the minimum requirements of this chapter as well as the standards in the respective specific plan. In case of conflict between the two chapters, the specific plan regulations shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 2010-06, § 2(Exh. A), 8-17-10) 
16.20.580 - Design modification approval. 
    In order to encourage and allow design flexibility, applicants may utilize an administrative design modification which may be approved by the development services director or his/her designee, when the modification meets all of the following criteria: 
A.  Shall be consistent with Sections 16.20.550, Purposes. 
B.  Shall use exclusively water-efficient desert plants as identified in Hesperia's approved plant list. 
C.  Shall demonstrate excellence in design. 
D.  Shall provide greater color and diversity than otherwise required by Sections 16.20.550 to 16.20.650. 
(Ord. No. 2010-06, § 2(Exh. A), 8-17-10) 
16.20.590 - Landscape standards for all zoning districts. 
    The following standards apply to all new and revised site plan reviews conditional use permits, variances, tentative tract maps and other discretionary approvals which include all residential, commercial, industrial, and non-residential developments: 
A.  Irrigation. All landscaped areas shall be served by an approved permanent automatic irrigation system that provides adequate coverage. 
1.  Controllers are required and shall feature automatic adjustment for weather and seasonal variations in irrigation requirements. 
2.  Irrigation shall provide one hundred (100) percent coverage of all plant materials. 
3.  Pop-up spray head irrigation and turf shall be located a minimum of four feet from driveways, hardscape, and public sidewalks in order to reduce overspray. 
4.  Irrigation for shrubs and trees shall consist of drip, bubbler, and other low-flow irrigation types. 
5.  Hydrozones. 
a.  Each valve shall irrigate a hydrozone with similar site slope, sun exposure, soil conditions, and plant materials with similar water use. 
b.  Sprinkler heads and other emission devices shall be selected based on what is appropriate for the plant type within that hydrozone. 
c.  Individual hydrozones that mix plants of moderate to low or moderate to high water use may be allowed if: 
i.  Plant factor calculation is based on the proportions of the respective plant water uses and their plant factor; or 
ii.  The plant factor for the higher water using plant is used for calculation. 
d.  Individual hydrozones that mix high and low water use plants shall not be permitted. 
e.  On the landscape design plan and irrigation design plan designate the areas irrigated by each valve, and assign a number to each valve. Use this valve number in the hydrozone information table. This table can also assist with the irrigation audit and programming the controller. 
6.  Spray irrigation shall be scheduled between eight p.m. and ten a.m. unless weather conditions prevent it. Operation of the irrigations system outside the normal watering window is allowed for the auditing and system maintenance. 
B.  Landscape Design. Landscape designs shall consider such elements as its function, consistency with the building, compatibility to the area, mounding, special features, clustering for a natural appearance when possible, and the use of hardscape and drought tolerant plant materials for water conservation. 
1.  All shrubs shall be planted in non-uniform clusters to soften and vary the slope plane. Trees shall be planted in clusters if possible. 
2.  Planting in linear formations, evenly spaced, is discouraged unless the development is using a formal landscape palette or providing a hedge for screening. Landscaping shall be clustered in order to achieve a more natural appearance. The massing of trees and shrubs into groups containing three or more plants is required unless standards elsewhere within this chapter require only a single element (e.g., single trees within parking lot planter islands). Planting of single shrub specimens, unless used to repeat an element already established within a massed planting in the same visual area, is prohibited. 
3.  Landscaping along street frontages should coordinate with adjacent properties to provide a consistent visual corridor, except when waived by the development services director or his/her designee. 
4.  Landscaping shall be denser near entryways of structures in order to define the entrance within the site. 
5.  Slopes. Slopes exceeding 5:1 shall not utilize spray irrigation. A minimum six-inch concrete curb shall be located at the bottom of the slope in order to contain non-living groundcover within the landscaping planter. 
C.  Approved Plant List. All plant materials shall be consistent with Hesperia's approved plant list, available at the City of Hesperia Planning Division. Applicants may request plants be added to the list by contacting the planning division, at which point a determination will be made. 
D.  Groundcover. Non-living and living groundcover shall provide one hundred (100) percent coverage of all landscape areas that are not covered by trees or shrubs. 
1.  Non-living Groundcover. 
a.  Areas absent of plant materials or alternate materials (boulders, hardscape) shall not be counted towards the total required landscape coverage. 
b.  Rock materials or bark shall be utilized for all areas that are not covered by plant materials. Bark shall not be used on any slope exceeding 5:1. 
c.  Rock is permitted. Rock color shall be approved by the planning division, a uniform grey color is not permitted. 
1.  Decomposed granite is permitted but shall be properly maintained to provide one hundred (100) percent ground coverage. 
2.  Rock less than 3/4 inch in size (such as pea gravel) is permitted as one component of non-living ground cover if it is used in conjunction with an accent of 3/4" or larger rock, fieldstone, cobble, etc. 
d.  Coarse decorative bark may be utilized, but the chips shall be a minimum of two inches in size and installed to a minimum depth of two inches. Shredded mulch is permitted but shall be maintained to provide one hundred (100) percent ground coverage. 
e.  Boulders are encouraged to provide visual interest within a project and shall be counted towards the minimum landscaping requirement when combined with non-living or living groundcover. A boulder shall have a minimum width of two feet or a minimum height of two feet. 
f.  All non-living groundcover shall be installed and maintained a minimum of two inches below adjacent hardscape, including sidewalks and curbs. 
g.  Non-living groundcover may be eliminated if the developer provides additional plant material of at least one shrub per five square feet of landscaped area. 
2.  Living Groundcover. 
a.  Plant materials to be used shall be consistent with the city's approved plant list. 
b.  Plants to be used as groundcover shall have well established roots as well as new and established growth. 
E.  Shrubs. 
1.  Shrubs shall be provided at a minimum average of five shrubs per one hundred (100) square feet of landscape area. 
2.  Shrubs shall be a minimum of five gallons in size. 
a.  The shrub shall be well-established within the five-gallon pot. 
b.  New and established growth shall be evident on the shrub. 
c.  Shrubs shall be a minimum of eighteen (18) inches in height or a minimum of eighteen (18) inches in width. 
3.  Shrubs shall be planted in clustered arrangements that provide an informal and natural appearance to the landscaping. 
F.  Trees. 
1.  Twenty-four-inch box trees shall be a minimum of one inch DBH (diameter at breast height) at the time of planting. 
2.  Shall be a minimum of fifteen (15) gallons in size, and shall have a mix of fifteen-gallon and twenty-four-inch box as described in the landscape matrix. 
3.  Root barriers shall be provided for all trees that will be located within six feet of any structure, pavement, or alternate material such as waterlines, building foundations, concrete flatwork, or turf area. 
4.  All trees shall be staked with at least two stakes, one shall be located on the prevailing windward side (southwest). 
G.  Hedges. 
1.  Shrubs used for screening shall be planted at intervals to provide a dense screen and be capable of growing to a height of three feet within three years of planting. 
H.  Retention Basins. Retention basins within all zoning districts shall be landscaped around the exterior portion of the basin. No irrigation shall be located at the bottom of the basins or the slopes of the basins. 
1.  Trees shall be planted at a rate of one tree per fifty (50) linear feet. 
2.  Shrubs shall be planted at a rate of five shrubs per one hundred (100) square feet of planter area. 
3.  Living and non-living groundcover shall provide one hundred (100) percent coverage of the exterior portion of the retention basin. 
(Ord. No. 2010-06, § 2(Exh. A), 8-17-10) 
16.20.600 - Single-family residential standards. 
    These standards are in addition to the landscape standards for all zone districts. 
A.  All new single-family residential developments shall provide landscaping and an automatic underground irrigation system for the area of the site between the street curb and the front of the structure and from each side property line to the side of the structure, including parkways. 
B.  One or more no-turf plans shall be offered in all residential zoning districts R-1 7,200 (single-family residential with a minimum lot size of seven thousand two hundred (7,200) square feet in size) and shall be showcased within the front yard of one or more model homes. 
C.  Turf. 
1.  Turf is not permitted in front yards or street side yards of small lot subdivisions. 
2.  A maximum of twenty (20) percent of the front yard and side yard landscaping may be turf in all other single-family residential developments. 
D.  Landscaping Materials. A variety of plant materials shall be utilized. 
1.  A minimum of one type of tree, three types of shrubs, three types of plant groundcovers, and two types of non-living groundcover shall be provided for each small-lot subdivision residential lot. A minimum of one type of tree, four types of shrubs, four types of plant groundcover, and three types of non-living groundcover shall be provided for all other residential lots. 
2.  A minimum of two textures, colors, or sizes of groundcover is required in all new developments. This may be achieved through utilizing rock and boulders, providing different colored rock in different areas of landscaping, using different textures of rock throughout the landscaping, or utilizing a combination of bark and hardscape elements. 
3.  Providing hedges or low decorative walls as well as varied heights of trees and shrubs is strongly encouraged to provide visual interest within the landscaping. 
E.  A minimum ten-foot wide planted parkway within the public right-of-way shall be provided along all secondary arterial streets or larger bordering small-lot subdivisions. A minimum five-foot wide planted parkway within the public right of way shall be provided along all secondary arterial streets or larger within all other single-family residential developments. 
F.  Trees Within New Subdivisions. 
1.  All trees shall be located outside of the required clear sight triangle, per development code Section 16.20.045. 
2.  At least twenty-five (25) percent of the trees to be installed within the front or street side yards of a residential subdivision shall be twenty-four-inch box trees. 
a.  In order to encourage the use of water-efficient desert plants, twenty-five (25) percent of the trees to be installed within standard subdivisions and thirty (30) percent of the trees to be installed within small lot subdivisions may be five gallons in size if they are exclusively water-efficient desert plants as identified by the Hesperia approved plant list. 
3.  One required tree shall be located within the public right-of-way landscaped area adjacent to the street, or, if no landscaping within the public right-of-way is required, all trees shall be located in the front yard and street side yard. 
4.  Minimum number of trees required. 
a.  Lots with sixty (60) feet of street frontage or less shall have a minimum of one tree in the front yard. 
b.  Lots with sixty (60) feet or more of street frontage shall have a minimum of two trees in the front yard. 
c.  All corner lots shall have a minimum of two trees, regardless of the street frontage. One tree shall be in the front yard area, and one tree shall be located on the street side yard. 
4.  All required street trees on east-west streets shall be deciduous species and all required street trees on north-south streets of a development shall be evergreen species. 
G.  Entry Statements. Entry statements are required for all residential developments over fifty (50) units in size that contain privately maintained common areas. Statements shall consist of a monument sign or wall sign and enhanced landscaping located on private property at the primary entrance to the project as determined by city staff. 
H.  Education. 
1.  A literature package describing water conserving landscaping designs shall be prominently displayed within all model home sales offices. The package may be obtained from the planning division, or assembled by the developer. The display shall include the following information, plus any relevant information the developer would like to include: 
a.  A Guide to High Desert Landscaping. Available at your local water district offices and the planning division offices. 
b.  Water Efficient Landscaping. Available at your local water district office, the planning division office, or the Mojave Desert Resource Conservation District. 
2.  Developers shall provide a disclosure notifying residences of the front yard landscaping requirements of this ordinance that shall be signed by the homebuyer with the escrow documents. The disclosure shall be submitted to and approved by the planning department prior to final inspection of the sales trailer or the first residence within the tract. 
(Ord. No. 2010-06, § 2(Exh. A), 8-17-10) 
16.20.610 - Commercial, industrial, non-residential, and multi-family residential standards. 
    These standards are in addition to the landscape standards for all zone districts. 
A.  All setbacks, parkways, and areas not occupied by structures, buildings or hardscape shall be landscaped. Areas visible from the public right-of-way that are proposed for development in another phase shall be temporarily seeded and irrigated or treated with an appropriate inorganic ground cover for dust and soil erosion control, if said phase will not begin construction within six months of completion of the previous phase. If the phase does not begin within six months, plans for permanent landscaping shall be submitted to the planning division, and landscaping shall be installed. This requirement does not apply to areas of the site that remain undisturbed. 
B.  Landscape Coverage. 
1.  A minimum of five percent of the project site shall be landscaped in commercial, industrial, and non-residential projects. 
2.  A minimum of fifteen (15) percent of the project site shall be landscaped in multi-family projects. In addition, all non-hardscape areas shall be landscaped. 
C.  Landscaping Materials. A variety of plant materials shall be utilized. All landscape areas that are not covered by plants at time of planting shall be covered with bark, rock, or boulders. Plant types should vary in height to provide visual interest within the project. 
1.  Turf is not permitted as a design element within the project's landscaping. Turf may be permitted for recreational uses such as picnic areas or employee break areas with approval of the development services director or his/her designee. 
2.  For projects less than one-acre, a minimum of two types of trees, four types of shrubs, and two types of plant groundcovers are required. 
3.  For projects one-acre to 2.5 acres in size, a minimum of three types of trees, four types of shrubs, and three types of plant groundcover are required. 
4.  For projects larger than 2.5 acres in size, a minimum of four types of trees, six types of shrubs, and four types of plant groundcover are required. 
D.  Landscape Planters. 
1.  Landscape planters a minimum of eight feet in width shall be provided adjacent to the front and street side yard property lines in the commercial, non-residential, and multi-family zoning districts. In industrial districts landscape planters a minimum of eight feet in width shall be provided adjacent to the front yard property line and a minimum of five feet in width shall be provided adjacent to the street side yard property line. This may include the landscaped area within the public right-of-way. 
2.  All required landscaped areas shall be a minimum of four feet in width and are to be bounded on all sides by six-inch concrete curbing, unless it is bordered by sidewalk. If the planter slopes down towards the sidewalk a six-inch concrete curb is also required. 
E.  Trees. 
1.  Within commercial, non-residential, and multi-family parking lots trees shall be planted at a total of one tree for every six parking stalls. Within industrial parking lots trees shall be planted at a total of one tree for every eight parking stalls. 
a.  Trees shall have a broad canopy that will provide shade in the summer months. 
b.  Trees shall be planted along the required handicap path of travel, sidewalks, or near trash enclosures. When possible, trees may be planted in clusters. 
2.  Trees shall be planted in areas of public view adjacent to and along structures, at an equivalent of one tree per fifty (50) linear feet of building which has public exposure in commercial, non-residential, and multi-family districts. 
3.  Trees shall be planted in areas of public view adjacent to and along structures at an equivalent of one tree per seventy (70) linear feet of building which is visible from any public right-of-way within industrial districts. 
4.  All required trees shall be a minimum of fifteen-gallon size and at least twenty-five (25) percent of the trees to be used in new development shall be twenty-four-inch box in the commercial district and multi-family district and at least twenty (20) percent of the trees to be used in new development shall be twenty-four-inch box in the industrial district. 
5.  In order to encourage the use of desert, water efficient plants, twenty-five (25) percent of the trees to be installed within commercial and multi-family district developments and twenty (20) percent of the trees to be installed within industrial district developments may be five gallons in size if they are exclusively water-efficient desert plants as identified by the Hesperia approved plant list. 
F.  Affordable Housing Incentive. As an incentive for affordable housing, any development that provides housing affordable to seniors or persons of very low or low income through an agreement with the city and as defined by the state department of housing and community development, may use one-gallon shrubs and five-gallon trees within the development. 
G.  Screening. The use or combination of berms, shrubs, trees, and low level walls and structures shall be used to screen parking areas facing public streets, loading areas, trash enclosures, and utilities from public view. 
1.  A six-foot decorative block wall is required along all property lines that abut property designated for residential use within the commercial, non-residential, and industrial districts. The wall shall screen all parking areas, and a minimum five-foot landscape planter shall be located adjacent to the wall within the development in order to provide a landscape buffer between the development and the residential use. Trees shall be located within this planter for screening and shall be evergreen. 
2.  All parking stalls facing public streets shall utilize screening to eliminate headlight glare into the right-of-way, and shall be consistent with Section 16.20.045, clear sight triangles, and Section 16.20.075, projections into yards. All screening used to block headlight glare shall be thirty-six (36) inches in height above the adjacent parking surface. 
a.  A combination of shrubs, trees, or low level walls shall be located within the required landscape planter adjacent to the right of way and shall provide the required three foot high screening. In addition, berms may be used when possible in larger planter areas. 
3.  Landscape berms shall be incorporated wherever possible within the landscape setback and landscape areas surrounding parking and loading areas. 
4.  The height and size of the berms and low walls shall vary whenever possible to provide interest and visual access to buildings. 
H.  Entry Statements. Entry statements are required on all multi-family developments over fifty (50) units, and all industrial, commercial, and non-residential developments over five acres in size. Statements shall consist of a monument sign or wall sign and enhanced landscaping located on private property at the primary entrance to the project. 
(Ord. No. 2010-06, § 2(Exh. A), 8-17-10) 
16.20.620 - Single-family residential landscaping requirements summary matrix. 
Minimum Requirements Small-Lot Subdivisions All Other Single-Family Residential Zones Landscape coverage (16.20.590(A)) All front and street side yard areas and required public right-of-way (not including required driveways) Maximum allowable turf (16.20.600(C)(1) and (2)) Not permitted in front yards 20% Trees (16.20.600(4)) All lots with 60-feet or less of street frontage: one per lot (in public right-of-way) and an additional tree in the street side yard of corner lots All lots exceeding 60-feet of street frontage: two per lot (one in front yard, one in public right-of-way) and an additional tree in the street side yard of corner lots Shrubs (16.20.590(E)(1)) 5 per 100 square feet of landscape planter Landscape planter depth on arterial streets (16.20.600(G)) Ten feet Five feet 24? box tree or larger (16.20.600(3)) 30% 25% Minimum number of plant or material types required in front and street side yards, per residential lot Trees (16.20.600(D)(1)) One Shrubs (16.20.600(D)(1)) Three Four Groundcover (plants) (16.20.600(D)(1)) Three Four Groundcover (non-living) (16.20.600(D)(1)) Two Three  
(Ord. No. 2010-06, § 2(Exh. A), 8-17-10) 
16.20.630 - Commercial, industrial, non-residential, and multi-family residential landscaping requirements summary matrix. 
Minimum 
Requirements Commercial and 
Non-Residential 
Development Industrial Development Multi-Family Landscape Coverage (16.20.610.B.1&2) 5% 5% 15% of project site plus all areas not covered in hardscape Maximum allowable turf (16.20.610.C.1) Not permitted # Parking lot trees (16.20.610.E.1) One 15-gallon tree or larger per six parking stalls One 15-gallon tree or larger per eight parking stalls One 15-gallon tree or larger per six parking stalls Required trees along building frontages (16.20.610.E.2&3) 1 per 50 linear feet 1 per 70 linear feet 1 per 50 linear feet 24" box tree or larger (16.20.610.E.4&5) 25% of total number of trees 20% of total number of trees 25% Shrub requirement (16.20.590.E.1) 5 per 100 square feet of landscape-planter Minimum Landscaping Adjacent to Property Lines Front yard (16.20.610.D.1) Eight feet Street side yard (16.20.610.D.1) Eight feet (16.16.470B) Five feet (16.16.550) Eight feet Rear yard Adjacent to Residential Zoning (16.16.470B&16.16.550) Five feet Ten feet Five feet Minimum Number of Plant Types For Projects Less Than One Acre in Size (16.20.610.C.2) Trees Two Shrubs Four Groundcover (plants) Two Minimum Number of Plant Types for Projects One Acre to 2.5 Acres In Size (16.20.610.C.3) Trees Three Shrubs Four Groundcover (plants) Three Minimum Number of Plant Types For Projects Greater Than 2.5 Acres in Size (16.20.610.C.4) Trees Four Shrubs Six Groundcover (plants) Four  
# Turf is not permitted except for specific recreational use as approved by the Development Services Director or his/her designee. 
(Ord. No. 2010-06, § 2(Exh. A), 8-17-10) 
16.20.640 - Landscape design and irrigation design plan. 
A.  Hesperia's approved plant list shall be used in the preparation of landscape plans. The plant list is available at the planning division and will be updated on a continual basis. 
B.  Landscape and irrigation plans shall be prepared, stamped, and signed by a licensed landscape architect, architect, engineer, land surveyor, certified irrigation designer, licensed landscape contractor, or any other person authorized to design an irrigation system with the following statement "I have complied with the criteria of the ordinance and applied them accordingly for the efficient use of water in the irrigation design plan". 
C.  Prior to issuance of a building permit, three copies of a landscape design plan consisting of landscape and irrigation plans consistent with the requirements of this chapter. Plans shall be drawn at a minimum scale of one inch equals eight feet (maximum sheet size 24" × 36") and shall be submitted to the building and safety division as part of the landscape documentation package (Appendix A) 
D.  Landscape documentation package includes: 
1.  Project information: date, project applicant, project address (parcel/lot number), total landscape area, project type (e.g new, rehabilitated, public, private, cemetery, homeowner-installed), water supply (e.g., potable, recycled, well) and identify the local retail water purveyor if the applicant is not served by a private well, checklist of all documents in the landscape documentation package, project contacts, applicant signature and date with statement "I agree to comply with the requirements of the water efficient landscape ordinance and submit a complete landscape documentation package." 
2.  Water efficient landscape worksheet: 
a.  Hydrozone information table. 
b.  Water budget calculations-Maximum Applied Water Allowance (MAWA) and Estimated Total Water Use (ETWU). 
3.  Soil management report; 
4.  Landscape design plan 
5.  Irrigation design plan; 
E.  Prior to construction, the project applicant shall: 
1.  Submit a landscape documentation package to the local agency. 
F.  Upon approval of the landscape documentation package by the local agency, the project applicant shall: 
1.  Receive a permit or approval of the plan check or design review and record the date of the permit in the certificate of completion; 
2.  Submit a copy of the approved landscape documentation package along with the record drawings, and any other information to the property owner or his/her designee; and 
3.  Submit a copy of the water efficient landscape worksheet to the local water purveyor. 
G.  Water efficient landscape worksheet. 
1.  A project applicant shall complete the water efficient landscape worksheet which contains two sections: 
a.  A hydrozone information table for the landscape project; and 
b.  A water budget calculation for the landscape project. For the calculation of the maximum applied water allowance and estimated total water use, a project applicant shall us the ETo value of 66.2. 
2.  Water budget calculations shall adhere to the following requirements: 
a.  The plant factor used shall be from WUCOLS. The plant factor ranges from o to 0.3 for low water use plans, form 0.4 to 0.6 for moderate water use plants, and from 0.7 to 1.0 for high water use plants. 
b.  All water features shall be included in the high water use hydrozone and temporarily irrigated areas shall be include in the low water use hydrozone. 
c.  All special landscape areas shall be identified and their water use calculated as described below. 
d.  ETAF for special landscape areas shall not exceed 1.0. For the purpose of determining maximum applied water allowance, average irrigation efficiency is assumed to be 0.71. Irrigation systems shall be designed, maintained, and managed to meet or exceed and average landscape irrigation efficiency of 0.71. 
3.  Maximum applied water allowance shall be calculated using the equation: 
MAWA = (ETo) (0.62) [(0.7 × LA) + (0.3 × SLA)] 
ETo = Reference Evapotranspiration (inches per year) 
0.62 = Conversion Factor (to gallons) 
0.7 = ET Adjustment Factor (ETAF) 
LA = Landscape Area including SLA (square feet) 
0.3 = Additional Water Allowance for SLA 
SLA = Special Landscape Area (square feet) 
4.  Estimated total water use shall be calculated using the equation below. The sum of the estimated total water use calculated for all hydrozones shall not exceed MAWA. 
ETWU = [(ETo) (0.62)] [(PF × HA)/IE + SLA)] 
ETo = Reference Evapotranspiration (inches) 
PF = Plant Factor form WUCOLS 
HA = Hydrozone Area [high, medium, and low water use areas] (square feet) 
SLA = Special Landscape Area (square feet) 
0.62 = Conversion Factor 
IE = Irrigation Efficiency (minimum 0.71) 
I.  The landscape plan shall be drawn on project base sheets and be fully dimensioned and shall comply with Section 16.20.590. 
J.  Irrigation Plan. A fully dimensioned irrigation plan shall be drawn on project base sheets separate from the landscape design plan. The scale and format shall be the same as the landscape plan and comply with Section 16.20.590. 
(Ord. No. 2010-06, § 2(Exh. A), 8-17-10) 
16.20.642 - Recycled water. 
A.  The installation of recycled water irrigation systems shall allow for the current and future us of recycled water, unless an exemption has been granted as describe in Section 16.20.642(B). 
B.  Irrigation systems and decorative water features shall use recycled water unless a written exemption has been granted by the city stating that recycled water meeting all public health codes and standards is not available and will not be available for the foreseeable future. 
C.  All recycled water irrigation systems shall be designed and operated in accordance with all applicable local and state laws. 
D.  Landscapes using recycled water are considered special landscape areas. The ET adjustment factor for special landscape areas shall not exceed 1.0. 
(Ord. No. 2010-06, § 2(Exh. A), 8-17-10) 
16.20.645 - Irrigation audit, irrigation survey, and irrigation water use analysis. 
A.  All landscape irrigation audits hall be conducted by a certified landscape irrigation auditor certifying that all irrigation systems, plant materials, and landscape features have been installed and operate as approved, and shall submit that certification to the city prior to occupancy and use. 
B.  For new construction and rehabilitated landscape projects installed after January 1, 2010, as described in Section 16.20.570: 
1.  The project applicant shall submit an irrigation audit report with the certificate of completion to the city that includes: inspection, system tune-up, system test with distribution uniformity, reporting overspray or run off that causes overland flow, and preparation of an irrigation schedule: 
(Ord. No. 2010-06, § 2(Exh. A), 8-17-10) 
16.20.650 - Landscape and irrigation maintenance schedule. 
A.  Landscapes shall be maintained to ensure water use efficiency. A regular maintenance schedule shall be submitted with the certificate of completion. 
B.  A regular maintenance schedule shall include, but not be limited to, routine inspection; adjustment and repair of the irrigation system and its components; aerating and dethatching turf areas; replenishing mulch; fertilizing; pruning; weeding in all landscape areas, and removing and obstruction to emission devices. Operation of the irrigation system outside the normal watering window is allowed for auditing and system maintenance. 
C.  All landscaped areas shall be maintained in a healthy and growing condition and shall receive regular pruning, fertilizing, and trimming. Turf shall not exceed six inches in height. All dead plant material shall be removed and replaced in a timely manner. 
D.  All irrigation systems shall be kept operable, including adjustments, replacements, repairs and cleaning as part of regular maintenance. Repair of all irrigation equipment shall be done with the originally installed components or their equivalents. 
E.  All landscaped areas shall be kept free of weeds and debris. 
F.  If a parcel is proposed for residential, industrial, commercial or institutional use, maintenance of any landscaping in the public right-of-way between the curb of any street abutting the parcel and the property line shall be the responsibility of the owner of that parcel, unless the Hesperia Parks and Recreation District has assumed responsibility for maintenance. 
G.  A project applicant is encouraged to implement sustainable or environmentally-friendly practices for overall landscape maintenance. 
(Ord. No. 2010-06, § 2(Exh. A), 8-17-10) 
ARTICLE XIII. - ANIMAL REGULATIONS 

16.20.660 - Purpose. 
    These provisions define the type, number, and regulations regarding the keeping of animals in residential and agricultural designations and zones in order to ensure land use compatibility. These provisions balance the desire for animal keeping with the rights of neighboring property owners. This article also includes regulations which provide minimum distances between areas for the keeping of animals and habitable structures in furtherance of maintaining land use compatibility. 
(Ord. No. 2011-13, § 3(Exh. A), 9-20-11; Ord. No. 2012-08, § 3(Exh. A), 6-19-12; Ord. No. 2017-18 , § 3(Exh. A), 10-17-17) 
16.20.670 - Requirements and key. 
    Table 16.20.680 (A) through Table 16.20.680 (F) provide the regulatory requirements to allow private animal keeping in the City. These regulations additionally apply to zones within the Main Street and Freeway Corridor Specific Plan. In interpreting and applying the provisions of this article, such provisions shall be held to the minimum requirements for the promotion of public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Whenever there is any question regarding the interpretation of the provisions of this article or their application to any specific case or situation, the development services director or designee shall interpret the intent of this article. The following key legend demonstrates which symbol corresponds with the applicable permit process. 
Permit Symbol Applicable Process A Accessory Use P Permitted Use E Requires an Exotic Animal Permit NP Not Permitted  
(Ord. No. 2011-13, § 3(Exh. A), 9-20-11; Ord. No. 2012-08, § 3(Exh. A), 6-19-12; Ord. No. 2017-18 , § 3(Exh. A), 10-17-17) 
16.20.680 - Animal allowances. 
The quantity and type of animals shall be regulated as follows: 
Table 16.20.680 (A) - Animal allowances in the Limited Agricultural (A1) and General Agricultural (A2) designations 
Type of Animal Permit Symbol Lot size criteria Quantities Additional Regulations Dogs and Cats A Below 1.5 acres 6 of each Female or neutered male potbellied pigs may be substituted for allowable quantities of dogs. 1.5 acres or more 8 of each Small Livestock P 1 acre or more 12 per acre Each lot limited to one buck. Total allowed is combined with cattle, horses and hogs Horses, mules, donkeys, and llamas P 4 per acre Total allowed is combined with livestock, hogs, and cattle Small animals P 150 per acre Hogs and large pigs P 2 per acre, but not more than 5 Total allowed is combined with small livestock, cattle, and horses. Cannot be garbage feed Fowl P 150 per acre Cattle P 4 per acre Total allowed is combined with small, livestock, hogs, and horses Columbi, caged P 150 maximum  
Table 16.20.680 (B) - Animal allowances in the Rural Residential (RR) designation and the Rural Estate Residential (RER) zone 
Type of Animal Permit Symbol Lot size criteria Quantities Additional Regulations Dogs and Cats A Under 19,500 square feet (sq. ft.) 4 of each Female or neutered male potbellied pigs may be substituted for allowable quantities of dogs. Between 19,500 sq. ft. - 1.49 acre 6 of each 1.5 acres or more 8 of each Small Livestock A All sizes 1 per 5,000 Each lot limited to one buck. Total allowed is combined with cattle and horses Horses, mules, donkeys, and llamas A All sizes 1 per 10,000 sq. ft. Total allowed is combined with small, livestock, and cattle Small animals A All sizes 15 per 10,000 sq. ft. Cannot be kept for meat or pelts. Total allowed is combined with fowl. Hogs and large pigs NP 0 Fowl A All sizes 15 per 10,000 sq. ft. Total allowed is combined with small animals. Cattle A 1 acre or more 4 per acre Total allowed is combined with small, livestock, and horses Columbi, caged A All sizes 65 maximum  
Table 16.20.680 (C) - Animal allowances in the Single-Family Residence (R1) designation 
Type of Animal Permit Symbol Lot size criteria Quantities Additional Regulations Dogs and Cats A Under 18,000 sq. ft. 2 of each Female or neutered male potbellied pigs may be substituted for allowable quantities of dogs. One acre and up, one additional per 1/2 acre (maximum 8). Between 18,000 sq. ft. - 19,499 sq. ft. 4 of each Between 19,500 sq. ft. - 1 acre 6 of each Small Livestock NP Any size Educational Animal Permit Only Not permitted unless authorized by an educational animal project or prior to residential use on five acres or more. Horses, mules, donkeys, and llamas A Over 20,000 sq. ft. 1 per 10,000 sq. ft., not to exceed a total of 6 Lots 19,000 sq. ft. and larger may be allowed one horse with written approval from all contiguous property owners. Lots with a minimum net lot area of 10,000 sq. ft. previously within the RR designation shall be allowed one horse. Small animals A All sizes 2 for 3,500 sq. ft., not to exceed 25 per acre Cannot be kept for meat or pelts. Total allowed is combined with fowl. Hogs and large pigs NP 0 Fowl A All sizes 2 for 3,500 sq. ft., not to exceed 25 per acre. Any male fowl limited to 1 per 14,000 sq. ft. Lots over 18,000 sq. ft., 10% of allowed may be male. Total allowed is combined with small animals. Cattle NP 0 Columbi, caged A 40 maximum  
Table 16.20.680 (D) - Animal allowances in the Low Density Residential (LDR) zone 
Type of Animal Permit Symbol Lot size criteria Quantities Additional Regulations Dogs and Cats A Under 18,000 sq. ft. 2 of each Female or neutered male potbellied pigs may be substituted for allowable quantities of dogs. One acre and up, one additional per 1/2 acre (maximum 8). Between 18,000 sq. ft. - 19,499 sq. ft. 4 of each Between 19,500 sq. ft.- 1 acre 6 of each Small Livestock NP Under 1 acre Educational Animal Permit Only Not permitted unless authorized by an educational animal project or prior to residential use on five acres or more. A 1 acre or more 1 per 5,000 Each lot limited to one buck. Total allowed is combined with small animals and fowl Horses, mules, donkeys, and llamas A Over 20,000 sq. ft. 1 per 10,000 sq. ft., not to exceed a total of 6 Lots 19,000 sq. ft. and larger may be allowed one horse with written approval from all contiguous property owners. Lots with a minimum net lot area of 10,000 sq. ft. previously within the RR designation shall be allowed one horse. Small animals A Under 1 acre 2 for 3,500 sq. ft., not to exceed 25 per acre Cannot be kept for meat or pelts. Total allowed is combined with fowl A 1 acre or more 15 per 10,000 sq. ft. Cannot be kept for meat or pelts. Total allowed is combined with fowl and small livestock Hogs and large pigs NP 0 Fowl NP Under 7,200 sq. ft. 0 A Between 7,200 sq. ft. - 43,559 sq. ft. 2 for 3,500 sq. ft., not to exceed 25 per acre Total allowed is combined with small animals A 1 acre or more 15 per 10,000 sq. ft. Total allowed is combined with small animals and small livestock Cattle NP 0 Columbi, caged A Under 1 acre 40 maximum 1 acre or more 65 maximum  
Table 16.20.680 (E) - Animal allowances in the Very Low Density Residential (VLR) zone 
Type of Animal Permit Symbol Lot size criteria Quantities Additional Regulations Dogs and Cats A Under 18,000 sq. ft. 2 of each Female or neutered male potbellied pigs may be substituted for allowable quantities of dogs. One acre and up, one additional per 1/2 acre (maximum 8). Between 18,000 sq. ft. - 19,499 sq. ft. 4 of each Between 19,500 sq. ft.- 1 acre 6 of each Small Livestock A Under 1 acre 1 per 5,000 Each lot limited to one buck. Total allowed is combined small animals, and fowl P 1 acre or more 12 per acre Total allowed is combined horses, cattle and hogs Horses, mules, donkeys, and llamas A All sizes 1 per 10,000 sq. ft. Total allowed is combined with small livestock, cattle and hogs Small animals A Under 1 acre 15 per 10,000 sq. ft. Cannot be kept for meat or pelts. Total allowed is combined with small livestock and fowl P 1 acre or more 150 per acre Hogs and large pigs NP Under 1 acre 0 P 1 acre or more 2 per acre, but not more than 5 Total allowed is combined with horses, cattle and small livestock. Cannot be garbage feed Fowl A Under 1 acre 15 per 10,000 sq. ft. Total allowed is combined with small animals and small livestock P 1 acre or more 150 per acre Cattle NP Under 1 acre 0 Total allowed is combined with horses, hogs and small livestock P 1 acre or more 4 per acre Columbi, caged A Under 1 acre 65 maximum P 1 acre or more 150 maximum  
Table 16.20.680 (F) - Animal allowances in the Multiple-Family Residence (R3) designation, and the Medium Density Residential (MDR), the High Density Residential (HDR), and the Mixed Use (MU) zones 
Type of Animal Permit Symbol Lot size criteria Quantities Additional Regulations Dogs and Cats A Any size One dog and one cat, 2 dogs, or 2 cats Female or neutered male potbellied pigs may be substituted for allowable quantities of dogs. Small animals A Any size 1 per unit Cannot be kept for meat or pelts. Columbi, caged A Any size 10 per unit Small Livestock, Hogs, Fowl, and Cattle NP Any size 0 Horses, mules, and donkeys, NP Any size 0  
(Ord. No. 2017-18 , § 3(Exh. A), 10-17-17) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2017-18 , § 3(Exh. A), adopted October 17, 2017, amended § 16.20.680 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 16.20.680 pertained to permit requirements for animals by land use designation, and derived from Ord. No. 2011-13, § 3(Exh. A), 9-20-11; Ord. No. 2012-08, § 3(Exh. A), 6-19-12). 
16.20.690 - Additional animal regulations applicable to residential or agricultural designations/zones. 
[A.]  Total allowed is combined with..." means that combinations of specific animal types are allowed, provided the total allotment on any parcel shall not be exceeded. When combining animals, it is not the intent here to allow each animal at its maximum density. Instead these animals shall be allowed as a proportion of the property's allotment. In order to determine if the property's allotment is not exceeded, one must first determine the area of property required by each animal (see Table 1). The area required for each animal on the property is added up to determine if the total amount exceeds the property's lot size. The total amount shall not exceed the property's lot size. On a one acre property, a combination of animals consistent with this provision would be equivalent to fifteen (15) fowl, twenty (20) small animals, and four goats (see Figure 1). 
Table 1 - Example of area required for each animal in the RR zone 
Type of Animal Area required 1 Fowl 667 sq. ft. 1 Small Animal 667 sq. ft. 1 Small Livestock 5,000 sq. ft.  
Figure 1 - Example of Area Required When Combining Animals 

B.  Exotic animals (not normally domesticated), as defined within Section 16.08.215 and Title 14, Section 671 of the California Fish and Game Only, shall be allowed if approved as part of an exotic animal permit. Foxes and minks are only permitted in the A2 zone with an exotic animal permit. 
C.  Fishbowls and aquariums are allowed as accessory uses. This is applicable only to small private fish, amphibian, and reptile collections and does not allow large tanks and/or buildings in which fish and other animals are kept and shown to the public. 
D.  Ostriches and emus are only permitted in the A2 zone. 
E.  Commercial raising of rabbits or other small animals and cattle is permitted in the A1, RER, and VLR zones on lots at least one gross acre in size and one hundred fifty (150) feet of street frontage. 
F.  In the A2 zone, noncommercial animal keeping shall not exceed the number allowed in the A1 designation. Large scale animal keeping shall be limited to local and industry standards. 
G.  Apiaries shall be regulated by Section 6.12.080 of the municipal code. 
H.  Prior to being weaned, the offspring of an allowed animal type shall be permitted. 
I.  Lots with a minimum net lot area of ten thousand (10,000) square feet previously within the RR designation shall be allowed one horse. This applies to properties zoned R1, LDR, VLR. This is consistent with the Development Code prior to adoption of Resolution No. 2010-058, which established the general plan update. 
(Ord. No. 2017-18 , § 3(Exh. A), 10-17-17) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2017-18 , § 3(Exh. A), adopted October 17, 2017, amended § 16.20.690 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 16.20.690 pertained to number of animals allowed by land use designation, and derived from Ord. No. 2011-13, § 3(Exh. A), 9-20-11; Ord. No. 2012-08, § 3(Exh. A), 6-19-12). 
16.20.700 - Standards for the keeping of animals. 
A.  General animal use regulations. The keeping of animals shall be in accordance with Article XIII of Chapter 16.20 and Title 6. 
1.  All animals shall be allowed as an accessory use to a primary use except on a minimum five gross acre vacant parcel within the R1 designation and as a permitted agricultural use within the RR, RER, A1, and A2 Designations. On a vacant five gross acre property designated R1, one cow or two goats are allowed per acre or four hundred (400) fowl per acre. 
2.  All buildings and enclosures for animals, except for cats, dogs, and pot-bellied pigs, shall be in accordance with Section 16.16.105 entitled "Animal buildings and structures." 
3.  The location of corrals, fenced enclosures, barns, stables, stalls and similar enclosures used to confine horses shall conform to the clearances as set forth in this section and Chapter 16.20, street setback regulations. Whenever the words "keeping" or "kept" are used in this section, they shall mean and include maintaining, grazing, riding, leading, exercising, tying, hitching, stabling and allowing to run at large. Riding or leading of horses to or from the premises in order to gain access to a bridle path, alley or street is allowed. Fences shall be a minimum height of five feet and capable of securing horses. 
B.  Standards of care and licensing of animals. 
1.  All areas used for the keeping of animals shall be adequately maintained to reduce odors and other negative effects in accordance with Title 6 of the Municipal Code. 
2.  All animals shall be licensed as required by Title 6. 
3.  Commercial animal facilities shall comply with Title 6. 
C.  Educational animal project. An educational animal project may be permitted as a temporary accessory use on a lot and shall require approval of an educational animal project application in accordance with this chapter. 
1.  The number of animals that may be permitted is shown in Table 16.20.690. Animals born to the project animal pursuant to an approved educational animal project permit under the age of four months may also be kept. 
2.  Combinations of the listed animals may be kept, provided the maximum number does not exceed the allowable number within Table 16.20.710. 
Table 16.20.710 
Allowed Number of Animals For an Educational Animal Project 
The number and type of animals allowed with an approved educational animal project permit as a function of net lot area Maximum Number One bovine per 20,000 sq. ft. 3 Two calves per 10,000 sq. ft. (to a maximum age of six (6) months) 9 Two sheep per 10,000 sq. ft. 9 Two goats per 10,000 sq. ft. 9  
3.  An educational animal project shall be subject to the following. The educational animal project shall be kept only on an improved and occupied lot or parcel. 
a.  Such animals shall be kept at least seventy (70) feet from buildings used for human habitation, public park, school, hospital or church buildings on adjoining lots or parcels. Buildings used for human habitation shall not include cabanas, patios, attached or detached private garages or storage buildings. 
b.  Areas for animal keeping shall be a minimum of five feet from interior side and rear property lines, and fifteen (15) feet from side street rights-of-way, excepting an alley or bridle path. Animals shall not be kept within any front yard. 
c.  The animals shall be confined by a five-foot high chain link fence or a five foot wood fence with horizontal members no more than six inches apart, in accordance with the fencing limitations within the Development Code. 
4.  An exemption shall be made to allow for the purpose of conducting animal projects by 4-H, FFA or other state accredited program members, specifically and exclusively; provided, the members obtain an educational animal project permit, which shall be subject to the following conditions: 
a.  Educational animal project permits shall be issued for twenty-four (24) months, during which time unscheduled monthly inspections shall be conducted. Permits may be extended on a twelve (12) month basis. Requests for extensions shall be evaluated based on inspections, any complaints on file, and other applicable information. The permit shall become invalid when the permittee reaches nineteen (19) years of age, or in the event the 4-H or FFA project is discontinued; 
b.  Property owners contiguous to the permittee shall be notified prior to the issuance of a permit and shall be renotified in the event an extension is requested; 
c.  In the event of a complaint, or if unsatisfactory conditions are identified through inspection, the 4-H, FFA or other accredited program representative shall cooperate with city staff to enforce the conditions of the educational animal project permit; 
d.  All operation and maintenance regulations established under an approved educational animal project permit shall be met. 
e.  Any violation of the permit requirements may result in the revocation of the educational animal project permit. The permittee shall be given written notification prior to consideration for revocation. 
(Ord. No. 2011-13, § 3(Exh. A), 9-20-11; Ord. No. 2012-08, § 3(Exh. A), 6-19-12) 
16.20.710-16.20.740 - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIV. - DONATION BINS 

16.20.750 - Purpose and intent. 
    The purpose of regulating donation bins is to ensure public safety, avoid public nuisance, and promote compatibility of the use with surrounding uses and properties. 
( Ord. No. 2017-02 , § 4(Exh. A), 1-17-17) 
16.20.760 - Definition. 
    Donation Bin. As used herein, shall mean a small detached structure placed on private property used for the deposit of donated household goods such as clothing and shoes, small appliances, toys, etc., intended for collection by the charity or other nonprofit organization with ownership of the bin. 
( Ord. No. 2017-02 , § 4(Exh. A), 1-17-17) 
16.20.770 - Development criteria 
    Donation bins are permitted on developed sites in all commercial and industrial zones subject to the following: 
A.  A special use permit application shall be submitted and approved administratively (by planning staff) prior to placement of any donation bin. 
B.  A maximum of one donation bin may be placed on any one developed commercial or industrial lot. Development must have previously been approved by the city. 
C.  Donation bins shall be spaced apart from one another by a minimum distance of three hundred (300) feet. 
D.  Permits for donation bins shall be issued to non-profit organizations only. A copy of the organization's 501(c) shall be submitted with the special use permit application. 
E.  No donation bin shall be placed within the public right-of-way, landscaped areas, required parking spaces, or on vacant land. 
( Ord. No. 2017-02 , § 4(Exh. A), 1-17-17) 
16.20.780 - Prohibited locations. 
A.  All residential and agricultural zones and land use designations. 
B.  Within the public institutional zone and all public facilities, including schools, parks and public places. 
C.  Vacant land, including the undeveloped portion of a commercial or industrial project. 
D.  Public right-of-ways, utility easements, and utility corridors. 
( Ord. No. 2017-02 , § 4(Exh. A), 1-17-17) 
16.20.790 - Approval process. 
    Donation bins shall not be placed on any location within the city without approval by the planning division, based on the following requirements: 
A.  Application: Applicant shall file an application for a special use permit. 
B.  Authorization: If the property owner is not the applicant, the owner's written authorization on the city form is required and shall be notarized. 
C.  Exhibits: Provide three copies of the exhibits described below: 
1.  Elevation drawings or photographs of the proposed donation bin are required. Drawings and donation bin specifications shall be fully dimensioned. 
2.  Site plan shall depict location of all structures, parking areas, trash enclosures, landscaping, and pedestrian walkways, including disabled access, potentially affected by the donation bin. Buildings and parking stalls shall be dimensioned, and the site plan shall be drawn to scale. Include all boundaries and property features including but not limited to, north arrow, vicinity map, scale, public utility poles and boxes, guy wires, signs, fire hydrants and fire lanes. 
D.  Grant deed for property. 
E.  Copy of the organization's 501(c) for proof of non-profit status. 
F.  The planning division will issue one numbered permit per approved donation bin to be permanently affixed in a conspicuous location on the front of the box. Permits are not transferrable. 
( Ord. No. 2017-02 , § 4(Exh. A), 1-17-17) 
16.20.800 - Development standards. 
A.  Donation bins shall not exceed the dimensions of six feet wide by six feet deep (thirty-six (36) square feet), and eight feet in height. 
B.  Donation bins must be placed within the buildable area of the lot. Donation bins shall be located on gravel, concrete or asphalt. 
C.  Donation bins shall have paved access. 
D.  Donation bins shall be located no closer than ten feet from existing buildings or structures, interior property lines and property lines adjacent to public streets. 
E.  Donation bins shall be located a minimum of one hundred (100) feet away from residential property or properties designated or zoned for residential or agricultural uses. 
F.  All donations must be fully contained within the bin. Donations not fully contained within the bin are considered a public nuisance and subject to removal by the city at the property and/or bin owner's expense. Donation bin's shall state on their exterior: "No donation items shall be left outside this bin." 
G.  Donation bins shall contain contact information consisting at a minimum, the name of the nonprofit organization and a valid phone number. 
H.  Donation bins shall be maintained in good condition with no graffiti or excessive signage. Graffiti shall be removed within forty-eight (48) hours. 
I.  Nonprofit organizations shall obtain a no-cost business license from the City of Hesperia. 
( Ord. No. 2017-02 , § 4(Exh. A), 1-17-17) 
Chapter 16.24 - PROTECTED PLANTS 
Sections: 
ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

16.24.010 - Purpose of provisions. 
    The city finds that it is in the public interest to promote the continued health of this city's abundant and diverse plant resources, by providing regulations and guidelines for the management of the plant resources on property or combinations of property under private or public ownership for the following purposes: 
A.  To promote and sustain the health, vigor and productivity of plant life and aesthetic values through appropriate management techniques; 
B.  To conserve the native plant life heritage for the benefit of all, including future generations; 
C.  To protect native trees and plants from indiscriminate removal, and to regulate such activity; 
D.  To provide a uniform standard for appropriate removal of native trees and plants in public and private places and streets to promote conservation of these valuable, natural resources; 
E.  To protect and maintain water productivity and quality in local watersheds; 
F.  To preserve rare plants and protect animals with limited or specialized habitats. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 811.0101) 
16.24.020 - Intent of provisions. 
    The general provisions established by this article shall apply to all subsequent articles of this chapter, unless specifically exempted. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 811.0105) 
16.24.030 - Scope of provisions. 
A.  The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all private land within the city and to public lands owned by the city except as specified by the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  Exceptions. The provisions of this chapter except those of Article II are not applicable to the removal of any regulated native tree or desert native plant when such are removed in accordance with any of the following listed situations, provided they do not remove or provide adequate substitutes for perch trees within identified American Bald Eagle habitat. 
1.  Removal as part of a timber operation conducted under the Forest Practice Act of 1973, (California Public Resources Code, Division 4, Part 2, Chapter 8); 
2.  Removal from lands owned by the United States Government, state of California or local governmental entity, excluding special districts; 
3.  Removal by any public utility subject to jurisdiction of the Public Utilities Commission or any other constituted public agency, including franchised cable TV where to establish or maintain safe operation of facilities under their jurisdiction, trees are pruned, topped or braced; 
4.  Removal by the California Department of Forestry and Fire Protection; 
5.  Removal under the authority of: 
a.  Forest improvement program, 
b.  California Forest Improvement Program, 
c.  Agricultural conservation program; 
6.  Removal required by other codes, ordinances or laws of San Bernardino County, the state of California or the United States; 
7.  Removal of native trees and plants which are an immediate threat to the public health, safety or welfare and require emergency removal to prevent probable damage to a structure or injury to people or fenced animals; 
8.  Removal as part of a stocking control program prepared by a California Registered Professional Forester; 
9.  Removal as part of a fire hazard reduction program approved by the county fire warden and/or a local fire authority; 
10.  Removal as part of a bona fide agricultural activity as determined by the agricultural commissioner which is: 
a.  Conducted under a land conservation contract, and/or 
b.  An existing agricultural activity, including expansions of such activity onto undisturbed contiguous land, and/or 
c.  A proposed bona fide agricultural activity if the agricultural commissioner is given thirty (30) days' written notice of the removal describing the location of the land, the nature of the proposed activity, and the proposed sources of water for the activity. The county agricultural commissioner shall notify the landowner in writing prior to the elapse of the thirty (30) day period if, in the opinion of the county agricultural commissioner, the activity is not a bona fide agricultural activity, or else the activity shall be deemed bona fide. 
    A bona fide agricultural activity is one which is served by a water distribution system adequate for the proper operation of such activity; 
11.  Removal on lots that have a net area of twenty thousand (20,000) square feet or less, which are developed with a primary structure, other than a sign structure; 
12.  Any regulated native plant or tree that is within twenty (20) feet of a structure on the lot that was constructed or set down under a county development permit; 
13.  Removal of two or fewer regulated native trees in the mountain or valley area per year per acre for private fuel wood purposes. The year shall be measured as the last twelve (12) consecutive months. 
C.  Conditions. The permits authorized by this chapter may be subject to conditions required by the reviewing authority. Such conditions may specify criteria, methods and persons authorized to conduct the proposed activities which are subject to the permit. Where applicable regulated trees and plants may be required to be transplanted and/or stockpiled for future transplanting. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 811.0110) 
16.24.040 - Removal permit. 
A.  A removal permit shall be required for the removal of any native tree or plant that is subject to the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  A land use application, a building permit and all other development permits (e.g., grading, mobile home set downs, etc.), shall consider and include a review of any proposed native tree or plant removal. Any approved land use application and/or development permit shall be a permit for the removal of native trees or plants, if such land use application or development permit specifically reviews and approves such removals. Such reviews shall consider and require compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
C.  The reviewing authority may require certification from an appropriate tree expert or desert native plant expert that such tree removals are appropriate, supportive of a healthy environment and are in compliance with the provisions of this article. 
D.  Removals of native trees or plants that are not requested in conjunction with a land use application or development permit may be accomplished only under a permit issued by either the county agricultural commission or the fire marshal, subject to the provisions of this article. 
E.  The building official shall require a preconstruction inspection prior to approval of development permits. 
F.  The duration of a plant or tree removal permit when issued in conjunction with a land use application and/or a development permit shall be coterminous with the duration of the associated application or permit, unless otherwise specified. The reviewing authority shall specify the expiration date for all other tree and/or plant removal permits. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; Ord. 75 § 2 (part), 1990; SBCC § 811.0115) 
16.24.050 - Findings for removal. 
    The reviewing authority shall authorize the removal of a native tree or plant subject to provisions of this article only if the following findings are made: 
A.  The removal of the native tree or plant does not have a significant adverse impact on any proposed mitigation measures, soil retention, soil erosion and sediment control measures, scenic routes, flood and surface water runoff and wildlife habitats (flora and fauna), especially those with limited habitats (e.g., eagles). 
B.  The removal of the native tree or plant is justified for one of the following reasons: 
1.  The location of the native tree or plant and/or its drip line interferes with the reasonable improvement of the site with an allowed structure, sewage disposal area, paved area or other approved improvement or ground disturbing activity. Also such improvements have been designed in such a manner as to save as many healthy native trees and/or plants as reasonably practicable in conjunction with the proposed improvements; 
2.  The location of the native tree or plant and/or its drip line interferes with the planned improvement of a street or development of an approved access to the subject or adjoining private property; 
3.  The location of the native tree or plant is hazardous to pedestrian or vehicular travel or safety as determined by the director of transportation, flood control and airports or other county reviewing authority; 
4.  The native tree or plant or its presence interferes with or is causing excessive damage to utility services or facilities, roadways, sidewalks, curbs, gutters, pavement, sewer line(s), drainage or flood control improvements, foundations, existing structures, or municipal improvements; 
5.  The condition or location of the native plant or tree is adjacent to and in such close proximity to existing or proposed structure that the native plant or tree has or will sustain significant damage. 
C.  Joshua trees that are proposed to be removed have been transplanted or stockpiled for future transplanting wherever possible. In the instance of stockpiling the permittee has posted a bond to insure such Joshua trees are transplanted appropriately. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 811.0120) 
16.24.060 - Plot plan requirements. 
    Prior to the issuance of a native tree or plant removal permit in conjunction with a development permit and/or approval of a land use application which authorizes such removal, a plot plan or grading plan shall be approved by the appropriate city review authority for each site indicating exactly which trees or plants are authorized to be removed. The required information can be added to any other required site plan. Prior to issuance of development permits in areas with native trees or plants that are subject to the provisions of this chapter, a preconstruction inspection shall be conducted by the appropriate authority. Such preconstruction inspections may be combined with any other required inspection. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 811.0125) 
16.24.070 - Construction standards. 
    During construction and prior to final inspection under a development permit, the following standards shall apply unless otherwise approved in writing by a tree expert: 
A.  Native tree trunks and plants shall not be enclosed within roof lines or decking; 
B.  Utilities, construction signs, or other hardware shall not be attached so as to penetrate or abrade any live native tree or plant; 
C.  Grade Alterations. There shall be no grade alterations which buries any portion of a native tree or plant or significantly undercuts the root system within the drip line. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 811.0130) 
16.24.080 - Fees. 
    Where permits or reviews are required by this chapter and they are not incorporated into other review or permit procedures, fees shall be paid in accordance with the city's fee schedule. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 811.0135) 
16.24.090 - Enforcement. 
A.  The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by any authorized member of the community development department, the county agriculture commissioner, the county forestry and fire warden department, and may be enforced by the California Department of Forestry, where applicable. 
B.  The following establishes the primary lead responsibility for review and enforcement of the provisions of this chapter for the listed activities and/or areas: 
1.  Community development, all plants/trees removed in conjunction with a land/use application or development permit; 
2.  County agricultural commissioner. 
C.  Extension of Time. If any of the land governed by this chapter shall be subject to snow, flooding, or other condition which shall render compliance with the provisions of this chapter within the specified time periods impractical because of inaccessibility, an enforcement officer may extend the period of time for compliance. 
D.  A peace officer or any authorized enforcement officer may, in the enforcement of this article, make arrests without warrant for a violation of this article which he or she may witness, and may confiscate regulated native trees or plants, or parts thereof which are unlawfully harvested, possessed, sold, or otherwise obtained in violation of this article. Also any designated enforcement officer is hereby authorized and directed to enter in or upon any premises or other place, train, vehicle, or other means of transportation within or entering the state, which is suspected of containing or having present therein or thereon native plants in violation of this chapter in order to examine permits and wood receipts and observe tags and seals and to otherwise enforce the provisions of this article. 
E.  When any power or authority is given by any provision of this article to any person, it may be exercised by any deputy, inspector, or agent duly authorized by that person. Any person in whom the enforcement of any provision of this article is vested has the power of a peace officer as to that enforcement, which shall include state or federal agencies with which cooperative agreements have been made by the county to enforce the provisions of this article. 
F.  No person shall remove or damage all or part of any native tree or plant on another property without first obtaining notarized written permission from the landowner and any required permits, wood receipts or tags and seals. Also it is unlawful for any person to falsify any document offered as evidence of permission to enter upon the property of another to harvest all or parts of a native tree or plant, whether it be alive or dead. 
G.  No person, except as provided in this article, shall harvest, offer for sale, destroy, dig up or mutilate or have in his or her possession any regulated native plant or tree, or the living or dead parts of such unless the plant or tree was harvested under a valid permit, and where applicable, a valid wood receipt on his or her person. Any such person shall exhibit the permit, wood receipt, tags and/or seals upon request for inspection by any duly authorized county enforcement officer or any peace officer. No wood receipt or tag and seal is valid unless it is issued with a valid permit and the permit bears the tag number or wood receipt number on its face. Any required tags and seals shall be attached securely to a regulated desert native plant. 
H.  No person, except as provided in this article, shall cause a disturbance of land which results in the removal of any regulated native trees or plants (e.g. grading, or land clearing) and which is not in conjunction with any other development permit without first obtaining a native plant harvesting or tree removal permit issued by the appropriate reviewing authority. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 811.0140) 
16.24.100 - Penalties. 
    Penalties shall be those specified in Chapter 1.12 of this code, and shall include the following and any other penalties specified by individual articles of this chapter. 
A.  When one or more plants or trees are removed in violation of the provisions of this chapter, the removal of each such separate plant or tree shall be a new and separate offense. Payment of any penalty herein provided shall not relieve a person, firm or corporation from the responsibility of correcting the condition resulting from the violation. 
B.  Illegally Removed Native Tree or Desert Native Plant Replacement Penalty. 
1.  In addition to other penalties imposed by this code or other law, any person, firm, or corporation convicted of violating the provisions of this chapter regarding improper removal of regulated native trees or plants shall be required to retain as appropriate, a tree or desert native plant expert to develop and implement a replacement program. Such expert shall determine the appropriate number, size, species, location and planting conditions for replacement plants or trees in sufficient quantities to revegetate the illegally disturbed area. 
    If it is inappropriate to revegetate the illegally disturbed area another appropriate location (e.g., public parks) may be substituted at the direction of the court. 
2.  The violator shall post a bond in an amount sufficient to remove and reinstall plant/tree materials that were planted as a part of such a replacement program and failed within two years. 
C.  Revocation of Permits. Upon conviction of a violation of this chapter, all native trees or desert native plant removal permits issued to the person, firm or corporation convicted shall be revoked and no new or additional removal permits shall be issued to the permittee for a period of one year from the date of conviction and additionally in the desert area the permittee shall be required to surrender any unused tags and seals or wood receipts to the agricultural commissioner. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 811.0145) 
ARTICLE II. - DESERT NATIVE PLANT PROTECTION 

16.24.110 - Purpose of provisions. 
    The city finds that it is in the public interest to preserve and protect specified desert native plants and provide for the conservation and wise use of our desert resources, through regulation, guidelines and enforcement that manage the removal or harvesting of such plants. They are also necessary to augment and coordinate with the State Department of Food and Agriculture in its efforts to implement and enforce the Desert Native Plant Act. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 811.0401) 
16.24.120 - Scope of provisions. 
A.  The provisions of this article shall apply to all desert native plants growing on private land within the city and to desert native plants growing on public land owned by the city, county of San Bernardino or the state of California, except as specified by Article I of this chapter and as specified by this section. 
B.  Except as otherwise provided by this chapter, any person who willfully removes, or harvests or transplants a living desert native plant shall first obtain approval from the county to do so in accordance with the procedures set forth in Sections 16.24.040 or 16.24.110 et seq. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 811.0405) 
16.24.130 - Commercial harvesting or transplanting of desert native plants. 
A.  The commercial harvesting of desert native plants shall be prohibited, except as permitted and authorized by the State Department of Food and Agriculture and as specified in the Desert Native Plant Act of 1983, as amended. The San Bernardino County Agricultural Commissioner shall be responsible for the issuance of the appropriate tags, seals and permits required by the state. 
1.  Protected desert native plants as specified by Section 16.24.150(B) may only be removed by a scientific or educational institution which has obtained a permit from the county agricultural commissioner for a specified number and species of these plants. 
2.  Written permission must be obtained from and signed by the owner of the property on which the plants are located. A copy of the document granting such permission shall be submitted to the county agricultural commissioner prior to issuance of the permit. 
B.  An application for a desert native plant commercial harvesting permit shall be filed with the county agricultural commissioner for review and processing. If it is determined that the proposed harvesting would not require an environmental impact report, the agricultural commissioner shall process the permit application in accordance with the provisions of this article. If an environmental impact report is required, the agricultural commissioner shall proceed only after an environmental impact report is certified, the concerns and issues are addressed, and findings made pursuant to law. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 811.0410) 
16.24.140 - Findings for commercial harvesting or transplanting of desert native plants. 
    The county agricultural commissioner or other reviewing authority shall only authorize the commercial harvesting or transplanting of desert native plants listed in Section 16.24.150(B) subject to the provisions of this article only if one or more of the following findings are made: 
A.  The desert native plants are to be transplanted or harvested in a manner approved by the county agricultural commissioner or other reviewing authority, including any requirement for the issuance of plant tag seals and/or wood receipts; 
B.  The desert native plant is to be transplanted to another property within the same plant habitat under the supervision of a desert native plant expert and the removal of such plant will not adversely affect the desert environment on the subject site; 
C.  Any desert native plant on the site which is determined by the agricultural commissioner or other reviewing authority as requiring transplanting has or will be transplanted or stockpiled for transplanting in accordance with methods approved by the county agricultural commissioner. A desert native plant expert shall supervise and manage any required transplanting of desert native plants; 
D.  The harvesting operation has incorporated all mitigation measures, if any, establish by the environmental review action; 
E.  The harvesting operator has been notified of the availability of all known plants that are proposed to be removed by construction activity within the vicinity so that these may be used in lieu of those proposed to be harvested. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 811.0415) 
16.24.150 - Subject desert native plants. 
    The following desert native plants are subject to the regulations specified by this chapter. In all cases the botanical names shall govern the interpretation of this article. 
A.  Regulated Desert Native Plants. The following desert native plants, or any part thereof except the fruit, shall not be harvested or removed except under a permit issued by the agricultural commissioner or other applicable reviewing authority: 
1.  The following desert native plants with stems two inches or greater in diameter or six feet or greater in height: 
a.  Dalea, Spinosa (smoketree); 
b.  All species of the family Agavaceae (century plants, nolinas, yuccas); 
c.  All species of the genus Prosopis (mesquites). 
2.  Creosote Rings, ten feet or greater in diameter. 
3.  All Joshua trees (mature and immature). 
B.  All plants protected or regulated by the State Desert Native Plants Act (i.e., Food and Agricultural Code 80001 et seq.) shall be required to comply with the provisions of those statues prior to the issuance of any county development permit or land use application approval. The county agricultural commissioner is the responsible agency for the issuance of any required wood tags, seals or permits. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 811.0420) 
16.24.160 - Subject area. 
    This article is applicable only within the city in which these desert native plants grow in a natural habitat. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 811.0425) 
16.24.170 - Enforcement. 
    In addition to the enforcement provisions and penalties prescribed in Article I of this chapter and/or the State Food and Agricultural Code, Division 23, Chapter 7, the following shall apply: 
A.  Upon conviction of a violation of this article, all desert native plant harvesting permits issued to the person convicted shall be revoked and the permittee shall be required to surrender any unused tags and seals or wood receipts to the agricultural commissioner and no new or additional permits shall be issued to the permittee for a period of one year from the date of conviction. 
B.  Upon the second conviction, all permits issued to the person convicted shall be revoked and the permittee shall be required to surrender any unused tags and seals or wood receipts to the agricultural commissioner and no new or additional permits shall be issued to the permittee at any time in the future from the date of such second conviction. 
C.  The reviewing authority may revoke any permit, tags, or seals issued for the purpose of harvesting if the permittee willfully fails to comply with all of the conditions or stipulations of the permit. 
D.  Each permit authorizing the harvesting, or possessing of desert native plants or live or dead mesquite, palo verde, or ironwood species of trees which are harvested for wood shall be accompanied by a sufficient number of tags and seals or wood receipt. Such tags, seals, or wood receipts shall be issued, transported, and may be transferred to other parties in accordance with the California Desert Native Plant Act, as amended. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 811.0430) 
16.24.180 - Definitions. 
    Terms and phrases used within this article shall be defined by Chapter 16.08 and/or as defined by the Food and Agricultural Code. The Food and Agricultural Code definition, if one exists, shall prevail over a conflicting definition in this code. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 811.0435) 
ARTICLE III. - RIPARIAN PLANT CONSERVATION 

16.24.190 - Purpose of provisions. 
    The city finds that it is in the public interest to promote healthy and abundant riparian habitats. Riparian habitats are located along the sides of canyon bottoms, streams and rivers, providing watershed protection as well as control transmission and storage of natural water supplies. Riparian areas provide a unique wildlife habitat and contribute to an attractive environment. Riparian areas also provide natural soil erosion and sedimentation control protecting stream banks subject to erosion and undercutting. In addition riparian areas provide sufficient shade to reduce temperature and evaporation and the growth of algae in streams. The provisions of this article are designed to augment and coordinate with the responsibilities of the California Department of Fish and Game. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 811.0501) 
16.24.200 - Scope of provisions. 
A.  The provisions of this article shall apply to all riparian areas growing on private land within the city and to riparian areas growing on public land owned by the city or county of San Bernardino, except as specified by this chapter. 
B.  Exceptions. The provisions of this article are not applicable to emergency flood control district operations or water conservation measures established and authorized by an appropriate independent special district with such responsibility. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 811.0505) 
16.24.210 - Subject areas and plants. 
    Except as otherwise provided or excepted by the provisions of this chapter, the removal of any vegetation within two hundred (200) feet of the bank of a stream indicated as a blue line on a United States Geological Survey Quadrangle (topographic) map or indicated as a protected riparian area on a community or specific plan, shall be subject to a tree or plant removal permit in accordance with the procedures detailed by this chapter for each respective regional area and shall be subject to environmental review. Any necessary conditions of approval for removal of riparian vegetation may be imposed in addition to and in combination with any condition imposed pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 811.0510) 
Chapter 16.28 - MOBILE HOME PARKS 
Sections: 

16.28.010 - Title, purpose and general provisions. 
A.  Title. This chapter shall be known and may be referred to as the Mobile Home Parks Design Standards. 
B.  Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to provide regulations for the location, design and improvement of mobile home parks, as defined herein, in order to promote, protect and secure the public health, safety and general welfare. 
C.  Approving Agency. The planning director is designated as the agency charged with the duty of making investigation and reports on design and improvements of proposed mobile home parks, and is authorized to approve, conditionally approve or disapprove maps prepared and filed according to this chapter; to prescribe the kinds, nature and extent of the improvements required to be installed by this chapter and to report to the applicant the action taken. 
D.  Reference to Other Laws. Whenever reference is made to any portion of this chapter or other ordinance or statute, such reference applies to all amendments and additions now and hereafter made. 
E.  Intent. It is the intent of this chapter to provide regulations for the location, design and improvements of mobile home parks that equal or exceed all applicable state laws. It is declared that in an instance where the provisions of this chapter do not encompass all of the state regulations insofar as the limits of this chapter apply, that such regulations are included and required for conformance as a part of this chapter. 
F.  Enforcement of Other Regulations. The provisions of the Mobile Home Parks Act, California Health and Safety Code, Division 13, Part 2.1 and the applicable regulations adopted pursuant thereto by the State Department of Housing and Community Development are adopted as a part of this chapter. It shall be the duty of the building and safety department to enforce all of the provisions of the Act pertaining to construction, alteration or modification of all mobile home parks. It shall be the duty of the department of building and safety to enforce all the provisions pertaining to permits to operate, maintenance, use, occupancy, sanitation and safety of all mobile home parks. 
(Amended during 1997 codification; Ord. 75 § 2 (part), 1990; SBCC § 89.0101) 
16.28.020 - Definitions. 
    Except as otherwise provided in Chapter 16.08, all terms used in this chapter which are defined in the Mobile Home Parks Act, California Health and Safety Code, Division 13, Part 2.1 and the applicable regulations adopted pursuant thereto by the State Department of Housing and Community Development are used in this chapter as so defined unless, from the context thereof, it clearly appears that a different meaning is intended. 
(SBCC § 89.0105) 
16.28.030 - Establishment of mobile home parks. 
A.  Compliance with Laws. Each map or plan prepared pursuant to this chapter shall be in accordance with applicable state laws, the provisions of this chapter, and any other ordinance, statute or law pertaining to the establishment of mobile home parks. 
B.  Compliance with Plans and Standards. Each map or plan filed pursuant to this chapter shall be in compliance with the officially adopted general plan and any amendment adopted pursuant thereto. 
C.  Mobile home park applications shall be reviewed subject to the provisions of Chapter 16.12 of this code. 
(Amended during 1997 codification; Ord. 75 § 2 (part), 1990; SBCC § 89.0110) 
16.28.040 - Standards of design and improvements. 
A.  Compliance to Standards. Any person desiring to enlarge or establish a mobile home park shall meet or exceed the design standards set forth in this chapter. 
B.  Locations. Mobile home parks shall be located in accordance with all applicable city ordinances and state laws. 
C.  Minimum Areas. Mobile home parks shall be developed on a parcel of land at least three acres in area. 
D.  Drainage and Flood Hazard. A mobile home park shall be located on a well-drained site, properly graded to provide for adequate disposition of runoff. Such areas shall be free of flood hazard from external sources. The city engineer may require dedications and improvements which will insure proper protection to the park in accordance with this section. 
E.  Streets and Highways. The city engineer may require additional dedication and improvements on streets and highways abutting the proposed mobile home park in accordance with the circulation element of the general plan and established widths of local and collector streets. 
F.  Lot Areas and Dimensions. Each mobile home lot shall contain a minimum area of one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet with a minimum width of thirty (30) feet fronting on a driveway; provided, however, that: 
1.  Lots larger than the above minimum sizes may be required where it is determined that said lot size will: 
a.  Be consistent with the general pattern established by mobile home parks in the vicinity, or 
b.  Be necessary to accommodate trailer coach sizes as stated in the trailer park report submitted. 
2.  Lots on curved driveways or cul-de-sacs where lot lines are either converging or diverging from the front to the rear of the lot shall have an average width of at least thirty (30) feet, but in no case shall the frontage on a driveway be less than twenty-five (25) feet. 
G.  Clearances. Trailer coaches shall be located so they are at least ten feet apart from side to side, eight feet apart from side to rear, six feet apart from rear to rear, and ten feet from any building, except for accessory buildings used as private toilets or baths for exclusive use of the occupant of the mobile home site. Trailer coach hitches shall face the access driveway. 
H.  Minimum Side and Rear Lot Clearances. There shall be minimum side lot clearances totaling ten feet in width; provided, however, that no trailer coach shall be closer than three feet to any side or rear lot line. Where lots abut side or rear yards as defined in subsection (J) of this section, the yard areas may be included as a part of this requirement. 
I.  Occupied Area. The occupied area of each mobile home space shall not exceed seventy-five (75) percent of the total area of such mobile home lot. The area shall be deemed to be occupied when covered or occupied by a trailer coach, cabana, vehicle, ramada, awning, closet, cupboard or any other structures. 
J.  Yards and Setbacks. The following yards shall be maintained on each mobile home park: 
1.  Front yard of at least twenty-five (25) feet in depth, along the public street upon which the mobile home park fronts. This yard shall extend across the entire width of the park; 
2.  Side yards of not less than five feet in width along each side boundary line of the mobile home park; 
3.  A rear yard of not less than ten feet in depth along the rear boundary line of the mobile home park; 
4.  Greater yards or setbacks may be required where, in the opinion of the planning officer, such yards or setbacks are necessary due to topographic conditions, grading, drainage or protection of adjacent property; 
5.  No part of any trailer coach shall be located within any yard or required setback area. 
K.  Driveways. Driveways shall be designed to provide reasonable and convenient traffic circulation and shall meet the following standards: 
1.  No driveway shall be less than thirty-three (33) feet in width if car parking is permitted on one side of the driveway and not less than forty-one (41) feet in width if car parking is permitted on both sides of a driveway; 
2.  Driveway widths to provide for parking on one side shall be deemed necessary when lots abut the driveway on one side only. Driveway widths to provide for parking on both sides shall be deemed necessary when lots abut the driveway on both sides; 
3.  The entire width of the driveways shall be surfaced with a minimum of two inch thick asphalt, concrete, plant mix or other approved material. 
L.  Parking. There shall be provided one parking space on each lot. There shall also be established and maintained within each mobile home park automobile parking area for the use of guests. The number of such spaces shall be equal to one for every ten lots or fraction thereof, within the mobile home park. Each parking space shall be ten by twenty (20) feet in size, plus such additional area as is necessary to afford adequate ingress and egress. 
M.  Walkways. Walkways shall be provided to permit reasonably direct access to all lots, service buildings and other areas or buildings used by occupants of the trailers. Collector walkways serving utility buildings, playgrounds and other general areas shall be four feet in width or more and individual entrance walks to each trailer coach site shall be at least two feet in width. All walkways shall be constructed of asphalt, concrete, plant mix or other approved materials which will permit all-weather pedestrian movement. 
N.  Enclosures of Mobile Home Park. A wall or fence six feet in height shall be erected and maintained along each side and rear boundary of a mobile home park except along the portion of such side or rear boundary line which either abuts a public street or is within a front yard or side yard adjacent to the street, in which case, a wall or fence may be required. A wall or fence shall be solid and of concrete, brick or other masonry construction, or of chain link metal construction with an evergreen hedge planted. Where, in the opinion of the planning officer, it is unreasonable to require the construction of a fence or wall, the officer, at his discretion, may waive or modify the requirements as specified in this subsection (N). 
O.  Service Area (Enclosure). The planning officer may require fencing or screen planting around areas containing garbage, rubbish or waste disposal or ground service or recreational areas as a condition of approval of a mobile home park. 
P.  Modifications in Design. Where mobile home parks are submitted for approval which, although not complying with the requirements of design as stated herein, are consistent with the general intent and purpose of this chapter, the city may approve such parks with conditions and restrictions which will insure that the general purposes herein set forth will be satisfied. 
1.  Park designs utilizing cell-type groupings or mobile home lots or other modified designs may be approved under the provisions of this section; 
2.  Modifications of the above standards of design may be approved under the provisions of this section for mobile home parks, travel trailer parks, recreational trailer parks, temporary trailer parks and tent camps. However, in no case shall such modifications be in conflict with minimum requirements of the Mobile Home Parks Act, California Health and Safety Code, Division 13, Part 2.1 and the applicable regulations adopted pursuant thereto by the State Department of Housing and Community Development. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 89.0115) 
16.28.050 - Buildings, structures and facilities. 
A.  Structural Requirements. The erection, construction, reconstruction, repair, relocation or alteration of all permanent buildings and structures located within a mobile home park shall conform to the requirements of the Uniform Building Code as adopted by Chapter 15.04. 
B.  Plumbing Requirements. The construction, installation, arrangement, alteration, repair, use and operation of all plumbing, water and sewage systems within, on or pertaining to all permanent buildings and structures located within a mobile home park shall be designed and installed in accordance with the requirements of the Uniform Plumbing Code as adopted by Chapter 15.04 and as herein provided. 
1.  Floor drains of a type approved by the building and safety department shall be installed in all concrete floors of rooms containing sanitary plumbing fixtures. Hose bibs shall be installed near each floor drain. Sanitary facilities within a mobile home park shall be for the exclusive use of tenants of the mobile home park. 
C.  Electrical Requirements. The construction, installation, arrangement, alteration, repair, use and operation of all electrical wiring and electrical equipment within, on or pertaining to all permanent buildings and structures located within the mobile home park shall be designed and installed in accordance with the requirements of the National Electrical Code as adopted by Chapter 15.04. 
D.  Certificate of Occupancy. Upon completion of any mobile home park and prior to the use thereof, the owner or operator of said park shall make an application to the building and safety department for a certificate of occupancy, the application to be in writing upon the form provided by the building and safety department, and shall be filed not less than ten days nor more than twenty (20) days before the mobile home park is ready for use. The building and safety department shall thereupon make a final inspection of the mobile home park referred to in the application and if found to be in conformity with the requirements of this chapter and other ordinances of the County of San Bernardino and the laws of the state of California, the office shall forward to the building and safety department a written certificate of occupancy. 
E.  Public Address Systems. Public address systems or loudspeakers shall not be permitted if audible outside the boundaries of the mobile home park. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; Ord. 75 § 2 (part), 1990; SBCC § 89.0120) 
16.28.060 - Approved maps. 
A.  Filing of Approved Maps. A reproducible tracing of the map of the mobile home park as approved by the planning officer shall be filed with the building and safety department for construction permits. Blue line prints, in an amount determined to be necessary for processing of the application, shall be submitted together with the tracing. 
B.  Checking of Approved Map. The approved map shall be checked for compliance with all the conditions set forth by the planning officer. When it is determined that all conditions have been met, construction permits may be issued by the building and safety department. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; Ord. 75 § 2 (part), 1990; SBCC § 89.0130) 
16.28.070 - Bonds to guarantee improvements. 
    If all improvements required as a condition of approval of mobile home park are not satisfactorily completed at the time an operating permit is requested, the owner or owners of the mobile home park shall, prior to the issuance of the permit, enter as contractor into an agreement with the city guaranteeing that the required work will be accomplished. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 89.0135) 
Chapter 16.32 - PLANNED DEVELOPMENTS 
Sections: 

16.32.010 - Intent of provisions. 
    It is the purpose of this chapter to promote a more efficient use of the land and to create a more desirable and affordable living environment by providing greater design flexibility than would be possible through the strict application of standard development regulations required by conventional zone or land use districts. This chapter shall set forth those requirements, design standards and conditions by which planned developments shall be regulated. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 89.0201) 
16.32.020 - Planned residential developments. 
A.  Planned residential developments are residential projects consisting of five hundred (500) dwelling units or fewer. Planned residential developments are compatible with, and not a significant departure from surrounding land uses, and will be so located in relation to public utility systems and installations that neither the extension nor enlargement of such systems will be required which results in public capital expenditures greater than would develop in a form generally permitted in the area. Planned residential developments shall be so located with respect to schools, parks and other public services and facilities required as to have access in the same degree as would develop in a form generally permitted in the area. 
    Residential planned development projects not meeting the above criteria shall be processed under the planned unit development regulations of the code. Excepting, however, residential projects greater in number of dwelling units than that permitted above may be processed as a planned residential development when the development review committee determines at the preapplication conference meeting that the project though greater in number of units: 
1.  Is compatible with, and not a significant departure from, surrounding land uses; 
2.  Will not require public capital expenditures for public utility systems greater than that required for the type of development generally permitted in the area; 
3.  Has reasonable access to schools, parks and other public services and facilities in the same degree as would the type of development generally permitted in the area; and 
4.  Otherwise complies with the provisions of this chapter. 
    The records of the preapplication meeting shall set forth those findings determining that the above criteria have been met. 
B.  The provisions of this chapter shall modify the development standards of any zone or land use district designated for residential uses subject to the review and approval of a planned residential development application, in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 16.12. 
C.  All land uses within a planned residential development shall conform to the permitted uses of the underlying zone or land use district, except as follows: 
1.  Residential dwelling units, as defined in Chapter 16.08 may be attached or detached. 
2.  Certain internally oriented, incidental service uses such as, but not limited to, civic, community or country clubs, conference centers, or convenience shops designed and intended to provide goods and services to residents of the planned residential development project may be permitted. Such incidental service uses shall not be located on the periphery of the PRD project, nor shall the use encompass more than ten percent of the total project area. 
D.  The conditions of approval of a planned residential development project shall specifically designate those uses, including types of dwelling units, permitted within the project. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 89.0205) 
16.32.030 - Planned unit development. 
A.  Planned unit developments are large, multi-phased projects which contain a variety of building types and uses, including commercial and industrial, when permitted by the general plan. 
B.  Planned unit developments shall be reviewed and approved subject to the provisions of the planned unit development application, Chapter 16.12 and the provisions of the planned unit development (PUD) district of the code. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 89.0210) 
16.32.040 - General regulations. 
A.  Density. The total density of a planned development shall be determined by the: 
1.  General Plan for the Particular Property. Increased densities may be granted by the reviewing authority through the density bonus provisions authorized by the general plan and implemented by the development code or specific plan; provided, however, density increases shall not be granted for that portion of a planned unit development in which only a preliminary development plan has been approved. 
B.  Accessory Uses Permitted in Planned Residential Developments. 
1.  All accessory uses permitted in the R-1 district, shall be permitted in a planned residential development, provided that such accessory uses are compatible with the approved PRD development plan. 
2.  When the underlying zone or land use district permits horse raising, and where the density of a planned residential development project does not exceed four dwelling units per acre, horses shall be permitted in a PRD project as follows: 
a.  On lots twenty thousand (20,000) square feet or greater subject to the regulations of the R-1 District; 
b.  Where lots are less than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet, horses shall be permitted subject to the following conditions: 
i.  Horses shall be clustered onto common lots, 
ii.  The maximum density of horses shall not exceed three and two-tenths (3.2) horses per gross acre of common lot area, 
iii.  All standards and regulations of the building and safety department shall apply, 
iv.  Maintenance and management of the clustered facilities shall be provided by the property-owners' association. 
C.  Phasing. In a phased development, safeguards shall be required in the form of easements or bonds or other commitments for open space requirements that will protect the integrity of the total project. 
D.  Subdivision. When a tentative subdivision map is filed with a planned development project, prior to recordation of the final subdivision map, the following items shall be filed with the appropriate agency: 
1.  Documentation of easements, covenants, deeds, and property-owner association by-laws, restrictions and articles of incorporation. 
2.  Sureties and performance bonds covering open space areas, dedicated public improvements, and other items as determined by the reviewing authority. The amount of the performance bonds shall be reviewed annually by the appropriate agency. 
E.  Revision of Approved Development Plans. No revisions may be made in an approved planned residential development site plan or planned unit development final development plan before, during or after the construction of a planned development except upon application by the applicant to the appropriate reviewing authority, under the procedures provided below: 
1.  Minor revisions such as in the location and siting of building and structures may be authorized by the planning officer, if required by engineering or other circumstances not foreseen at the time the development plan was approved. These revisions shall be made prior to recording the final subdivision map or the issuance of any building permits, whichever occurs first. 
2.  Major revisions, such as changes in use, any significant rearrangement of lots, blocks and building tracts, any substantial changes in the provision of common open spaces and all other modifications shall be approved by the reviewing authority authorized to approve the plan being revised. The reviewing authority shall hold a public hearing to consider such major revisions. No amendments may be made in the approved development plan unless they are shown to be required by changes in conditions that have occurred since the development plan was approved or by changes in the general plan, or any applicable community plan or specific plan. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; Ord. 228 § 5, 1996; Ord. 75 § 2 (part), 1990; SBCC § 89.0215) 
16.32.050 - Design standards. 
A.  Unless specifically changed within this section, all adopted ordinances, standards and policies apply to a planned development project, including those set forth in the general plan. The planning commission may alter adopted standards, except standards adopted by the board of supervisors, where, in their opinion, the altered standards would more adequately serve the intent and purposes of the planned development provisions of the code. 
B.  Circulation. 
1.  The vehicular circulation pattern shall be designed such that: 
a.  It provides adequate vehicular access to and within the project, in accordance with adopted county standards; 
b.  It is coordinated with external transportation networks in terms of location and loads; 
c.  It is integrated with the natural landscape and, where possible, parallels the natural drainage system; 
d.  It is designed such that noise levels from vehicular traffic shall comply with the noise quality standards of the general plan; 
e.  The planned development project, and each phase thereof, has two points of vehicular ingress and egress from surrounding streets, one of which may be emergency only. Where the applicant can show that this is a physical impossibility, this requirement may be waived; 
f.  Private streets are acceptable if they are built to county standards and are inspected by the county. However, right-of-way shall not be accepted by the county nor shall private streets be accepted into the county-maintained road system. 
2.  The pedestrian circulation pattern shall be designed such that: 
a.  It is separated from vehicular traffic where possible and designed to discourage pedestrian crossing of the vehicular network, except at controlled points which are designed for pedestrian safety; 
b.  Hard-surfaced, safely lighted pedestrian access to common open space, recreational areas, community facilities and other logical terminal points shall be provided. 
3.  All common off-street parking areas shall be designed such that: 
a.  They provide adequate, convenient, well-marked and safely lighted parking; 
b.  With the exception of building-enclosed parking structures, they shall contain appropriate landscaping to minimize the effect of large areas of asphalt or concrete. 
4.  Two parking spaces per dwelling unit shall be provided. No tandem parking is permitted except in mountain areas. Guest parking, either on-street or in common parking areas, shall be provided at a ratio of one space per two dwelling units. 
C.  Open Space. 
1.  For the purposes of this chapter, open space within a planned development shall be the total area of land or water within the boundaries of a planned development, designed and intended for use and enjoyment as open-space areas. 
a.  Open space within a planned development shall include the following: 
i.  Area of the site not covered by buildings, paved areas or accessory structures, except recreational structures; 
ii.  Land which is accessible and available to all occupants of the development for which the space is intended; 
b.  Open space within a planned development does not include: 
i.  Proposed and existing street rights-of-way and private streets; 
ii.  Open parking areas, driveways; 
iii.  School sites; 
iv.  Commercial, industrial or office areas, and the buildings, accessory buildings, parking and loading facilities thereof. 
2.  A residential planned development project shall have a minimum of forty (40) percent private and common open space, not including balcony area. 
3.  Each dwelling unit shall have a minimum contiguous private open space area as follows: 
a.  Ground-Floor: two hundred twenty-five (225) square feet; 
b.  Upper-story dwelling unit with no ground floor: sixty (60) square feet. 
4.  Provisions for the maintenance and management of the common open space and common facilities shall be reviewed and approved by the reviewing authority. Such approval shall be based on the following criteria: 
a.  The applicant shall establish a property-owners' association prior to the selling of any lot or occupancy of any dwelling unit. 
b.  The property-owners' association by-laws, restrictions and articles of incorporation shall include the necessary regulations required by the Federal Housing Administration. Other standards may be approved by the reviewing authority. 
D.  Site Resource Utilization. 
1.  The planned development shall be designed and developed in such a manner as to minimize the cutting of trees, disturbance of ground cover, cut-and-fill work, drainage alteration and hillside development. All tree removals shall be in accordance with county permit procedures. 
2.  All new dirt work and exposed slopes shall be suitably stabilized in accordance with the Uniform Building Code and this code. Scarred and erosion-prone areas shall be stabilized with appropriate planting. 
3.  A drainage analysis shall be prepared and shall accompany the application for a planned development. 
E.  Site and Structure Relationship. 
1.  The spacing of buildings shall be governed by the requirements for adequate light and air, proper access, fire regulations and the need for visual and auditory privacy. 
2.  Whenever possible, dwelling units shall be arranged to take advantage of views and vistas with consideration given to "micro" (subsections of the planned development) climate control and pleasing relationships of building mass. 
3.  The planned development shall be designed to minimize the likelihood of criminal activity by: 
a.  Minimizing those areas that are neither clearly private or public; 
b.  Planting landscaping such that maximum observation is obtained while providing the desired degree of aesthetics. 
4.  Building height, bulk and "micro" coverage are regulated only inasmuch as they meet the performance criteria set out above. 
5.  No structure for human habitation shall be placed in an environmentally hazardous, fragile or unique area. 
F.  Perimeter. 
1.  Adjacent properties to the planned development shall be protected from adverse influences of traffic, land uses, building scale and density by the combined use of screening, setbacks and land use location. 
2.  Perimeter planning and coordination are required to assure continuity in the community facilities and services. The applicant shall demonstrate that the development proposal can be adequately served by community facilities and services without undue public expenditure. 
3.  Planned development projects which are within wild land fire-hazard areas as defined in the general plan shall develop fuel modification plans approved by the Hesperia Fire Protection District. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 89.0220) 
Chapter 16.36 - SIGN REGULATIONS[16] 

Footnotes: 
--- (16) --- 
Prior ordinance history: Ord. 183 Exh. A; Ord. 209 Exh. A; Ord. 276 Exh. A; Ord. 288 Exh. A; Ord. 293 Exh. A. 

16.36.010 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to: 
A.  Encourage economic development by supporting the commercial communication needs of the business community; 
B.  Enhance the quality of life by providing a visually pleasing environment; 
C.  Promoting public health, safety and welfare. 
(Ord. 296 § 4 (Exh. A (part)), 2000) 
16.36.020 - Definitions. 
    Words and terms used in this chapter are defined as follows: 
    "Animated sign" means any sign that uses movement of the physical parts or extensions of the sign to depict action or create a special effect. These do not include reader boards, barber poles or similar signs where the sign structure itself is not in motion. 
    "Banner" means any sign of lightweight fabric of similar material that is permanently mounted to a pole or a building by a permanent frame at one or more edges. National flags, state or municipal flags, or the official flag of any institution or business shall not be considered banners. 
    "Beacon" means any light with one or more beams directed into the atmosphere or directed at one or more points not on the same lot as the light source; also, any light with one or more beams that rotate or move. 
    "Billboard" means any outdoor advertising structure or sign which has a flat surface sign space upon which advertising may be posted, painted, or affixed, and which is designed or made available for the rental or lease of such sign space for advertising billboards shall not mean any on-premises sign." Billboards may utilize digital advertising displays as part or all of their surface area. 
    "Bulletin board sign" means any sign located in a multi-tenant complex that lists businesses and addresses located therein. 
    "Changeable copy sign" means a sign or portion thereof with characters, letters or illustrations that can be changed or rearranged without altering the face or the surface of the sign. A sign on which the only copy that changes is an electronic or mechanical indication of time or temperature shall be considered a "time and temperature" portion of a sign and a changeable copy sign for purposes of this chapter. 
    "Club or organization sign" means any sign that exhibits an event or regularly scheduled meeting of a group, club, civic organization or similar use at the site. 
    "Commercial message" means any sign wording, logo or other representation that, directly or indirectly, names, advertises or calls attention to a business, product, service or other commercial activity. 
    "Construction or contractor sign" means a temporary sign, which states the names of the individuals and/or firms connected with the construction of a project. Such signs may include the name of the project, the address of the business and the emergency telephone number. 
    "Copy" means any words, letters, numbers, figures, designs, logos or other symbolic representations incorporated into a sign. 
    "Digital advertising display" means an advertising display of still, scrolling or moving images including video or animation, that may be changed remotely through electronic means and utilizes a series of grid lights, including but not limited to cathode ray, light-emitting diode (LED), plasma screen, liquid crystal display (LCD) fiber optic or other electronic media or technology. A digital advertising display may also be known as "Reader board." (See also "Billboard.") 
    "Directional sign" means a sign which contains words such as "entrance," "enter," "exit," "in," "out" or other similar words or a sign containing arrows or characters indicating traffic direction and used either in conjunction with such words or separately. 
    "Flag" means any fabric, banner or bunting containing distinctive colors, patterns or symbols, used as a symbol of a government, political subdivision or other entity. 
    "Future tenant identification sign" means a temporary sign which identifies a future use of a site or building. 
    "Grand opening" means a promotional activity used by newly established businesses, within thirty (30) days after occupancy, to inform the public of their location and contribution to the community. "Grand opening" does not mean an annual or occasional promotion of retail sales by a business. 
    "Height" shall be the vertical distance from the highest point of the sign to the highest point within five feet horizontally from the base of the sign. 
    "Inflatable sign" means any sign capable of being inflated with air or gas. 
    "Institutional use" means facilities which provide a service to the general public, including schools, churches, post offices, fire stations, hospitals, civic centers, and publicly owned land. 
    "Lot" means a parcel of land in single ownership that is of sufficient size to meet minimum zoning requirements for area, coverage and use, and that can provide such yards and other open spaces as required by the zoning regulations. 
    "Marquee" means any permanent roof-like structure projecting beyond a building or extending along and projecting beyond the wall of the building, generally designed and constructed to provide protection from the weather. 
    "Marquee sign" means any sign attached to, in any manner, or made a part of a marquee. 
    "Monument sign" means a freestanding sign generally supported by a solid base and less than ten feet in height. The base of a monument sign may include a hollow or opening as part of its design, so long as this area does not exceed more than twenty (20) percent of the sign's face. 
    "Nonconforming sign" means any sign that does not conform to the requirements of this chapter. 
    "Off-site sign" means a sign in accordance with this chapter which directs traffic to a business within the city but not located on the same site as the sign. 
    "Off-site subdivision sign" means a sign in accordance with this chapter which directs traffic to a subdivision within the city. "On premises sign" A sign that is either of the following: (1) a sign that advertises the business conducted, services rendered, or goods produced or sold upon the property on which the sign is placed; or (2) a sign that is within six hundred sixty (660) feet of the edge of the right-of-way of the freeway and advertises business conducted, services rendered, or goods produced or sold within one thousand (1,000) feet of the sign and which meets the requirements of a freeway sign under Section 16.36.060(C)(9) and is taller than sixty (60) feet in height. On-premise signs shall not be considered "off-site signs" for purposes of Sections 16.36.050(A) or 16.36.080." 
    "Open house sign" means a temporary off-site directional sign advertising the sale or lease of residential, commercial or industrial property, and the identification of the firm handling such sale, lease or rent. 
    "Pennant" means any lightweight plastic, fabric or other material, whether or not containing a message of any kind, suspended from a rope, wire or string, usually in series, designed to move in the wind. 
    "Person" means any individual, association, company, corporation, firm, organization or partnership, singular or plural, of any kind. 
    "Political sign" means a sign erected prior to an election to advertise or identify a candidate, campaign issue, election proposition, or other related matters. 
    "Portable sign" means any sign not permanently attached to the ground or other permanent structure, or a sign designed to be transported, including, but not limited to, signs designed to be transported by means of wheels; signs converted to A- or T-frames; menu and sandwich board signs; balloons used as signs; umbrellas used for advertising; and signs attached to or painted on vehicles and visible from the public right-of-way, unless the vehicle is used in the normal day-to-day operations of the business, and parked both adjacent to and in the parking provided for said business. 
    "Principal building" means the building in which is conducted the principal use on the site on which it is located. Sites with multiple principal uses may have multiple principal buildings, but storage buildings, garages, and other clearly accessory uses shall not be considered principal buildings. 
    "Projecting sign" means any sign affixed to a building or wall in such a manner that its leading edge extends more than six inches beyond the surface of such building or wall. 
    "Reader board sign" means a sign utilizing a field of small lights or other devices to create the effect of letters, numbers or symbols on the sign face. 
    "Real estate sign" means a temporary sign advertising the sale or lease of the property upon which it is located, and the identification of the firm handling such sale, lease or rent. 
    "Regional uses" means uses, which have access from major highways or arterials, and area of a size and configuration to facilitate development of businesses attracting consumers from a regional market area. Such uses could include retail malls, auto malls, movie theaters, recreation or other similar uses as approved by the director. 
    "Relocation agreement" means an agreement entered into between the city and a billboard or property owner to relocate or replace an existing billboard to another property or to reconstruct it on the same property. Reconstruction may also include converting a billboard to a digital advertising display. 
    "Residential sign" means any sign located in a district zoned for residential uses that contains no commercial message except advertising for goods or services legally offered on the premises where the sign is located, if offering such service as such location conforms with all requirements of the municipal code and general plan. 
    "Revolving sign" means a sign which all or a portion of which may rotate either on an intermittent or constant basis. 
    "Roof sign" means a sign that is mounted on the roof of a building or which is wholly dependent upon a building for support and which projects above the point of a building with a flat roof, the eave line of a building with a gambrel, gable or hip roof or the deck line of a building with a mansard roof. 
    Roof sign, integral. "Integral roof sign" means a sign erected or constructed as an integral or essentially integral part of a normal roof structure of any design, such that no part of the sign extends vertically above the highest portion of the roof and such that no part of the sign is separated from the rest of the roof by a space of more than six inches. 
    "Secondary wall signs" are accessory to the business sign but advertises goods, products or services offered at the site. 
    "Sign" means any device, fixture, placard or structure that uses any color, form, graphic, illumination, symbol or writing to advertise, announce the purpose of, or identify the purpose of a person or entity, or to communicate information of any kind to the public. 
    "Sign area" means the smallest geometric shape that will encompass the limits of the writing or other display. The structure or backdrop shall not be included in the computation. Multifaced signs shall compute all faces if they can be viewed from any one point at the same time. Channel letters shall be measured in the same fashion. 
    "Site sign plan" means a plan showing the height, size, type, location and architecture of all signs on a particular property or development. Signs in addition to those in Sections 16.36.040, 16.36.060 and 16.36.070 may be permitted when found to be benefiting the purpose of this chapter. 
    "Sports facility" means any facility expressly designed for the conduct of sports or recreation activities, owned by the state, county, city or other public or private entity in which sports or sanctioned recreation activities are conducted which has a total square footage greater than fifty thousand (50,000) square feet or, or has a fixed designed seating capacity greater than five thousand (5,000) seats. 
    "Street" means the public right-of-way subject to vehicular traffic (as well as pedestrian traffic) that provides direct or indirect access to property, including, but not limited to, alleys, avenues, boulevards, courts, drives, highways, lanes, places, roads, streets, terraces, trails or other thoroughfare. 
    "Street frontage (building)" means the length of the building facing, or within forty-five (45) degrees of facing, the public right-of-way of thirty (30) feet in width or more. 
    "Street frontage (site)" means the length of the site that abuts dedicated public streets with thirty (30) feet or more of public right-of-way. 
    "Temporary sign" means any sign that is used only temporarily and is not permanently mounted. 
    "Tethered balloon" means a balloon inflated with air or gas, which is fastened or restrained so that it can range only within a set radius. 
    "Wall sign" means any sign attached parallel to, but within twelve (12) inches of a wall, painted on the wall surface of, or erected and confined within the limits of an outside wall of any building or structure, which is supported by such wall or building, and which displays only one sign surface. 
    "Window sign" means any sign, pictures, symbol, or combination thereof, designed to communicate information about an activity, business, commodity, event, sale or service, that is placed inside a window or upon the window panes or glass and is visible from the exterior of the window. 
(Ord. 296 § 4 (Exh. A (part)), 2000) 
(Ord. No. 2009-02, § 3, 8-4-09; Ord. No. 2013-015, § 4(Exh. A), 11-5-13; Ord. No. 2017-01 , § 4(Exh. A), 3-7-17) 
16.36.030 - General provisions and administration. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to erect, alter, move, replace or relocate any sign except as provided by this chapter without first obtaining a sign permit. 
B.  Application for a sign permit shall be made on a form provided by the city. No person shall install electrical wiring or lighting to a sign without first obtaining an electrical permit. 
C.  It is the duty of the community development department to enforce all permitting and entitlement provisions of this chapter. The director may impose such conditions deemed necessary to secure the purpose of this chapter. 
D.  The director may grant minor exceptions from the sign area requirements or other minor changes when determined to be in accordance with Section 16.12.220(7) or (8). Should a site sign plan contain requests for signs that exceed the requirements of Section 16.12.220(7) of the development code, then the sign plan shall be referred to the planning commission for review and approval. 
E.  A permit shall be issued when the application is properly made, all fees are paid, the proposed sign complies with all city ordinances, and the sign is to be erected by an owner or licensed contractor. 
F.  Fees for sign permits shall be set by resolution of the city council. 
G.  No sign shall be erected upon any property without the written consent of the property owner or authorized representative. 
H.  Signs and support structures shall be kept in a proper state of repair. Display surfaces on signs shall be kept neatly painted or posted at all times. 
I.  No sign shall be installed, erected or maintained that prevents free ingress or egress from any door, window, fire escape, driveway, parking space, sidewalk or other area required for pedestrian, bicycle, motor vehicle or equestrian travel. 
J.  Signs shall be designed to avoid undue glare or reflection of light. Signs shall not be erected that create a traffic hazard or that may be confused with any traffic lights or signs. 
K.  Abatement and removal may be ordered for any sign when the director, or his designee, determines the sign to be unsafe, insecure or a public nuisance. Signs constructed, altered or maintained in violation with this chapter shall be determined to be a public nuisance and shall be subject to abatement and removal. 
(Ord. 296 § 4 (Exh. A (part)), 2000) 
16.36.040 - Exempt signs. 
    The following signs are exempt from the provisions of this chapter but may require electrical or building permits: 
A.  Public notice signs or warning signs required by law; 
B.  Signs inside a building not attached to the structure and not visible beyond the property line; 
C.  Works of art not containing a commercial message; 
D.  Real estate signs, contractor/construction signs, or future tenant signs for commercial or industrial properties not to exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in area, six feet in height, or spaced less than six hundred (600) feet apart on the same parcel. On residential or agricultural properties, real estate signs may be up to six square feet in area and five feet in height; 
E.  Service station gasoline price signs otherwise regulated pursuant to state law; 
F.  Community historical markers established by the city or park district; 
G.  Time and temperature signs not exceeding twelve (12) square feet or ten feet in height. When time and temperature signs are incorporated as part of a sign, this area may be added to the sign area otherwise permitted by this code; 
H.  Convenience signs not conveying commercial information, such as restrooms, no parking, pull forward, etc., not larger than six square feet or more than six feet in height; 
I.  On-site safety and identification signs used to identify locations, buildings, units, safety hazards, or similar type information and not exceed two square feet; 
J.  Club or organization signs similar in architecture to monument or wall signs not exceeding four feet in height and twenty (20) square feet in area; 
K.  Displays or decorations not exceeding twenty (20) square feet in total area and located outside building setback areas, parking lots and drive aisles; 
L.  Holiday decorations or banners not containing a commercial message; 
M.  Window signs, whether painted on the window or as banners or posters hung inside the window. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 5 (Exh. A (part)), 2007; Ord. 296 § 4 (Exh. A (part)), 2000) 
16.36.050 - Prohibited signs. 
    All signs not permitted by this chapter or exempt from regulation under Section 16.36.040 are prohibited and declared a public nuisance. Prohibited signs include: 
A.  Off-site signs unless permitted in Section 16.36.080; 
B.  Beacons, exposed light bulbs (except in reader board signs) or light bulb strings (except for temporary holiday use); 
C.  Pennants and flags except as permitted for special events, promotional events, and model homes; 
D.  Inflatable signs and tethered balloons except as permitted for special events; 
E.  Roof signs are prohibited except when other signing alternatives are considered impractical or unreasonable by the director. Roof signs may then be permitted if architecturally designed into the roof system. Whenever possible, new buildings shall be designed with integral roof signs to preclude the necessity for roof signs; 
F.  Animated or revolving signs where the physical structures or extensions of the sign structure are in motion. This does not include readerboards, barber poles or similar signs where motion may be depicted but where the sign structure itself is not in motion; 
G.  Portable sign except as allowed in Section 16.36.090; 
H.  Signs in the public right-of-way, except as approved by the city; 
I.  Signs that make sounds, emit odors or produce smoke. 
(Ord. 296 § 4 (Exh. A (part)), 2000) 
(Ord. No. 2012-04, § 3(Exh. A), 4-3-12) 
16.36.060 - Nonresidential signs (includes hotel and motel). 
A.  The following signs shall be permitted for nonresidential uses. Deviations from the following standards and the sign menu in Section 16.36.130 shall be permitted subject to review and approval of a site sign plan to govern all signage on a site. Should the site plan contain requests for signs that exceed the requirements of Section 16.12.220(7) of the development code, then the sign plan shall be referred to the planning commission for review and approval. 
B.  Total Sign Area. The total sign area for an individual use or combination of uses or buildings on a commercial or industrial site is computed as three square feet of signage per one lineal foot of principal building(s) that fronts on a street, alley or parking lot with customer entrances. Institutional uses shall not be granted a cumulative total, but shall be allowed signs listed in the sign menu and described per this chapter. 
C.  All signs must adhere to size, height and spacing limits per the type of sign as specified below: 
1.  Attached (Wall or Integral Roof) Signs. Wall signs are permitted at two square feet of sign area per lineal foot of principal building(s) fronting the street(s) with a maximum area of one hundred fifty (150) square feet per sign. Wall signs must be attached to the building and may be designated as integral roof signs, but shall not extend above the roof. Any number of signs may be used but the maximum area allowed shall be the cumulative total of all wall signs. 
2.  Monument Signs. Monument signs shall not exceed forty-eight (48) square feet in area or eight feet in height. Monument signs may be increased to nine feet in height and sixty (60) square feet if installed in a landscaped planter not exceeding three feet in height and at least six feet longer and wider than the sign. Any size site may have at least one monument sign. Multiple numbers of monument signs and freestanding signs allowed for a site shall not exceed one sign per one hundred fifty (150) feet of street frontage. 
3.  Canopy and Pump Island Signs. Canopy signs are allowed ten square feet in area per side. Signs are to display logos or brand names only. Pump islands are allowed three square feet of sign area per pump. 
4.  Banners. Banners used as permanent signs shall be attached to a principal building and shall be allowed in addition to attached, secondary, window or canopy signs. The area of these signs shall be counted against the site's allocation. Permanent banners shall not be permitted on separate stand-alone frames or structures, and shall not be attached or tied to perimeter walls, fences, monument signs or freestanding signs. Banners shall be made of canvas, vinyl or similar material of a minimum thickness of thirteen (13) ounces. The edges shall be folded, stitched or glued and equipped with eyelets or cords to facilitate mounting. Lettering, illustrations and logos shall be neat and professional in appearance. Banners shall be securely attached to buildings. Banners may be mounted inside windows. Any torn, faded, frayed or damaged banners shall be removed or replaced immediately. 
5.  Secondary Signs. Secondary signs such as food menus on fast food businesses or event or meeting signs shall not exceed fifty (50) square feet for any single sign (thirty (30) square feet for industrial uses)-unless approved as part of a site sign plan. 
6.  Secondary wall signs listing services offered such as nursery, pharmacy, tires, etc., with a maximum of fifty (50) square feet per sign. 
7.  Freestanding Signs. Freestanding signs are permitted whenever the project site exceeds two and one-half acres of land or the street frontage where the freestanding sign is proposed exceeds one hundred seventy-five (175) lineal feet. A site with less street frontage may also be eligible for a single freestanding sign should it be combined with at least one other adjacent property by merger, or with a least two other properties through the recordation of a reciprocal access and signage agreement. Properties so merged or combined shall form a continuous street frontage. Freestanding signs for commercial or industrial uses shall not exceed twenty (20) feet in height or two hundred (200) square feet in area. Multiple numbers of monument signs and freestanding signs allowed for a site shall not exceed one sign per one hundred fifty (150) feet of street frontage. 
8.  Bulletin or Directory Board. Bulletin board signs are monument style signs used to direct customers to tenants on a multiple tenant site. Bulletin boards shall not exceed thirty (30) square feet in area and six feet in height with one per entrance on the site. 
9.  Freeway Signs. Freeways signs are signs located within six hundred sixty (660) feet of the freeway. Freeway signs may be forty (40) feet high and two hundred (200) square feet in area. When two or more uses record an agreement to share signage, a freeway sign with two signs may be up to three hundred (300) square feet in area and fifty (50) feet in height. A freeway sign with three or more signs may be up to four hundred fifty (450) square feet in area and sixty (60) feet in height. 
    Notwithstanding the paragraph above, freeway signs between sixty (60) and one hundred (100) feet in height and up to one thousand (1,000) square feet in area may be permitted, subject to a study to determine the optimal location in relation to freeway off-ramps, overpasses, existing development, and topography. Such signs must be located on, or within one thousand (1,000) feet of the premises of a development project consisting of at least thirty-five (35) contiguous acres. No more than two signs may be permitted per development. Signs incorporating digital displays may not be closer than one thousand (1,000) feet from another digital display on the same side of the freeway. Such displays are subject to current Caltrans' specifications as to brightness, frequency of changeable copy and depiction of movement. The location and design of freeway signs must be included in an approved site sign plan for the development to ensure consistency with the design and architecture of the project. 
10.  Institutional Uses in Commercial Designations. These uses, including schools, churches, hospitals and convalescent homes, shall be limited to a maximum of two square feet of attached sign area per principal building frontage. Monument signs shall be a maximum of forty-eight (48) square feet with one sign per driveway on public streets. Additional signage may be permitted when incorporated in a site sign plan. 
(Ord. 296 § 4 (Exh. A (part)), 2000) 
( Ord. No. 2017-01 , § 4(Exh. A), 3-7-17) 
16.36.070 - Residential signs. 
    The following signs shall be permitted for residential uses: 
A.  Single-family residential uses may have one identification sign not to exceed three square feet and four feet in height. Identification signs shall not be permitted for home occupations. Agricultural signs shall be unilluminated and limited to twenty-five (25) square feet in area. A wall sign shall be located below the roofline or a monument sign may be up to four feet in height. One monument sign per street frontage is permitted. The sign shall only indicate the name, address, and agricultural product or service provided at the site. 
B.  Subdivision Signs. Subdivision signs shall be limited to thirty-two (32) square feet per street frontage and six feet in height. These are permanent signs incorporated in an entry statement or as part of a perimeter wall. 
C.  Apartments, Condominiums and Mobile Home Park Signs. These signs are limited to one monument per street frontage not to exceed forty-eight (48) square feet. Window signs may cover twenty (20) percent of available area on community or office buildings only. Additional signage may be permitted when incorporated in a site sign plan. 
D.  Institutional Uses in Residential Designations. Institutional uses including schools, churches, fraternal lodges and hospitals, shall be limited to a maximum of one sign per street frontage with a maximum of twenty-four (24) square feet in area. Monument signs are limited to one sign per street frontage, with a maximum of twenty-four (24) square feet and six feet in height. Additional signage may be permitted when incorporated in a site sign plan. 
(Ord. 296 § 4 (Exh. A (part)), 2000) 
16.36.080 - Off-site signs. 
    Signs may not be constructed on any parcel except that where the business is conducted unless approved as part of a sign program authorized by the city. Businesses not holding a city business license may not be advertised on off-site signs within the city. Prior to approval, the sign plan shall show as a minimum the following: 
A.  Individual signs shall not be larger than nine square feet and attached to a city approved sign stand. 
B.  Signs shall be located outside of clear sight triangles and generally three hundred (300) feet from other off-site signs. 
C.  Signs shall not be placed in the public right-of-way unless specifically approved by the director. 
D.  Requests for off-site sign locations shall be accompanied by proof of permission from the property owner and shall be approved by the director or his representative prior to installation. 
E.  In addition to the off-site business program authorized above, off-site signs for new residential construction are permitted for model homes and subdivision developments as well as open houses to market individual homes for sale. 
F.  For the purposes of this section, "subdivision" means a residential tract development with an active construction permit and a subdivision model home or complex holding a valid temporary occupancy permit. "Model home" means an individual home used to market the sale and construction of homes on scattered lots by an individual builder. "Open house" means the promotion of a single existing home for its individual sale. 
G.  Up to four off-site promotional signs may be permitted per subdivision or model home. Such signs may be up to nine square feet in area, six feet in height and may be placed on vacant property out of the public right-of-way. Subdivision developments may have one of the four signs up to thirty-two (32) square feet in area and eight feet in height. Signs shall be placed on private property with the owner's permission. Signs must be at least three hundred (300) feet away from city approved off-site business directional signs or other residential promotional signs. 
H.  Temporary weekend signs may be permitted for each subdivision or model home. Signs may be located along the streets extending from a major arterial roadway to the site of the model home or residential tract. These signs shall be located at least thirty (30) feet from an intersection and fifteen (15) feet from the edge of pavement. Signs must be spaced at least three hundred (300) feet apart and cannot be closer than one hundred (100) feet from any other weekend sign, promotional sign or city off-site sign. These signs may be up to twenty-four (24) inches by thirty-six (36) inches in size and are allowed on weekends or holidays only. These signs shall be erected no earlier than twelve midnight on Friday and removed no later than twelve midnight on Sunday. In the event of a three-day holiday, said signs can be erected no earlier than twelve midnight on Thursday if the holiday falls on a Friday, and must be removed no later than twelve midnight on Monday, if the holiday falls on Monday. 
I.  Only subdivisions or model homes with a temporary occupancy permit may be advertised on off-site residential signs. These signs shall only be used during the active sales period for new homes and shall not be used to advertise the resale of older homes. All on and off-site signs related to a subdivision or model home shall be approved under the authority of the temporary occupancy permit issued to the developer of the subdivision or model home. 
J.  Open house signs may be put up during daylight hours on the day of the open house. Up to three signs may be placed off-site from the location of the open house. These signs shall be located at least thirty (30) feet from an intersection and fifteen (15) feet from the edge of the pavement. They may be up to six square feet in area and three feet in height. Signs may be freestanding stick signs or A-frame in design. Only owners, salespersons or licensed real estate brokers holding a current city business license may place off-site open house signs. Owners, salespersons or licensed real estate brokers electing to hold a two or three day open house may keep their signs in place overnight during the event, however all signs must be removed before dusk on the final day. 
K.  All signs shall feature consistent colors, lettering and logos, and shall be neat and professional in appearance. No flags, balloons, streamers or banners shall be attached to off-site real estate signs. Damaged, torn, defaced or faded signs shall be removed or replaced immediately. Failure to maintain signs or control litter caused by lost weekend signs or open house signs shall result in revocation of permits to place off-site signs. 
(Ord. 296 § 4 (Exh. A (part)), 2000) 
16.36.090 - Special uses. 
    Special uses include special events, promotional events and political signs. 
A.  Special use signs advertise special events and activities such as grand openings, charitable events, seasonal sales and events. Special use signs shall be regulated as part of a temporary special event permit. 
B.  Promotional events advertise new products, management, business hours, service or similar events and may include banners, flags, and similar signs with all other signs limited to fifty (50) square feet. Promotional event signs shall be limited to four display periods annually not to exceed fifteen (15) days per event. 
C.  Political signs may be displayed up to sixty (60) days before a scheduled election and must be removed within fifteen (15) days after the election. 
D.  Political signs may be placed in the public right-of-way, subject to certain exceptions to ensure safety: 
1.  Political signs are not permitted in median strip areas. 
2.  Political signs must be freestanding and are not permitted on traffic signs, trees, shrubs, bus stops, power poles, utility cabinets or other public appurtenances. 
3.  Political signs may not be placed within fifty (50) feet of an intersection and no closer than six feet from the curb. Where no curb exists, signs shall be at least ten feet from the edge of pavement. 
4.  Political signs may not be located within any clear-sight triangle and may not obstruct any regulatory sign or traffic signal. In no case shall any political sign be placed where it will obstruct or impede traffic visibility. 
E.  Political signs may not be placed on city or other public property outside of city right-of-way, such as parks, buildings, facilities or appurtenant landscaped areas. 
F.  Political signs may be up to thirty-two (32) square feet in area and six feet in height. 
G.  All political signs on private property must be authorized by the property owner. 
H.  Signs may not be affixed directly to buildings or other objects. Signs may not be illuminated, but may be placed where existing lighting may permit them to be seen at night. 
I.  Promotional and special event signs shall include a-frame signs and flag poles as illustrated below. These signs are not permitted on any vehicle. Temporary signs shall be permitted as follows: 

A-Frame Signs

Flag Pole Signs
1.  For twelve (12) months from the effective date of this ordinance, one temporary signs shall be allowed without a permit. The temporary signs is subject to the following regulations: 
a.  An A-frame signs shall not exceed a sign area of twenty (20) square feet, and a height of four feet. A flags mounted on a poles shall not exceed a sign area of sixty-five (65) square feet and a height of twelve (12) feet. 
b.  No temporary sign shall be placed within ten feet of another temporary sign. This separation requirement shall only apply to temporary signs allowed in Section 16.36.090(1). It shall be the responsibility of each tenant to coordinate the placement of the sign with other tenants. 
c.  The signs may only be displayed during business hours of operation. 
d.  The signs must be neatly and professionally constructed and all lettering done in a professional workmanlike manner. 
i.  A flag poles sign shall mean any sign of lightweight fabric or similar material that is permanently mounted to a pole. 
ii.  An A-frame signs shall be constructed of durable materials that are weather and rust-resistant. 
e.  The signs may not be illuminated or contain any electrical components. 
f.  The signs must be installed in a manner preventing it from falling or blowing over. 
g.  The temporary signs shall be placed on the privately owned property where the business is located. 
h.  The temporary signs shall not be placed in the right-of-way, clear sight triangle, or handicap path of travel. A temporary signs shall not be hung from, or attached to, utility poles, light poles, or landscaping. 
i.  The temporary signs shall be subject to the maintenance and abatement provisions in Chapters 8.32 and 16.36 of this Municipal Code. The installation or erection of any sign in violation of this section shall be, and is hereby declared to be, unlawful and a public nuisance. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 5 (Exh. A (part)), 2007: Ord. 296 § 4 (Exh. A (part)), 2000) 
(Ord. No. 2009-09, § 3(Exh. A), 8-4-09; Ord. No. 2010-08, § 3(Exh. A), 9-7-10; Ord. No. 2011-16, § 3(Exh. A), 9-6-11; Ord. No. 2012-04, § 3(Exh. A), 4-3-12; Ord. No. 2013-003, § 3(Exh. A), 4-2-13) 
16.36.092 - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2017-01 , § 4(Exh. A), adopted March 7, 2017, repealed § 16.36.092, which pertained to city freeway pylon signs and derived from Ord. No. 2013-015 , adopted November 5, 2013. 
16.36.100 - Billboards. 
A.  Purpose. For the purposes of regulating excess signage, encouraging the positive economic development of the city, promoting the safety of the traveling public, protecting existing property values in both residential and nonresidential areas, preventing the overcrowding of land, promoting a positive community appearance as part of a concerted city wide effort to protect and enhance the aesthetics of the city for the enjoyment of all citizens. The regulations are designed to prevent their overconcentration, improvement placement, and excessive height, bulk, number and area. It is recognized that, unlike on-premises identification signs, which are in actuality a part of a business, billboards are a separate and distinct use of the public thoroughfare. With a view to this distinction, billboards are regulated differently from on-premises signs. It is intended that billboards be located away from residential areas, and that such signs be regulated to protect the character of the area wherein billboards are located, and to conserve property values in these areas. 
B.  Prohibition of New Billboards. New billboards are prohibited, and the erection, alteration, construction, replacement, use, installation or conversion of any billboard within the city is prohibited. No permit shall be issued for any billboard which violates this policy. This paragraph shall be construed liberally to broadly prohibit any new billboard of any kind within the city, unless a permit is issued pursuant to a relocation agreement described in paragraph C of this Section 16.36.100, below. With regard to any existing billboard lawfully constructed prior to the city's incorporation nothing in this paragraph shall be construed as prohibiting: (1) the ordinary maintenance, poster panel replacements, copy changes, or repair (excluding repairs involving structural, material, or electrical changes, which are prohibited) of such billboard, or (2) the replacement of a billboard by permit, consistent with Section 16.12.316(C) of the code. 
C.  Relocation of Existing Billboards. Billboards or digital advertising displays may only be constructed, relocated, or upgraded upon the approval of a relocation agreement and site plan review by the city council, and consistent with the following criteria: 
1.  No billboard may exceed six hundred seventy-two (672) square feet. The sign area is measured by finding the area of the minimum imaginary rectangle or square of vertical and horizontal lines that fully encloses all extremities of the sign, excluding supports, the base or apron unless such copy, message, announcement or decoration appears on the base or apron. The allowable sign area of signs with equal size and shape for both double-faced (back-to-back) and V-type signs is measured by computing the area of only one side of the sign. Both sides of a double-faced or V-type sign shall be of equal size. The sign area of signs with three or more sides (multiple-side signs) containing copy message, decoration or announcement visible from a street, highway or expressway is measured as the sum of the area of any two adjacent sides. The digital advertising display areas of the sign, if any, shall be calculated as part of the permitted sign area. 
2.  No billboard or part thereof, including base or apron, supports, supporting structures and trim, may exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height. Any required solar or wind power devices shall not be counted as part of the billboard's height. 
3.  All signs shall comply with the appropriate detailed provisions of the latest adopted edition of the California building codes. 
4.  Billboards shall be located in such a way that they maintain horizontal and vertical clearance of all overhead electrical conductors in accordance with the California Electric Code and the development standards of any public or private electrical provider; provided, that in no case shall a billboard be erected closer than ten feet horizontally or vertically from a conductor or public utility guy wire. 
5.  No part of a billboard may be located within a triangular area formed by the street right-of-way lines and a line connecting them at points thirty (30) feet from the right-of-way intersection. 
6.  No part of any billboard shall be located less than one thousand (1,000) feet from any part of another billboard, measured in all directions. 
7.  Billboards shall not be permitted in any historic, residential, or agricultural district. Billboards shall only be relocated within the regional commercial, office park or commercial industrial business park districts, on a parcel located within six hundred sixty (660) feet of the freeway. 
8.  Billboards shall not be permitted on any designated scenic street, road, drive, parkway or highway. 
9.  Billboards shall not be permitted within seven hundred fifty (750) feet of any residential district, historic district, park, school, church, hospital, retirement home, cemetery, convention center, or government building. 
10.  Billboards shall not be permitted on or over the roofs of buildings. 
11.  Billboards shall not be permitted at any bridge crossing or situated to impair any scenic vistas. 
12.  Billboards shall not be permitted to be stacked over or placed next to any other billboard. 
13.  Any billboards or digital advertising displays shall be required to provide for public service announcements, Amber Alerts and other community service announcements. 
14.  Digital advertising displays may be approved as part of a sports facility as defined herein, subject to approval of a digital agreement with the owner to facilitate public service announcements and Amber Alerts. Digital displays may advertise products or services that are or will be available in the premises and/or products or services provided by the principal sponsors of the facility pursuant to an agreement of at least one year duration between the vendor or sponsor and the property owner, facility owner or facility operator. 
15.  Nonconforming billboards owned by the same advertising company within the city boundaries shall be removed prior to issuance of permits for the new billboard or the conversion of an existing billboard to a digital advertising display at a ratio of three sign faces to one. 
16.  Where removal is not possible, the city may consider other provisions in the relocation agreement, including, but not limited to, as increased public service announcements, construction of city entry monuments or payment to the city. 
17.  No billboard or digital advertising display shall depict or simulate any motion or video (i.e., video clips, flashing, etc.). Any slide (image) shall be displayed for a minimum of six seconds and transitions between slides shall not exceed one second. 
18.  Each billboard shall include a photometric sensor that will adjust the intensity of the sign for daytime and nighttime viewing. The nighttime intensity shall be limited to 0.3 foot candles (over ambient levels) as measured at a present distance as established by the Lewin Report as prepared for the Outdoor Advertising Association of America (OAAA). The city may modify or further restrict the intensity of any billboard or digital advertising display should the lighting create a distraction to drivers. 
19.  Generators shall not be used to power any billboards. All relocated or reconstructed billboards, not including digital displays, shall incorporate solar or wind power to offset at least seventy-five (75) percent of their energy use. 
(Ord. 296 § 4 (Exh. A (part)), 2000) 
(Ord. No. 2009-02, § 4, 8-4-09) 
16.36.110 - Design standards. 
A.  Signs shall be designed and be constructed of materials that relate to the architectural style of the main or principal building(s) on the lot. When more than one sign is permitted on a site, the style of all signs on a parcel shall be coordinated architecturally. 
B.  Illuminated signs shall be designed so that illumination shall be internal or if external shall be directed fully onto the sign face(s). 
C.  When monument signs use planters to increase height or area, planters shall be three feet wider than the monument, not more than three feet high, and be landscaped with a permanent irrigation system. 
D.  All signs shall be maintained in proper repair. All signs shall be kept clean and graffiti free. Any structural or electrical damage shall be repaired immediately. 
E.  Signs are not permitted in the public right-of-way except signs erected by or on behalf of a governmental entity. This includes bus stop signs erected by a public transit authority and conveying a commercial message. Any other sign placed on public property, except in conformance with this section, shall be forfeited to the public or subject to summary abatement. In addition, the city shall have the right to recover the full costs of removal and disposal of any sign. 
F.  No part of any freestanding sign, including the footing, shall be located closer than one foot from any property line. 
G.  The leading edge or footing of a sign shall be located no closer than one foot from the existing right-of-way line. Where the planned right-of-way is greater than the existing right-of-way, the property owner shall enter into an agreement with the city to relocate the sign at the property owner's expense whenever such right-of-way is expanded. 
H.  When a freestanding sign is within a front or street side yard setback area, or is located within the clear sight triangle, the sign face shall be at least eight feet above grade. 
I.  The height of a projecting sign shall not exceed the height of the building to which it is attached. 
J.  Banners used as permanent signs shall be regulated in size, location and proportion to a building face in accordance with the sign menu (Section 16.36.130). The area of banners shall not exceed fifty (50) percent of any building face's allocation. 
(Ord. 296 § 4 (Exh. A (part)), 2000) 
16.36.120 - Previously permitted signs and amortization. 
A.  "Grandfathering" of Permitted Signs. Any sign previously approved or erected with permits in accordance with any prior code or this chapter in effect at the time of the approval or construction, may remain in place indefinitely. Permitted signs made nonconforming by this chapter are included in this provision, unless they subsequently become subject to subsection (D) of this section. 
B.  Persons who cannot produce evidence of a prior approval or permit as required by subsection (A) of this section may appeal the abatement of their sign to the planning commission. The appeal fee shall be set by resolution of the city council. The committee shall hold a public hearing on the matter and may consider the following factors: 
1.  Special topographic circumstances of the site, building or the sign; 
2.  Special historical or cultural significance to the community; 
3.  Special architectural significance or design limitations that would necessitate the type of sign requested; 
4.  Other factors including, but not limited to, adjacent structures or signs, public improvements, specimen trees or existing landscaping that are relevant in the placement or design of the sign in relation to its location within the development. 
C.  Amortization of Nonconforming Signs-General. 
1.  Every sign not described in California Business and Professions Code Subsection 5490(b) and which does not comply with the provisions of the prior code or this chapter shall be amortized and abated in accordance with the following schedule: 
Value Time Period Signs costing under $1,000 (per sign) 1 year Signs $1,000 and over but under $5,000 (per sign) 3 years Signs costing $5,000 and over (per sign) 7 years  
2.  The city, in accordance with the latest material valuation schedules shall determine the value of a nonconforming sign unless a verified receipt or contract is produced to prove the value. 
D.  Abatement of Existing Signs. Notwithstanding the status of any sign, whether previously permitted, grandfathered or approved by the planning commission, that fall within the criteria listed below, shall immediately be removed from the site, without compensation, under any of the criteria as follows: 
1.  Any sign which has been more than fifty (50) percent destroyed or damaged (other than destruction of the facial copy) and the display cannot be repaired within thirty (30) days of the date of its damage or destruction; 
2.  Any sign which is a danger to the public or is unsafe; 
3.  Any sign that constitutes a traffic hazard, such as a sign that simulates or interferes with signs or signals, (not created by the relocation of any street or highway or by any other act of the city); and 
4.  Any sign erected without a permit after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
E.  Amortization and Abatement of Nonconforming Billboards. 
1.  Nonconforming billboards located in an area designated on the general plan and zoned as either agricultural or residential and more than six hundred sixty (660) feet from the edge of the right-of-way of a freeway or primary highway, which have copy not visible or intended to be read from such freeway or primary highway, shall be removed from the site without compensation in accordance with the following schedule: 
Fair Market Value on Date of Notice Maximum Years Allowed Under $1,999.00 2 $2,000.00 to $3,999.00 3 $4,000.00 to $5,999.00 4 $6,000.00 to $7,999.00 5 $8,000.00 to $9,999.00 6 $10,000.00 and over 7  
2.  This amortization period shall commence upon receipt of written notice of nonconformance. 
(Ord. 296 § 4 (Exh. A (part)), 2000) 
( Ord. No. 2017-01 , § 4(Exh. A), 3-7-17) 
16.36.130 - Sign menu. 
    Applicants may pick and choose any type of sign as it applies to each use listed in the left hand column. 
    Totals for all signage allowed on a site are cumulative and is based on the following formula: three square feet of signage allowed per one lineal foot of principal building(s) frontage that faces a street, alley or parking lot with customer entrances. 
    This matrix is intended to address permanent signs. For temporary, off-site and special event signs, refer to the sign regulations (Chapter 16.36 of the Municipal Code). 
    This matrix shows size and height limitations for each type of sign, as well as street frontage requirements for freestanding and monument signs. 
    Exceptions are subject to a site sign plan approved by the city planning division in conjunction with the project. 
    N/A = Not allowed. 
Sign Type/Land Use Attached Monument Freestanding Secondary Accessory A. Commercial Building 2 sq. ft. per 1 foot of building frontage 
150 sq. ft. maximum per sign 1 sign per 150 ft. of the site's street frontage 
48 sq. ft. 8' high max. 
60 sq. ft., 9' high in planter 1 sign per 150 ft. of the site's street frontage 
200 sq. ft. 20' high max. 
175 ft. street frontage or 21/2 ac. required 50 sq. ft. per sign: pharmacy, food, banking, etc. 50 sq. ft. per sign: menu boards, directional signs, etc. B. Industrial 
Building 2 sq. ft. per 1 foot of building frontage. 
150 sq. ft. maximum per sign 1 sign per 150 ft. of the site's street frontage. 48 sq. ft., 8' high max. 
60 sq. ft., 9' high in planter 1 sign per 150 ft. of the site's street frontage. 200 sq. ft. 20' high max. 
175 ft. street frontage required 50 sq. ft. per sign services offered, etc. 30 sq. ft. per sign site directory bulletin boards, directional signs, etc. C. Canopy and Pump Islands 10 sq. ft. of sign per side. Brand name or franchise logos only N/A N/A 3 sq. ft. of sign area per pump N/A D. Institutional Uses Commercial Designations 2 sq. ft. per 1 foot of building frontage. 
200 sq. ft. maximum per sign 1 sign per driveway on public streets. 
48 sq. ft., 8' high max. Permitted per site sign plan only N/A 20 sq. ft. per sign, directional signs, site directory, parking signs, etc. E. Institutional Uses Residential Designations 1 sign per street frontage. 
24 sq. ft. maximum per sign 1 sign per street frontage. 
24 sq. ft. 6 ft. high maximum per sign N/A N/A 10 sq. ft. per sign, directional signs, site directory parking sign, etc. F. Multi-family Complex/Mobile Home Parks Entry Statement: 
48 sq. ft. maximum per sign; 
1 per entry 1 sign per driveway on public streets. 
48 sq. ft., 8' high N/A N/A 10 sq. ft. per sign, directional signs, site directory, parking signs, etc. G. Single-Family Residential Identification sign: 
3 sq. ft. max., 4 ft. high. Agricultural sign: 
25 sq. ft. max., 4 ft. high, unlighted Identification sign: 
3 sq. ft. max., 4 ft. high. Agricultural sign: 
25 sq. ft. max., 4 ft. high, unlighted N/A Subdivision signs: 
32 sq. ft. 6 ft. high max. 
On perimeter walls or as part of an entry statement N/A  
(Ord. 288 § 4 (Exh. A (part)), 2000) 
Chapter 16.40 - HILLSIDE DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS 
Sections: 

16.40.010 - Purpose of provisions. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to establish standards and guidelines for the review and approval of development on hillsides and other slopes, as defined below, which, due to their topography, require special consideration to assure that they are developed in a way that will substantially maintain their natural character and environmental and aesthetic values in accordance with the provisions set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. 228 Exh. A (§ 1), 1996) 
16.40.020 - Definition and scope. 
    Hillside areas include all those areas which have a slope of twenty (20) percent or greater. This chapter does not apply to lots for which an active tentative map was approved prior to the effective date of this chapter and which is developed in accordance with the general plan. This chapter also does not apply for any project for which a specific plan has been adopted. 
(Ord. 228 Exh. A (§ 2), 1996) 
16.40.030 - General objectives. 
A.  To preserve the most visually significant slope and ridgelines in as natural a condition as possible; 
B.  To minimize the effects of grading and ensure that the natural character of the hillside is retained; 
C.  To preserve, to the maximum extent possible, visually significant rock outcroppings, native plant materials, natural hydrology, and areas of historical or visual significance identified by the general plan or the environmental review process; 
D.  To preserve views of significant visual features as viewed both from within the project as well as from outside the project area; 
E.  To encourage a variety of structures and foundations, gracing techniques, lot sizes, site design and spacing of homes and developments; 
F.  To discourage mass grading of large pads and excessive terracing; 
G.  To provide safe circulation of vehicular and pedestrian traffic to and within hillside areas and to provide for emergency vehicles access necessary to serve hillside areas, including access to open space within the project; 
H.  To provide for safety against unstable slopes subject to erosion and deterioration in order to protect lives and property. 
(Ord. 228 Exh. A (§ 3), 1996) 
16.40.040 - Slope analysis requirements and criteria. 
A.  Overall residential density within projects involving hillside areas shall not exceed the designation(s) shown on the general plan land use map. 
B.  For the purpose of this section, slope shall be defined as the relationship between the change in elevation (rise) of the land and the horizontal distance (run) over which that change in elevation occurs. The percent of any given slope is determined by dividing the rise by the run on the natural slope of the land. 
C.  For the purpose of determining the amount and location of land falling into each slope class, the applicant shall submit a slope analysis map consisting of a base topographical map of the subject property. The map is to be prepared and signed by a qualified person, such as a civil engineer or land surveyor, in accordance with the Business and Professions Code. Such a map shall have a scale of not less than one inch to two hundred (200) feet and a contour interval of not more than two feet within areas of less than twenty (20) percent slope and a contour interval of ten feet where the slope is twenty (20) percent or more. The map shall also include all adjoining property within one hundred (100) feet of the site boundaries. A tabulation of the amount of land within the project area for each slope class shall be provided. 
D.  In preparing a slope analysis map, those small portions of ravines, ridges and terraces of less than one hundred fifty (150) feet in width at their widest measurement, which extend into an area of a different slope class, shall be regarded as part of that bordering slope class. 
E.  The slope analysis map shall be submitted in conjunction with any site plan review, conditional use permit or subdivision application affecting land within the scope of this chapter. The reviewing authority for a project involving hillsides should be determined by the application filed as specified in Chapter 16.12. 
F.  A soils report shall also be submitted with the application to develop land within the scope of this chapter. The report shall identify any unsafe conditions that may limit or preclude development and shall be prepared by a licensed civil engineer or other qualified person in accordance with the Business and Professions Code. 
G.  The maximum density and the percent of a site area to remain in a natural state within each slope class shall be determined by a slope analysis that is applied to the slope-density/natural-area table shown below: 
Slope-Density/Natural-Area Table 
Slope Class Ratio Allowable Density(% of G.P.) Minimum Percentage of Natural Area Required 40% or more >2.5:1 0% 100% 39 to 30% >3.3:1 10% 50% 29 to 20% >5:1 40% 10% 19% or less <5:1 100% 0%  
H.  Grading of any site shall be based on the applicable slope class as described below: 
Slope Class Standards 10% to 19% Redistribution of earth over large areas may be permitted. However such grading shall not disrupt the overall existing land form, major drainage patterns, and areas of significant vegetation. 20% to 29% Padded building sites may be allowed, but the use of custom foundations and split level designs shall be encouraged within this slope class to reduce the need for large built-up areas and the minimize the appearance of artificially landscaped slopes. 30% to 39% Mass grading is not permitted. Special hillside architectural and design techniques are expected in order to conform to the natural landform. 40% or more Development and grading is prohibited in this slope class. For all areas All graded areas shall be protected from wind and water erosion through acceptable slope stabilization methods such as landscaping, walls or other suitable methods satisfactory to the city engineer and building official.  
I.  Building setbacks, grading, construction, maximum slope heights, and slope drainage facilities shall be designed in accordance with standard engineering practices, the development code, applicable chapters of the Uniform Building Code and procedures established by this chapter. 
J.  The building official may require special construction methods of structures where it has been determined to have potential geologic or soils hazards. 
K.  Any fuel modification areas or planted slopes shall be landscaped and maintained in accordance with the Hesperia Recreation and Park District and Fire Marshal. 
L.  Sloped areas not included as part of a private lot shall be dedicated to the park district and annexed into the district's landscape and lighting maintenance district. An exception to this requirement will be considered for projects within planned developments that include the formation of a homeowners association. The association shall be formed for the purpose of maintaining common amenities such as golf courses, club houses, or pools as well as common landscaping. Associations formed for the sole purpose of maintaining streets and right-of-way landscaping are not acceptable. 
(Ord. 228 Exh. A (§ 4), 1996) 
16.40.050 - Drainage and runoff control. 
    Runoff from activities subject to a development permit shall be properly controlled to prevent erosion and downstream flooding. Erosion control and surface flow containment facilities stall be constructed and maintained to prevent discharge of sediment to surface waters or storm drainage systems. The following measures shall be used for runoff control, and shall be adequate to control runoff from a one hundred (100) year storm: 
A.  The identification of building and access envelopes and nonbuildable areas required to minimize disturbance of erodible areas of any proposed development site; 
B.  All development drainage systems shall be designed to the satisfaction of the city engineer to mitigate effects of runoff, in accordance with the San Bernardino County Flood Control District Hydrology Manual and good engineering practice. Detention and/or retention facilities shall be provided to mitigate increases in runoff from storms of varying intensity. Desilting and/or debulking facilities shall be provided where necessary to ensure the storm drain system will function as designed; 
C.  Any concentrated runoff which cannot be effectively dispersed over nonerodible channels or conduits to the nearest drainage course shall be contained within on-site percolation devices. Where water will be discharged to natural ground or channels, appropriate energy dissipators shall be installed to prevent erosion at the point of discharge; 
D.  Runoff from disturbed areas shall be treated in a manner satisfactory to the city engineer to prevent the escape of sediment from the disturbed area; 
E.  No earth, organic or construction material shall be deposited in or placed where it may be directly carried into a stream, lake, marsh, slough, lagoon or body of standing water. It is the developer's responsibility to secure and maintain any required storm water pollution prevention program and National Pollution Discharge Elimination System Permits from the State Regional Water Quality Control Board; 
F.  Where land-disturbing activities are in proximity to lakes or natural watercourses, a buffer zone is required along the land-water margin of sufficient width to confine visible siltation within twenty-five (25) percent of the buffer zone nearest the land-disturbing activities; 
G.  Where possible, drainage channels should be placed in less visible locations, and more importantly, should receive a naturalizing treatment including native rock, colored concrete, and landscaping so that the structure appears as an integral part of the environment. In all cases, a suitable liner shall be designed in accordance with city standards; 
H.  Natural drainage courses should be preserved and enhanced to the extent possible. Rather than filling them in, drainage features should be incorporated as an integral part of the project design in order to enhance the overall quality and aesthetics of a site, to provide attractive open space vistas, and to preserve the natural character of the area. 
(Ord. 228 Exh. A (§ 5), 1996) 
16.40.060 - Supplemental review guidelines. 
    These hillside development guidelines are intended to facilitate the appropriate development of hillside areas. These guidelines are not intended to be strict standards, but rather, to provide direction to encourage development which is sensitive to the unique characteristics common to hillside properties. Their purpose is not to restrict an individual from proposing an innovative or alternative method of design in a hillside area; innovation is, in fact, encouraged as long as the end result is one which respects the hillside and is consistent with the purposes expressed in this chapter and in the goals and objectives of the general plan. 
A.  Site Design. 
1.  Design of building sites should be located to the natural terrain. Structures should be located in such a way as to minimize necessary grading and to preserve natural features such as prominent knolls or ridgelines. 
2.  Preserve views of significant visual features as seen from both within and outside a hillside development. When designing lots and plotting homes, the following provisions should be taken into consideration. 
a.  Homes constructed along ridgelines shall be designed to be compatible with the general gradient of the existing landform. The developer should avoid architectural styles that over emphasize vertical surfaces and disrupt the natural silhouette of the ridge. 

b.  Homes should be oriented to allow view opportunities, although such views may be limited; however, residential privacy should not be unreasonably sacrificed. 

c.  Homes should be located in a manner that will retain outward views from each unit and preserve or enhance vistas, particularly those seen from public places. 

d.  Any significant public vista or view corridor as seen from a secondary, collector, or major arterial should be protected. 
3.  Significant visual features, such as large rock formations or groupings of protected plants or trees, shall be given special consideration in the design of the subdivision. Disturbance of such areas shall be avoided, unless in conflict with construction safety requirements or fire prevention standards. 
B.  Walls and Fences. Walls and fences can be used to define a sense of place and create an attractive appearance. However, walls should not dominate a view, and their height should be limited adjacent to a street or trail or within a rear yard. Terracing and extensive landscaping can reduce the effective bulk. In addition, street front walls should incorporate varying design and natural materials. The use of open view fencing is encouraged, so long as adequate public safety and residential privacy are maintained. 
1.  Retaining walls used to create pads or yard areas shall be minimized. Where possible, the structure shall be located to conceal the wall and cut slope. Where retaining wall or fences are adjacent to roads or are visible from public areas, they shall be built, where feasible of natural materials indigenous to the area. Non-native materials designed and colored to blend in with the surrounding area may be substituted. 

2.  Introduction of landscaping within hillside areas should make maximum use of texture, color, be capable of blending in with the natural landscape and help soften the effects of buildings, walls, pavement and grading. 
3.  Retaining walls or other support structures should be designed to minimize their visual impact through techniques such as terracing, crib walls, and appropriate landscaping. 

4.  Where retaining structures are required for hillside roads, efforts should be made to integrate them with the foundation walls of the adjacent residence and natural materials should be used in conjunction. 

C.  Driveways and Roadways. 
1.  Roadways should conform to the natural landform. They should not greatly alter the physical and visual character of a hillside by creating large notches in ridgelines or by defining wide straight alignments. Reduced road sections, split sections, and parking bays should be considered in the layout of hillside streets to reduce grading. 

2.  Local road and driveway alignments shall be designed to conform to existing topography and to minimize grading. Road grades shall be kept as flat as possible. Roads exceeding ten percent and driveway grades exceeding fourteen (14) percent require design to the satisfaction of the city engineer. Collector and larger roads shall have grade limits reviewed on a case by case basis. 
3.  Driveways shall be designed to provide for approved fire access lanes to any structure more than one hundred fifty (150) feet from a public street. Access roads shall be a minimum of twelve (12) feet in width, and have a vertical clearance of thirteen (13) feet, six inches. The maximum grade shall be twelve (12) percent for asphalt and fifteen (15) percent for concrete. All cases exceeding these standards shall be reviewed on a case by case basis by the fire chief in accordance with the fire protection standards of the Hesperia Fire Protection District. 
D.  Grading. 
1.  Contour grading techniques should be used to provide a variety of both slope percentage and slope direction in a three dimensional undulating pattern similar to existing, adjacent terrain. The following concepts should be utilized: 
a.  Hard edges left by cut and fill operations should be given a rounded appearance that closely resembles the natural contours of the land. 

b.  Manufactured slopes adjacent to roadways should be modulated by sufficient berming, regrading and landscaping to create visually interesting and pleasing streetscapes. 

c.  Where cut or fill conditions are created, slopes should be varied rather than left at a constant angle which may be unstable or create an unnatural, rigid, "engineered" appearance. Portions of the graded slope may exceed the maximum allowed within the slope class in order to achieve this objective. 

d.  The angle of any graded slope should be gradually adjusted to the angle of the natural terrain. 

e.  When adjacent pad elevations exceed ten feet, and terrace grading techniques are used, the pad configuration should be softened with variable, undulating slopes created to give a more pleasing and natural appearance. 

(Ord. 228 Exh. A (§ 6), 1996) 
Chapter 16.44 - SURFACE MINING AND RECLAMATION 
Sections: 

16.44.010 - Purpose and intent. 
A.  The city recognizes that the extraction of minerals is essential to the continued economic well-being of the city and to the needs of society and that the reclamation of mined lands is necessary to prevent or minimize adverse effects on the environment and to protect the public health and safety. The city also recognizes that surface mining takes place in diverse areas where the geologic, topographic, climatic, biological, and social conditions are significantly different and that reclamation operations and the specifications therefore may vary accordingly. 
B.  The purpose and intent of this chapter is to ensure the continued availability of important mineral resources, while regulating surface mining operations as required by California's Surface Mining and Reclamation Act of 1975 (Public Resources Code Sections 2710 et seq.), as amended, hereinafter referred to as "SMARA," Public Resources Code (PRC) Section 2207 (relating to annual reporting requirements), and State Mining and Geology Board regulations (hereinafter referred to as "state regulations") for surface mining and reclamation practice (California Code of Regulations [CCR], Title 14, Division 2, Chapter 8, Subchapter 1, Sections 3500 et seq.), to ensure that: 
1.  Adverse environmental effects are prevented or minimized and that mined lands are reclaimed to a usable condition which is readily adaptable for alternative land uses; 
2.  The production and conservation of minerals are encouraged, while giving consideration to values relating to recreation, watershed, wildlife, range and forage, and aesthetic enjoyment; 
3.  Residual hazards to the public health and safety are eliminated. 
(Added during 1997 codification) 
16.44.020 - Definitions. 
    The definitions set forth in this section shall govern the construction of this chapter. 
    "Area of regional significance" means an area designated by the State Mining and Geology Board which is known to contain a deposit of minerals, the extraction of which is judged to be of prime importance in meeting future needs for minerals in a particular region of the state within which the minerals are located and which, if prematurely developed for alternate incompatible land uses, could result in the premature loss of minerals that are of more than local significance. 
    "Area of statewide significance" means an area designated by the board which is known to contain a deposit of minerals, the extraction of which is judged to be of prime importance in meeting future needs for minerals in the state and which, if prematurely developed for alternate incompatible land uses, could result in the permanent loss of minerals that are of more than local or regional significance. 
    "Borrow pits" means excavations created by the surface mining of rock, unconsolidated geologic deposits or soil to provide material (borrow) for fill elsewhere. 
    "Haul road" means a road along which material is transported from the area of excavation to the processing plant or stock pile area of the surface mining operation. 
    "Idle" means surface mining operations curtailed for a period of one year or more, by more than ninety (90) percent of the operation's previous maximum annual mineral production, with the intent to resume those surface mining operations at a future date. 
    "Mined lands" means the surface, subsurface and ground water of an area in which surface mining operations will be, are being, or have been conducted, including private ways and roads appurtenant to any such area, land excavations, workings, mining waste, and areas in which structures, facilities, equipment, machines, tools, or other materials or property which result from, or are used in, surface mining operations are located. 
    "Minerals" means any naturally occurring chemical element or compound, or groups of elements and compounds, formed from inorganic processes and organic substances, including, but not limited to, coal, peat and bituminous rock, but excluding geothermal resources, natural gas and petroleum. 
    "Operator" means any person who is engaged in surface mining operations, or who contracts with others to conduct operations on his/her behalf, except a person who is engaged in surface mining operations as an employee with wages as his/her sole compensation. 
    "Reclamation" means the combined process of land treatment that minimizes water degradation, air pollution, damage to aquatic or wildlife habitat, flooding, erosion, and other adverse effects from surface mining operations, including adverse surface effects incidental to underground mines, so that mined lands are reclaimed to a usable condition which is readily adaptable for alternate land uses and create no danger to public health or safety. The process may extend to affected lands surrounding mined lands, and may require backfilling, grading, resoiling, revegetation, soil compaction, stabilization, or other measures. 
    "Stream bed skimming" means excavation of sand and gravel from stream bed deposits above the mean summer water level or stream bottom, whichever is higher. 
    "Surface mining operations" means all, or any part of, the process involved in the mining of minerals on mined lands by removing overburden and mining directly from the mineral deposits, open-pit mining of minerals naturally exposed, mining by the auger method, dredging and quarrying, or surface work incident to an underground mine. Surface mining operations include, but are not limited to, in place distillation or retorting or leaching, the production and disposal of mining waste, prospecting and exploratory activities, borrow pitting, streambed skimming, and segregation and stockpiling of mined materials (and recovery of same). 
(Added during 1997 codification) 
16.44.030 - Incorporation by reference. 
    The provisions of SMARA (PRC Section 2710 et seq.), PRC Section 2207, and state regulations CCR Section 3500 et seq., as those provisions and regulations may be amended from time to time, are made a part of this chapter by reference with the same force and effect as if the provisions therein were specifically and fully set out herein, excepting that when the provisions of this chapter are more restrictive than correlative state provisions, this chapter shall prevail. 
(Added during 1997 codification) 
16.44.040 - Scope of provisions. 
A.  Except as provided in this chapter, no person shall conduct surface mining operations unless a permit, reclamation plan, and financial assurances for reclamation have first been approved by the city. Any applicable exemption from this requirement does not automatically exempt a project or activity from the application of other regulations, ordinances or policies of the city, including but not limited to, the application of CEQA, the requirement of site approvals or other permits, the payment of development impact fees, or the imposition of other dedications and exactions as may be permitted under the law. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all lands within the city, public and private. 
B.  This chapter shall not apply to the following activities, subject to the above-referenced exceptions: 
1.  Excavations or grading conducted for farming or on-site construction or for the purpose of restoring land following a flood or natural disaster; 
2.  On-site excavation and on-site earthmoving activities which are an integral and necessary part of a construction project that are undertaken to prepare a site for construction of structures, landscaping, or other land improvements, including the related excavation, grading, compaction, or the creation of fills, road cuts, and embankments, whether or not surplus materials are exported from the site, subject to all of the following conditions: 
a.  All required permits for the construction, landscaping, or related land improvements have been approved by a public agency in accordance with applicable provisions of state law and locally adopted plans and ordinances, including, but not limited to, the California Environmental Quality Act ("CEQA," Public Resources Code, Division 13, Section 21000 et seq.), 
b.  The city's approval of the construction project included consideration of the onsite excavation and onsite earthmoving activities pursuant to CEQA, 
c.  The approved construction project is consistent with the general plan or zoning of the site, 
d.  Surplus materials shall not be exported from the site unless and until actual construction work has commenced and shall cease if it is determined that construction activities have terminated, have been indefinitely suspended, or are no longer being actively pursued; 
3.  Operation of a plant site used for mineral processing, including associated onsite structures, equipment, machines, tools, or other materials, including the onsite stockpiling and onsite recovery of mined materials, subject to all of the following conditions: 
a.  The plant site is located on lands designated for industrial or commercial uses in the city's general plan, 
b.  The plant site is located on lands zoned industrial or commercial, or are contained within a zoning category intended exclusively for industrial activities by the city, 
c.  None of the minerals being processed are being extracted onsite, 
d.  All reclamation work has been completed pursuant to the approved reclamation plan for any mineral extraction activities that occurred onsite after January 1, 1976; 
4.  Prospecting for, or the extraction of, minerals for commercial purposes and the removal of overburden in total amounts of less than one thousand (1,000) cubic yards in any one location of one acre or less. 
5.  Surface mining operations that are required by federal law in order to protect a mining claim, if those operations are conducted solely for that purpose; 
6.  Any other surface mining operations that the city determines to be of an infrequent nature and which involve only minor surface disturbances; 
7.  Emergency excavations or grading conducted by the department of water resources or the reclamation board for the purpose of averting, alleviating, repairing, or restoring damage to property due to imminent or recent floods, disasters, or other emergencies. 
(Added during 1997 codification) 
16.44.050 - Vested rights. 
A.  No person who obtained a vested right to conduct surface mining operations prior to January 1, 1976, shall be required to secure a permit to mine, so long as the vested right continues and as long as no substantial changes have been made in the operation except in accordance with SMARA, State regulations, and this chapter. Where a person with vested rights has continued surface mining in the same area subsequent to January 1, 1976, he shall obtain city approval of a reclamation plan covering the mined lands disturbed by such subsequent surface mining. In those cases where an overlap exists (in the horizontal and/or vertical sense) between pre- and post-Act mining, the reclamation plan shall call for reclamation proportional to that disturbance caused by the mining after the effective date of the Act (January 1, 1976). 
B.  All other requirements of state law and this chapter shall apply to vested mining operations. 
(Added during 1997 codification) 
16.44.060 - Procedures. 
A.  Applications for a site approval or reclamation plan for surface mining or land reclamation projects shall be made on forms provided by the planning department. The application shall be filed in accord with this chapter and procedures to be established by the planning director. The forms for reclamation plan applications shall require, at a minimum, each of the elements required by SMARA (Section 2772-2773) and state regulations, and any other requirements deemed necessary to facilitate an expeditious and fair evaluation of the proposed reclamation plan, to be established at the discretion of the planning director. As many copies of the site approval application as may be required by the planning director shall be submitted to the planning department. 
B.  As many copies of a reclamation plan application as may be required shall be submitted in conjunction with all applications for site approvals for surface mining operations. For surface mining operations that are exempt from a site approval pursuant to this chapter, the reclamation plan application shall include information concerning the mining operation that is required for processing the reclamation plan. All documentation for the reclamation plan shall be submitted to the city at one time. 
C.  Applications shall include all required environmental review forms and information prescribed by the planning director. 
D.  Upon completion of the environmental review procedure and filing of all documents required by the planning director, consideration of the site approval or reclamation plan for the proposed or existing surface mine shall be reviewed at a duly noted public hearing before the planning commission, and pursuant to Section 2774 of the Public Resources Code. 
E.  Within thirty (30) days of acceptance of a complete application for a site approval for surface mining operations and/or a reclamation plan as complete, the planning department shall notify the State Department of Conservation of the filing of the application(s). Whenever mining operations are proposed in the one hundred (100) year flood plain of any stream, as shown in Zone A of the flood insurance rate maps issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, and within one mile, upstream or downstream, of any state highway bridge, the planning department shall also notify the State Department of Transportation that the application has been received. 
F.  Prior to final approval of a reclamation plan, financial assurances (as provided in this chapter), or any amendments to the reclamation plan or existing financial assurances, the planning commission shall certify to the State Department of Conservation that the reclamation plan and/or financial assurance complies with the applicable requirements of state law, and submit the plan, assurance, or amendments to the State Department of Conservation for review. The planning commission may conceptually approve the reclamation plan and financial assurance before submittal to the State Department of Conservation. If a site approval is being processed concurrently with the reclamation plan, the planning commission may simultaneously also conceptually approve the site approval. However, the planning commission may defer action on the site approval until taking final action on the reclamation plan and financial assurances. If necessary to comply with permit processing deadlines, the planning commission may conditionally approve the site approval with the condition that the planning department shall not issue the site approval for the mining operations until cost estimates for financial assurances have been reviewed by the State Department of Conservation and final action has been taken on the reclamation plan and financial assurances. 
    Pursuant to PRC Section 2774(d), the State Department of Conservation shall be given thirty (30) days to review and comment on the reclamation plan and forty-five (45) days to review and comment on the financial assurance. The planning commission shall evaluate written comments received, if any, from the State Department of Conservation during the comment periods. Staff shall prepare a written response describing the disposition of the major issues raised by the state for the planning commission's approval. In particular, when the planning commission's position is at variance with the recommendations and objections raised in the state's comments, the written response shall address, in detail, why specific comments and suggestions were not accepted. Copies of any written comments received and responses prepared by the planning commission shall be promptly forwarded to the operator/applicant. 
G.  The planning commission shall then take action to approve, conditionally approve, or deny the site approval and reclamation plan, and to approve the financial assurances pursuant to PRC Section 2770(d). 
H.  The planning department shall forward a copy of each approved site approval for mining operations and/or approved reclamation plan, and a copy of the approved financial assurances to the State Department of Conservation. By July 1st of each year, the planning department shall submit to the State Department of Conservation for each active or idle mining operation a copy of the site approval or reclamation plan amendments, as applicable, or a statement that there have been no changes during the previous year. 
(Added during 1997 codification) 
16.44.070 - Standards for reclamation. 
A.  All reclamation plans shall comply with the provisions of SMARA (Section 2772 and Section 2773) and state regulations (CCR Section 3500-3505). Reclamation plans approved after January 15, 1993, reclamation plans for proposed new mining operations, and any substantial amendments to previously approved reclamation plans, shall also comply with the requirements for reclamation performance standards (CCR Section 3700-3713). 
B.  The city may impose additional performance standards as developed either in review of individual projects, as warranted, or through the formulation and adoption of citywide performance standards. 
C.  Reclamation activities shall be initiated at the earliest possible time on those portions of the mined lands that will not be subject to further disturbance. Interim reclamation may also be required for mined lands that have been disturbed and that may be disturbed again in future operations. Reclamation may be done on an annual basis, in stages compatible with continuing operations, or on completion of all excavation, removal, or fill, as approved by the city. Each phase of reclamation shall be specifically described in the reclamation plan and shall include: (1) the beginning and expected ending dates for each phase; (2) all reclamation activities required; (3) criteria for measuring completion of specific reclamation activities; and (4) estimated costs for completion of each phase of reclamation. 
(Added during 1997 codification) 
16.44.080 - Statement of responsibility. 
    The person submitting the reclamation plan shall sign a statement accepting responsibility for reclaiming the mined lands in accordance with the reclamation plan. The statement shall be kept by the planning department in the mining operation's permanent record. Upon sale or transfer of the operation, the new operator shall submit a signed statement of responsibility to the planning department for placement in the permanent record. 
(Added during 1997 codification) 
16.44.090 - Findings for approval. 
A.  Site Approvals. In addition to any findings required by the municipal code, site approvals for surface mining operations shall include a finding that the project complies with the provisions of SMARA and state regulations. 
B.  Reclamation Plans. For reclamation plans, the following findings shall be required: 
1.  That the reclamation plan complies with SMARA Sections 2772 and 2773, and any other applicable provisions; 
2.  That the reclamation plan complies with applicable requirements of State regulations (CCR Section 3500-3505, and Section 3700-3713); 
3.  That the reclamation plan and potential use of reclaimed land pursuant to the plan are consistent with this chapter and the city's general plan and any applicable resource plan or element; 
4.  That the reclamation plan has been reviewed pursuant to CEQA and the city's environmental review guidelines, and all significant adverse impacts from reclamation of the surface mining operations are mitigated to the maximum extent feasible; 
5.  That the land and/or resources to be reclaimed will be restored to a condition that is compatible with, and blends in with, the surrounding natural environment, topography, and other resources, or that suitable off-site development will compensate for related disturbance to resource values; 
6.  That the reclamation plan will restore the mined lands to a usable condition which is readily adaptable for alternative land uses consistent with the general plan and applicable resource plan; 
7.  That a written response to the State Department of Conservation has been prepared, describing the disposition of major issues raised by that department. Where the city's position is at variance with the recommendations and objections raised by the State Department of Conservation, said response shall address, in detail, why specific comments and suggestions were not accepted. 
(Added during 1997 codification) 
16.44.100 - Financial assurances. 
A.  To ensure that reclamation will proceed in accordance with the approved reclamation plan, the city shall require as a condition of approval security which will be released upon satisfactory performance. The applicant may pose security in the form of a surety bond, trust fund, irrevocable letter of credit from an accredited financial institution, or other method acceptable to the city and the State Mining and Geology Board as specified in state regulations, and which the city reasonably determines are adequate to perform reclamation in accordance with the surface mining operation's approved reclamation plan. Financial assurances shall be made payable to the city and the State Department of Conservation. 
B.  Financial assurances will be required to ensure compliance with elements of the reclamation plan, including but not limited to, revegetation and landscaping requirements, restoration of aquatic or wildlife habitat, restoration of water bodies and water quality, slope stability and erosion and drainage control, disposal of hazardous materials, and other measures, if necessary. 
C.  Cost estimates for the financial assurance shall be submitted to the planning department for review and approval prior to the operator securing financial assurances. The planning director shall forward a copy of the cost estimates, together with any documentation received supporting the amount or the cost estimates, to the State Department of Conservation for review. If the State Department of Conservation does not comment within forty-five (45) days of receipt of these estimates, it shall be assumed that the cost estimates are adequate, unless the city has reason to determine that additional costs may be incurred. The planning director shall have the discretion to approve the financial assurance if it meets the requirements of this chapter, SMARA, and State regulations. 
D.  The amount of the financial assurance shall be based upon the estimated costs of reclamation for the years or phases stipulated in the approved reclamation plan, including any maintenance of reclaimed areas as may be required, subject to adjustment for the actual amount required to reclaim lands disturbed by surface mining activities since January 1, 1976, and new lands to be disturbed by surface mining activities in the upcoming year. Cost estimates should be prepared by a California registered professional engineer and/or other similarly licensed and qualified professionals retained by the operator and approved by the planning director. The estimated amount of the financial assurance shall be based on an analysis of physical activities necessary to implement the approved reclamation plan, the unit costs for each of these activities, the number of units of each of these activities, and the actual administrative costs. Financial assurances to ensure compliance with revegetation, restoration of water bodies, restoration of aquatic or wildlife habitat, and any other applicable element of the approved reclamation plan shall be based upon cost estimates that include but may not be limited to labor, equipment, materials, mobilization of equipment, administration, and reasonable profit by a commercial operator other than the permittee. A contingency factor of ten percent shall be added to the cost of financial assurances. 
E.  In projecting the costs of financial assurances, it shall be assumed without prejudice or insinuation that the surface mining operation could be abandoned by the operator and, consequently, the city or State Department of Conservation may need to contract with a third party commercial company for reclamation of the site. 
F.  The financial assurances shall remain in effect for the duration of the surface mining operation and any additional period until reclamation is completed (including any maintenance required). 
G.  The amount of financial assurances required of a surface mining operation for any one year shall be adjusted annually to account for new lands disturbed by surface mining operations, inflation, and reclamation of lands accomplished in accordance with the approved reclamation plan. The financial assurances shall include estimates to cover reclamation for existing conditions and anticipated activities during the upcoming year, excepting that the permittee may not claim credit for reclamation scheduled for completion during the coming year. 
H.  Revisions to financial assurances shall be submitted to the planning director each year prior to the anniversary date for approval of the financial assurances. The financial assurance shall cover the cost of existing disturbance and anticipated activities for the next calendar year, including any required interim reclamation. If revisions to the financial assurances are not required, the operator shall explain, in writing, why revisions are not required. 
(Added during 1997 codification) 
16.44.110 - Interim management plan. 
A.  Within ninety (90) days of a surface mining operation becoming idle, the operator shall submit to the planning department a proposed interim management plan (IMP). The proposed IMP shall fully comply with the requirements of SMARA, including but not limited to all site approval conditions, and shall provide measures the operator will implement to maintain the site in a stable condition, taking into consideration public health and safety. The proposed IMP shall be submitted on forms provided by the planning department, and shall be processed as an amendment to the reclamation plan. IMPs shall not be considered a project for the purposes of environmental review. 
B.  Financial assurances for idle operations shall be maintained as though the operation were active, or as otherwise approved through the idle mine's IMP. 
C.  Upon receipt of a complete proposed IMP, the planning department shall forward the IMP to the State Department of Conservation for review. The IMP shall be submitted to the State Department of Conservation at least thirty (30) days prior to approval by the planning commission. 
D.  Within sixty (60) days of receipt of the proposed IMP, or a longer period mutually agreed upon by the planning director and the operator, the planning commission shall review and approve or deny the IMP in accordance with this chapter. The operator shall have thirty (30) days, or a longer period mutually agreed upon by the operator and the planning director, to submit a revised IMP. The planning commission shall approve or deny the revised IMP within sixty (60) days of receipt. If the planning commission denies the revised IMP, the operator may appeal that action to the city council/board of supervisors. 
E.  The IMP may remain in effect for a period not to exceed two years, at which time the planning commission may renew the IMP for another period not to exceed two years, or require the surface mining operator to commence reclamation in accordance with its approved reclamation plan. 
(Added during 1997 codification) 
16.44.120 - Annual report requirements. 
    Surface mining operators shall forward an annual surface mining report to the State Department of Conservation and to the city planning department on a date established by the State Department of Conservation, upon forms furnished by the State Mining and Geology Board. New mining operations shall file an initial surface mining report and any applicable filing fees with the State Department of Conservation within thirty (30) days of permit approval, or before commencement of operations, whichever is sooner. Any applicable fees, together with a copy of the annual inspection report, shall be forwarded to the State Department of Conservation at the time of filing the annual surface mining report. 
(Added during 1997 codification) 
16.44.130 - Inspections. 
A.  The planning department shall arrange for inspection of a surface mining operation within six months of receipt of the annual report required in Section 16.44.120, to determine whether the surface mining operation is in compliance with the approved site approval and/or reclamation plan, approved financial assurances, and state regulations. In no event shall less than one inspection be conducted in any calendar year. The inspections may be made by a state-registered geologist, state-registered civil engineer, state-licensed landscape architect, or state-registered forester, who is experienced in land reclamation and who has not been employed by the mining operation in any capacity during the previous twelve (12) months, or other qualified specialists, as selected by the planning director. All inspections shall be conducted using a form approved and provided by the State Mining and Geology Board. 
B.  The planning department shall notify the State Department of Conservation within thirty (30) days of completion of the inspection that the inspection has been conducted, and shall forward a copy of the inspection notice and any supporting documentation to the mining operator. The operator shall be solely responsible for the reasonable cost of such inspection. 
(Added during 1997 codification) 
16.44.140 - Violations and penalties. 
    If the planning director, based upon an annual inspection or otherwise confirmed by an inspection of the mining operation, determines that a surface mining operation is not in compliance with this chapter, the applicable site approval, any required permit and/or the reclamation plan, the city shall follow the procedures set forth in Public Resources Code, Sections 2774.1 and 2774.2 concerning violations and penalties, as well as those provisions of the city development code for revocation and/or abandonment of a site approval which are not preempted by SMARA. 
(Added during 1997 codification) 
16.44.150 - Appeals. 
    Any person aggrieved by an act or determination of the planning department in the exercise of the authority granted herein, shall have the right to appeal to the planning commission or the city council, whichever is the next higher authority. An appeal shall be filed on forms provided, within fifteen (15) calendar days after the rendition, in writing, of the appealed decision. 
(Added during 1997 codification) 
16.44.160 - Fees. 
    The city shall establish by resolution such fees as it deems necessary to cover the reasonable costs incurred in implementing this chapter and the state regulations, including but not limited to processing of applications, annual reports, inspections, monitoring, enforcement and compliance. Such fees shall be paid by the operator, as required by the city, at the time of filing of the site approval application, reclamation plan application, and at such other times as are determined by the city to be appropriate in order to ensure that all reasonable costs of implementing this chapter are borne by the mining operator. 
(Added during 1997 codification) 
Title 17 - SUBDIVISIONS 
Chapters: 
Chapter 17.04 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Sections: 

17.04.010 - Intent of provisions. 
A.  It is the intent of this Title 17 to insure implementation of the city's general plan through attainment of its stated goals and objectives regarding the regulation and control of the creation, adjustment, and deletion of property lines through subdivision or other procedures. 
B.  It is also the intent of this Title 17 to provide, in conjunction with Titles 12, 15 and 16 of this code, for proper grading and erosion control, including the prevention of sedimentation on, or damage to, off-site property, and to specifically apply those regulations. 
C.  In addition, it is the intent of this Title 17 to implement those provisions of the California Solar Rights Act of 1978 relating to the design of subdivisions for future passive or natural heating or cooling opportunities. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 88.0101) 
17.04.020 - General provisions. 
    The provisions defining and regulating the review and approval of tentative, final, and parcel maps; lot line adjustments; lot mergers; reversions to acreage; certificates of compliance, and official maps shall be governed by this Title 17, except as otherwise indicated by this section. 
A.  Authority for Local Regulations. Pursuant to the provisions of California Government Code, Title 7, Division 2, referred to herein as the "Subdivision Map Act", and in addition to any regulations otherwise provided by law, the regulations contained in this Title 17 shall apply to all subdivisions, parts of subdivisions, lot line adjustments, lot mergers, reversions to acreage, certificates of compliance, and official maps hereafter made entirely or partially within the city. 
B.  The designation, establishment, duties, and meeting dates of the reviewing authorities by Chapter 16.12. 
C.  Review procedures and findings for approval shall be as specified by this Title 17 and Chapter 16.12. 
D.  Terms used within this Title 17 are defined as specified in Chapter 16.08. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 88.0105) 
17.04.030 - Filing criteria. 
A.  Maps of Condominium or Community Apartment Projects. A map of a condominium project, a community apartment project, or of the conversion of five or more existing dwelling units into a stock cooperative project need not show the buildings or the manner in which the buildings or the airspace above the property shown on the map are to be divided, nor will the city refuse approval of a parcel, tentative, or final map of such a project on account of design or location of buildings on the property shown on the map. However, the city may regulate the design and location of condominium project or a community apartment project through the provisions of its general plan or development code. The city may refuse approval of such a project if the design and locations of buildings violate provisions of the general plan or development code. 
B.  Filing Maps with County Recorder. Of the maps required by this Title 17 and the Subdivision Map Act, only final and parcel maps may be filed for record in the office of the county recorder. 
1.  No final map required by this chapter and the Subdivision Map Act which creates a subdivision shall be filed with the county without the written consent of all parties having any record title interest in the real property proposed to be subdivided, except as otherwise provided in this Title 17. 
2.  No parcel map required by this Title 17 and the Subdivision Map Act which creates a subdivision shall be filed with the county without the consent of the legal owner of record in the real property proposed to be subdivided, except as otherwise provided in this Title 17. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 88.1101) 
17.04.040 - Map procedures. 
    The procedures set forth in this section shall govern the filing, processing, approval, conditional approval, or disapproval of tentative, final and parcel maps and the modification thereof, in addition to the requirements in previous provisions. 
A.  Extension of Time Limits. The time limits specified in this Title 17 for reporting and acting on maps may be extended by mutual consent of the subdivider and the planning agency or city council. 
B.  Fees for Processing. Fees for the processing of tentative, vesting tentative, minor subdivision plot plan, final and parcel maps, lot line adjustments, lot mergers, reversion to acreage, certificates of compliance and official maps, and for other procedures required or authorized by this Title 17 shall be established in the city fee resolution. 
C.  The planning director may grant approval for the creation of two, three or four lots and a remainder parcel as shown on an approved tentative subdivision map for the purpose of obtaining building permits for model homes or units. As a condition of this approval, a parcel map may be required. Prior to the issuance of building permits for said model homes, a surety bond or cash deposit shall be posted with the city engineer for the street improvements abutting said lots as required for the approved tentative subdivision. The surety bond or cash deposit shall be in an amount equal to a contractor's construction estimate plus ten percent. 
D.  Filing Maps with County Recorder. After the approval by the city of a final or parcel map of a subdivision within the unincorporated territory, the map shall be transmitted ultimately to the county recorder in accordance with Section 66464 et seq. of the Subdivision Map Act or as may be subsequently amended. 
E.  Correction and Amendment to Maps. The purpose of this subsection is to provide a means to correct errors which may be found in final or parcel maps. 
1.  Amendment to a Final or Parcel Map. After a final map or parcel map is filed in the office of the county recorder, it may be amended by a certificate of correction or an amending map in the following circumstances: 
a.  To correct an error in any course or distance shown thereon; 
b.  To show any course or distance that was omitted therefrom; 
c.  To correct an error in the description of the real property shown on the map; 
d.  To indicate monuments set after the death, disability, or retirement from practice of the engineer or surveyor charged with the responsibilities for setting monuments; 
e.  To show the proper location or character of any monument which has been changed in location or character or originally was shown at the wrong location or incorrectly as to its character; 
f.  To correct any other type of map error or omission as approved by the county surveyor which does not affect any property right. Such errors and omissions may include, but are not limited to: lot numbers, acreage, street names, and identification of adjacent record maps. 
    As used in this section, "error" does not include change in courses or distances from which an error is not ascertainable from the data shown on the final or parcel map. 
2.  Preparation of Amending Map. The amending map or certificate of correction shall be prepared by a registered civil engineer licensed to practice land surveying or licensed land surveyor. An amending map shall conform to the requirements of the chapter governing final map form and content, if a final map; or the chapter governing parcel map form and content, if a parcel map. The amending map or certificate of correction shall set forth in detail the corrections made and show the names of the present fee owners of the property affected by the correction or omission. 
3.  Map Amendment Examined by City Engineer. The city engineer shall examine the amending map or certificate of correction, and if the only changes made are those set forth in this subsection, the city engineer shall certify to this fact on the amending map or certificate of correction. 
4.  Filing of Map Amendment with County Recorder. The amending map or certificate of correction certified by the city engineer shall be filed in the office of the county recorder in which the original map was filed. Upon such filing, the county recorder shall index the names of the fee owners and the appropriate tract designation shown on the amending map or certificate of correction in the general index and map index respectively. Thereupon, the original map shall be deemed to have been conclusively so corrected, and thereafter shall impart constructive notice of all such corrections in the same manner as though set forth upon the original map. 
5.  Upon recordation of an amending map or certificate of correction, the county recorder shall within sixty (60) days of recording transmit a certified copy to the city engineer who shall maintain an index of recorded certificates of correction. The amending map shall contain a certificate of preparation that is signed by the registered civil engineer licensed to practice land surveying or licensed land surveyor who prepared the map and a prominently displayed note on the map which briefly lists the changes to the satisfaction of the county surveyor. 
F.  Further Modifications of Final Maps. In addition to the amendments authorized by Section 17.04.040(E), after a final map or parcel map is filed in the office of the county recorder, such a recorded final map may be modified by a certificate of correction or an amending map if the city council makes each of the following findings: 
1.  That there are changes in circumstances which make one or all of the conditions of such a map no longer appropriate or necessary; and 
2.  That the modifications do not impose any additional burden on the present fee owner of the property; and 
3.  That the present fee owner of the property has consented in writing to the modifications; and 
4.  That the modifications do not alter any right, title, or interest in the real property reflected on the recorded map; and 
5.  That the map, as modified, conforms with each of the findings required by Section 16.12.405(D). 
    Any such modification shall be set for public hearing as provided for in Section 16.12.005(A)(1). The city council shall confine the hearing to consideration of and action on the proposed modification. These map amendments shall also be subject to the preparation, review, and recordation requirements of Section 17.04.040(E) where applicable. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 88.1105) 
17.04.050 - General requirements. 
    The procedures set forth in this section shall govern the requirements for soils report, special map requirement, environmental review, dedications, monument, and improvement requirements. 
A.  Soils Report Requirement. The requirements set forth in this subsection shall apply to the soils report. 
1.  A preliminary soils report may be required as part of the tentative map approval, providing the planning director makes a finding, based upon existing knowledge of soil qualities, that a preliminary analysis is necessary. The findings shall be based upon evidence, information, and recommendations of the development review committee or development review committee member acting within the departmental area of expertise. 
2.  If the city has knowledge of, or the preliminary soils report indicates, the presence of critically expansive soils or other soils problems which, if not corrected, would lead to structural defects, a soils investigation of each lot in the subdivision may be required. Such soils investigation shall be done by a civil engineer registered in this state, who shall recommend the corrective action which is likely to prevent structural damage to each structure proposed to be constructed in the area where such soils problems exist. 
    If the planning agency has knowledge of areas of districts which are characterized by such expansive soils or other soils problems, upon the recommendation of the planning officer, development review committee, or environmental review board, the planning agency may require that a soils investigation be prepared for each lot of any subdivision proposed within said areas or districts. 
3.  The planning agency may approve the subdivision or portion thereof where such soils problems exist if it determines that the development review committee's recommended action is likely to prevent structural damage to each structure to be constructed. As a condition to the issuance of any building permit, it shall be required that the approved recommended action be incorporated in the construction of each structure. 
4.  Each report shall be kept on file at the building and safety department for public inspection. The location of these reports shall be referenced on the composite development plan. 
B.  Special Map Requirement. Prior to tentative or parcel map approval, the planning director may require that the following information be reflected on the tentative map or minor subdivision plot plan: 
1.  Submittal of a map showing any or all existing easements and locations of rock outcrops, high groundwater and spring discharge. 
2.  Delineation of the portions of lots allocated for the subsurface disposal of sewage effluent. 
3.  The approximate size of irregularly shaped lots where it is deemed necessary in order to accomplish the objectives of this chapter and of the general plan. 
4.  A plan may be required where watercourses, significant drainage channels or bodies of water traverse or adjoin a lot, showing how sewage disposal systems will be installed and maintained. 
    Lines depicting the required setbacks from such watercourses, drainage channels or bodies of water shall be indicated on a copy of the tentative map. The map shall be reviewed by the development review committee and recommendations shall be forwarded to the planning agency. When subsurface waste-disposal systems are proposed, a preliminary soils report shall be provided by the subdivider which shall ascertain the acceptability of subsurface sewage-disposal systems where such will be the method for waste disposal. 
    This information shall be incorporated into the composite development plan to be filed with the building and safety department. The location of any special maps shall be referenced on the composite development plan. 
C.  Environmental Review Requirements. The requirements set forth in this subsection shall apply to the procedures related to environmental review. 
1.  No tentative map or parcel map shall be approved or disapproved until there has been compliance with the California Environmental Quality Act, the State CEQA guidelines and the adopted environmental review guidelines for the city. On tentative maps or parcel maps for which an environmental impact report has been prepared, the planning agency shall take the following actions: 
a.  Respond to the significant environmental points raised in the review and consultation process. The response shall describe the disposition of significant environmental issues raised (e.g., revisions to the proposed tentative map to mitigate anticipated impacts or objections). In particular, the major issues raised when the planning agency's position is at a variance with recommendations and objections raised in the comments must be addressed in detail giving reasons why specific comments and suggestions are not accepted, and factors of importance warranting override of the suggestions. 
b.  Identify the ultimate choice from alternatives presented in the environmental impact report and indicate why other alternatives were rejected in favor of the ultimate choice. 
c.  If the planning agency decides to approve a tentative map or parcel map for which significant adverse environmental consequences have been identified in an environmental impact report, the planning agency shall make a statement identifying the other interests that warrant approval in its point of view. 
D.  Dedications. 
1.  Streets, Highways and Flood Control Rights-of-Way. As a condition of approval of a map, the subdivider shall dedicate or make an irrevocable offer of dedication of all parcels of land within the subdivision that are needed for: 
a.  Streets; 
b.  Alleys; 
c.  Access rights and abutters' rights; 
d.  Drainage easements; 
e.  Public utility easements; 
f.  Other public easements. 
    In addition, the subdivider shall improve or agree to improve all streets, alleys, including access rights and abutters' rights, drainage, public utility easements and other public easements. The subdivider may also be required to dedicate such additional land as may be necessary and feasible to provide bicycle paths for the use and safety of residents of the subdivision. 
2.  Drainage Rights-of-Way. When, in the opinion of the planning agency, drainage rights-of-way are necessary, the subdivider shall offer to dedicate upon the final map of the subdivision the necessary rights-of-way for such drainage facilities. 
3.  Flood Control Dedication. Where dedication is offered for flood control district rights-of-way, such rights-of-way shall be shown as lots lettered alphabetically on the final map. Such offer of dedication shall be made by an appropriate certificate on the title sheet of the final map, and, in addition, an executed deed conveying fee title to said right-of-way to the flood control district shall be delivered to said district. 
4.  Certification of City Council Action. At the time the council approves a final map, it shall also accept, subject to improvement, or reject any offer of dedication. The city clerk shall certify on the map the action of the city council. 
5.  Resolution of Acceptance. The city clerk shall cause a resolution of acceptance of dedications by the council, to be filed with the county recorder. 
6.  If at the time the final map is approved, any streets, paths, alleys, public utility easements, rights-of-way for local transit facilities such as bus turnouts, benches, shelters, landing pads, and similar items, which directly benefit the residents of a subdivision, or storm drainage easements are rejected, subject to Section 771.010 of the Code of Civil Procedure, the offer of dedication shall remain open and the city council may by resolution at any later date, and without further action by the subdivider, rescind its action and accept and open the streets, paths, alleys, rights-of-way for local transit facilities such as bus turnouts, benches, shelters, landing pads, and similar items, which directly benefit the residents of a subdivision, or storm drainage easements for public use. Such acceptance shall be recorded in the office of the county recorder. 
E.  Monuments. The provisions of this subsection shall govern the placement of monuments for a subdivision. 
1.  Boundary Monuments. At the time of making the survey for the parcel map or the final map, the engineer or surveyor shall set sufficient durable monuments to conform with the city's engineering standards and standards described in Section 8771 of the Business and Professions Code so that another engineer or surveyor may readily retrace the survey. The parcel map or the final map shall show said monuments found or set at or near each boundary corner and at intermediate points approximately one thousand (1,000) feet apart or at such lesser distances as may be made necessary by topography or contour to insure accuracy in reestablishment of any point or line without unreasonable difficulty. The precise position and character of each monument shall be shown on the final map, together with the relative heights of the top of each such monument with respect to the surface of the ground. 
2.  Deferment, Final Map or Parcel Map Monuments. Interior monuments need not be set at the time the final map is filed if the engineer or surveyor certifies on the map that the monuments will be set on or before a specified later date. All monuments so deferred and the furnishing of notes thereon as required in the city's engineering standards, shall be agreed to be set and furnished by the subdivider. Such agreement shall be included and guaranteed in the "Agreement in Lieu of Improvements" as provided by this Title 17, and accompanied by a cash deposit. 
3.  Monument Inspection. All monuments shall be subject to inspection and approval by the city engineer. 
4.  Centerline Monuments. Durable monuments as described in the city's engineering standards shall be set. 
F.  Improvement Plans. 
1.  Submission of Improvement Plans. All improvement plans shall be submitted to the appropriate department, checked and approved prior to presentation of the final map to the city council for acceptance. 
2.  Preparation of Plans and Specifications. All plans and specifications in connection with improvements shall be prepared by or under the supervision of a registered professional engineer. 
3.  Street and Drainage Plans and Profiles. Plans, profiles and specifications of proposed street and drainage improvements shall be submitted to the city engineer, checked and approved prior to presentation of the final map to the city council for acceptance. These plans and profiles shall show full details of the proposed improvements which shall be according to the standards of the city. 
4.  Water Systems Plans. Plans, specifications and all necessary details of the proposed water system to be installed shall be submitted to the city engineer for review, provided that the supplier has certified that it is willing and able to supply water upon request. 
5.  Sanitary Sewer Plans. Plans, profiles, specifications and all necessary details of the sanitary sewers to be installed shall be submitted to the city engineer for review, or if a private sewage disposal company is to service the tract, the plans shall have been approved by the city engineer. 
(Amended during 1997 codification; Ord. 75 § 2 (part), 1990; SBCC § 88.1115) 
17.04.060 - Subdivision design and improvement standards. 
    The design and improvement standards found in this section shall be considered as requirements for map approval. 
A.  Land-Use Standards. The land-use standards in this subsection shall be applied as requirements for map approval. 
1.  The minimum areas and dimensions of lots shall be as required for the particular land use district classification in which the property is classified by the development code; provided, however, that: 
a.  Lot or parcel side lines shall be approximately normal to street lines. 
b.  Each lot or parcel on a dead-end street where the side lines thereof are converging from front to the rear of such lot or parcel, shall have an average width of not less than sixty (60) feet, or that width required by the development code, whichever is greater, measured along the front building setback line. 
c.  Each lot or parcel on a curved street where the side lines thereof are converging from the front to the rear of such lot or parcel, shall have an average width of not less than sixty (60) feet, or that width required by the development code, whichever is greater. 
d.  Double frontage lots shall be discouraged except where essential to provide separation of residential developments from major or secondary highways or due to topographical conditions. When double frontage lots are permitted, vehicular access rights shall be dedicated to the city along the street designated by the planning agency. 
e.  The planning agency may require lots larger than the above minimum sizes specified in multiple-residential, commercial and industrial subdivisions. 
    When lots or parcels twice or more the required area or width are shown as part of a subdivision of land, the planning agency may require such lots or parcels to be so established as to make practical a further division into allowable building sites, without injury to adjoining property. 
f.  In desert areas or in hilly or mountainous land, the planning agency may require lots larger than required minimums. Larger lots shall be required if it is deemed necessary in order to conform to the land-use element of the general plan. 
g.  Modification of the lot design standards may be allowed under the following circumstances: 
i.  Pursuant to the lot area regulations of Chapter 17.48; 
ii.  Pursuant to the planned development regulations of Chapter 16.32. 
h.  This subsection does not apply to any lot or parcel which the subdivider offers to dedicate to the county or any public agency or district. 
i.  When a land use district classification line established by the development code divides a lot or parcel, such lot or parcel shall have the area and frontage required for that land use district classification within the lot or parcel which has the greater area and frontage requirements. 
B.  Circulation Standards. The circulation standards in this subsection shall be applied as requirements for map approval. 
1.  If the general plan designates a general location of a proposed highway and any portion thereof may be wholly or partially within any proposed subdivision or may be affected by a proposed subdivision prior to the approval of the proposed subdivision, a specific alignment plan shall be prepared and adopted. Each such roadway shall conform in width and alignment with that shown or indicated on the general or specific plan or any standards adopted pursuant thereto. As a condition of approval or said subdivision, the subdivider shall be required to make dedications and construct such reasonable improvements required by the specific alignment plan. Such requirements may be waived by the planning agency upon recommendation of the city engineer, if the proposed highway is located upon a section line or its precise alignment can be otherwise determined. 
2.  The following provisions shall apply as standards governing circulation design and shall be required for map approval: 
a.  The circulation design of all subdivisions shall be compatible and coordinate with the general plan and the existing street and land-use pattern in the surrounding area. 
b.  Any part-width highway lying along and adjacent to any boundary of a subdivision shall have such a part-width and alignment as will conform to the route lines shown on the master plan of highways covering the same portion of such subdivision. 
c.  Each street intended to be extended into adjoining property shall be terminated by a one foot parcel of land extending across the end of the street and, in the case of a part-width street, a one foot parcel of land shall extend along the entire side of the street. The parcels shall be designated alphabetically as a lot, labeled as a future street and offered for dedication by appropriate certificate on the final or parcel map. The offer of dedication of the future street shall include a restriction against the use of same for access purposes until such time as it is accepted as a public street. 
    Where it is determined by the planning agency that to protect the public health, safety and general welfare, it is necessary to extend a street beyond the boundaries of the subdivision for adequate traffic needs, the subdivider shall provide separate deeds for the necessary easements or rights-of-way to accommodate such traffic facilities. Such rights-of-way shall be improved in accordance with city standards or as required by the planning agency. 
d.  Cul-de-sacs shall not exceed six hundred (600) feet in length, except as provided below, and shall terminate with a turn-around as specified in the adopted county road standards. The planning agency may approve a cul-de-sac which exceeds six hundred (600) feet if the planning agency finds that the cul-de-sac will not be injurious to the public health, safety and welfare. 
e.  Road grades shall not exceed twelve (12) percent unless it can be demonstrated that in order to accomplish the objectives of the general plan a road grade in excess of twelve (12) percent is necessary. In such circumstances, the planning agency may approve a road grade not to exceed fourteen (14) percent grade for a distance not to exceed five hundred (500) feet if a finding is made, based upon the recommendations of the city engineer and the fire marshal, that the roadway will not create an unacceptable hazardous risk to the public health, safety or welfare. 
f.  Access to a Subdivision. The subdivision and each phase thereof shall have two points of vehicular ingress and egress from existing and surrounding streets, one of which may be emergency only. Where it can be shown that this requirement is a physical impossibility or a cul-de-sac is proposed, this requirement may be waived. 
C.  Public Services and Facilities. The public services and facilities standards in this subsection shall be applied as requirements for map approval. 
1.  These standards shall regulate the placement of utilities within the subdivision. 
a.  Utility lines, including but not limited to electric, telephone, communications, street lighting and cable television, within or directly serving each subdivision, shall be placed underground. The subdivider is responsible for complying with the requirements of this subsection without expense to the county, and he shall make necessary arrangements with the utility company for the installation of such facilities. Appurtenances and associated equipment such as boxes and meter cabinets and concealed ducts in an underground system may be placed above ground. Waiver of the requirements for underground utilities shall be made through the public utilities commission. This subsection shall not apply to existing utility or common carrier routes in use at the time the subdivision is completed which do not provide service to the area subdivided. Aerial routes still in existence at the time the subdivision is completed may be reinforced from time to time as conditions dictate; however, all provisions of this subsection shall be subject to the requirements of any underground district created pursuant to Hesperia Municipal Code Chapter 13.04 in existence prior to the subdivision of the land or created subsequent thereto. 
b.  Overhead utility lines where permitted shall be located at the rear of lots or parcels where practical, and along the sides of lots or parcels where necessary. 
c.  If a local cable television system is available to serve the project, any subdivision for which a tentative map is required pursuant to Section 17.08.010(A) shall be designed to provide the appropriate cable television system an opportunity to construct, install, and maintain on land as reserved for cable television service or by separate instrument, any equipment necessary to extend cable television services to each residential parcel in the subdivision. 
    "Appropriate cable television systems," as used in this subsection, means those franchised or licensed to serve the geographical area in which the subdivision is located. 
    This subsection shall not apply to the conversion of existing dwelling units to condominiums, community apartments, or stock cooperatives. 
d.  Whenever the city imposes as a condition to its approval of a tentative map or a parcel map a requirement that necessitates replacing, under grounding, or permanently or temporarily relocating existing facilities of a telephone corporation, cable television system, common carrier or other public utility, the developer or subdivider shall reimburse the appropriate facility provider for all costs for the replacement, under grounding, or relocation. All these costs shall be billed after they are incurred, and shall include a credit for any required advance payments and for the salvage value of any facilities replaced. In no event shall the telephone corporation or cable television system be reimbursed for costs incurred in excess of the cost to replace the facilities with substantially similar facilities. 
D.  The standards herein shall be related to public safety. 
1.  The standards herein shall govern drainage works. 
a.  When a subdivision lies in the path of existing watercourses or overflows therefrom or natural drainage from upstream properties, it shall not be approved unless adequate dedicated rights-of-way or improvements are provided in a manner satisfactory to the planning agency. 
b.  When, in the opinion of the planning agency, a subdivision may cause an unnatural increase or concentration of surface waters onto downstream property, said subdivision shall not be approved by the planning agency unless drainage outlets are provided which will be adequate to render the city and the county flood control district harmless from any damages caused therefrom. 
c.  The location, type and size of watercourses or drainage works, and all drainage of streets and other drainage works between streets, shall be in accordance with city standards or as required by the planning agency. 
d.  When in the opinion of the planning agency, drainage rights-of-way are necessary, the subdivider shall offer to dedicate upon the final map of the subdivision the necessary rights-of-way for such drainage facilities. 
e.  Where dedication is offered or granted for flood control district rights-of-way, such rights-of-way shall be shown as lots lettered alphabetically on the final map. Such offer of dedication or grant shall be made by an appropriate certificate on the title sheet of the final map. 
2.  The standards contained herein related to fire protection measures shall be considered as requirements for map approval. 
a.  Subdivision design shall provide for safe and ready access for fire and other emergency equipment and for routes of escape to safely handle evacuations. 
b.  The subdivision shall be served by water supplies for community fire protection in accordance with the standards set by the fire marshal. 
c.  In hazardous fire areas, all flammable or combustible vegetation shall be removed from around all structures, in accordance with the requirements of the Uniform Fire Code. Where erosion is probable, the slopes shall be planted with fire resistive ground cover. 
3.  The standards contained herein related to sewage disposal systems shall be considered as requirements for map approval. 
a.  Subsurface sewage disposal systems shall be located as far as practical from a perennial or intermittent stream pursuant to Uniform Building Code, and the requirements of the county department of environmental health services and the regional water quality control board. 
b.  When a soils or a geologic hazards report for a subdivision is prepared (either at the developer's volition or as a requirement of any governmental agency), it shall include findings and recommendations concerning probable adverse effects of such hazards to the integrity of water supply and sewage disposal facilities and structures. 
E.  Environmental and Public Health. Lands to be subdivided for residential, park, playground or land recreation purposes may be subject to environmental quality standards as established by ordinances and regulations of the different departments and agencies within the city. 
(Amended during 1997 codification; SBCC § 88.1120) 
17.04.070 - Improvement security. 
    The necessity for improvement security and the related requirements shall be governed by the following regulations: 
A.  Requirement for Improvement Security. If all required improvements, engineering and inspection are not satisfactorily completed before the final map is approved, the owner or owners of the subdivision shall, prior to the approval of the final map, enter as contractor into an agreement with the city council whereby in consideration of the acceptance by the city council of the streets, easements and any other land offered for dedication, the contractor agrees to furnish the equipment, labor and material necessary to complete the work within the time specified in the agreement. 
B.  Amount of Improvement Security Required. To assure the city that the work will be completed, improvement security shall be furnished to guarantee the performance of any act or agreement in the following amounts for the following purposes: 
1.  An amount, not less than one hundred (100) percent of the total estimated cost of the improvement or of the act to be performed, conditioned upon the faithful performance of the act or agreement. 
2.  An additional amount, not less than fifty (50) percent nor more than one hundred (100) percent of the total estimated cost of the improvement or the performance of the required act, securing payment to the contractor, to the subcontractors, and to persons furnishing labor, materials or equipment to them for the improvement or the performance of the required act. 
3.  Whenever an entity required to furnish security in accordance with this section is a California nonprofit corporation, funded by the United States of America or one of its agencies, or funded by this state or one of its agencies, the entity shall not be required to comply with subsections (B)(1) and (B)(2) of this section, if the following conditions are met: 
a.  The contractor installing the improvements has bonded to the nonprofit corporation and the city as co-obligee the amount of one hundred (100) percent of the contract for the faithful performance of the work, and has further bonded to the nonprofit corporation and the city as co-obligee an amount of not less than fifty (50) percent of the contract for the payment of labor and materials, and those bonds comply with the provisions of this chapter. 
b.  All moneys payable to the contractor by the nonprofit corporation are deposited in a depository complying with the provisions of "Subdivision Map Act" and out of which moneys progress payments are conditioned upon: 
i.  The contractor's certification to the nonprofit corporation that all labor performed in the work, and all materials furnished to and installed in the work, have been paid for in full to the date of the certification. 
ii.  The written approval of the nonprofit corporation. 
iii.  Final payment to the contractor not being made until thirty-five (35) days shall have expired after the filing and recording of the notice of completion of the work acceptance of the work by the city in writing. 
c.  All certifications as to progress payments shall be delivered through the United States mail to the nonprofit corporation. The term "progress payments" means payments made in compliance with the schedule of partial payments agreed upon in the contract for the work. No less than ten percent of the total contract price shall be retained for the thirty-five (35) days following the filing of the notice of completion. 
d.  An amount as determined by the city engineer, but not more than twenty-five (25) percent of the total estimated cost of improvements or performance of the required act necessary for the guarantee and warranty of the improvement for a period of one year following the completion and acceptance thereof, against any defective work or labor done, or defective materials furnished. 
    As part of the obligation guaranteed by the security and in addition to the face amount of the security, there shall be included costs and reasonable expenses and fees, including reasonable attorney's fees incurred by the city in successfully enforcing the obligation secured. 
C.  Type of Security Required. The furnishing of security in connection with the performance of any act or agreement shall be one of the following, at the option of and subject to the approval of the city council: 
1.  Bond or bonds by one or more duly authorized corporate sureties. 
2.  A deposit, either with the city, responsible bank or trust company, at the option of the city, of money or negotiable bonds of the kind approved for securing deposits of public monies. 
3.  An instrument of credit from one or more financial institutions subject to regulation by the state or federal government, and pledging that the funds necessary to carry out the act or agreement are on deposit and guaranteed for payment, or a letter of credit issued by such a financial institution. 
4.  Bonds to secure faithful performance and for the benefit of laborers and material men of any agreement, shall be in substantially the forms as shown in the Subdivision Map Act. 
5.  Such money, negotiable bond or instrument of credit shall be a trust fund to guarantee performance and shall not be subject to enforcement of a money judgment by any creditors of the depositor until the obligation secured thereby is performed to the satisfaction of the city. 
D.  Forfeiture on Failure to Complete. Upon the failure of a subdivider to complete any improvements and work within two years of date agreement is executed, the city council may, upon notice in writing served by registered mail addressed to the last known address of the person, firm or corporation signing such contract, determine that the improvement work or any part thereof is uncompleted and may cause to be forfeited to the city, such sum of money or bonds given for the faithful performance of the work as may be necessary to complete such work. 
E.  Exoneration of Improvement Security. For projects involving flood control or drainage works constructed within San Bernardino County drainage easements, it shall be the duty of the city engineer and/or the county director of transportation/flood control/airports to inspect or receive certificate of completion of all improvements installed as to their compliance with this chapter and the city/county standards. 
    The security furnished by the subdivider may be released in the following manner: 
1.  Security given for faithful performance of any act or agreement may be released upon the performance of the act or final completion and acceptance of the required work. 
2.  Security securing the payment to the contractor, subcontractors, and to persons furnishing labor, materials or equipment shall, after passage of the time within which claims of lien are required to be recorded pursuant to Article 3 (commencing with Section 3114) of Chapter 2 of Title 15 of Part 4 of Division 3 of the Civil Code and other acceptance of the work, be reduced to an amount equal to the total claimed by all claimants for whom claims of lien have been recorded and notice thereof given in writing to the council or board, and if no such claims have been recorded, the security shall be released in full. 
    Such release shall not apply to any required guarantee and warranty period, nor to the amount of the security deemed necessary by the city or county for such guarantee and warranty period, nor to cost and reasonable expenses and fees, including reasonable attorney's fees. 
3.  Maintenance security necessary for guarantee and warranty of the work for a period of one year following completion and acceptance thereof against any defective work or labor completed, or defective materials furnished shall be released should no claims of such defective work be filed with the city or board of supervisors. In the event of such defective work, the security shall be held until all work is considered satisfactory and acceptable by the city or county. 
F.  Reimbursement for (Oversized) Supplemental Improvements. The planning agency may, at the request of a public agency, require that the improvements installed for the benefit of the subdivision contain supplemental size, capacity or number for the benefit of property not within the subdivision as a condition precedent to the approval of a subdivision or parcel map, and thereafter dedication of such improvements to the said public agency. However, the subdivider shall be reimbursed by said public agency for that portion of the cost of such improvements equal to the difference between actual cost and the amount it would have cost the subdivider to install such improvements pursuant to the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act. Standards and procedures for requiring such improvements and for reimbursement shall be contained in the operating rules and regulations of said public agencies and shall be made a public record. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 88.1125) 
17.04.080 - Prohibition and penalty. 
    This section shall provide the prohibition and penalty provisions of this title. 
A.  Prohibition on Transfers. No person shall sell, lease, or finance any parcel or portion of parcels of real property, or commence construction of any building for sale, lease or financing thereon, except for model homes, or allow occupancy thereof, for which a final map or parcel map is required by this title and the Subdivision Map Act, until such map thereof in full compliance with the provisions of this title has been filed for record by the county recorder. 
1.  Conveyance of any part of a division of real property for which a final or parcel map is required by this title shall not be made by parcel or block number, initial or other designation, unless and until such map has been filed for record by the county recorder. 
2.  A parcel created prior to March 4, 1972, in violation of the provisions of this title for which a permit or other grant of approval for development has not been issued, shall be conclusively presumed to be a legal parcel for purposes of sale by other than the owner of record at the time the violation occurred, if each of the following conditions are met: 
a.  The seller gives written notice to the buyer as follows: 
Notice: This parcel has been created in violation of the Subdivision Map Act. You must obtain a certificate of compliance or conditional certificate of compliance prior to obtaining a permit or other grant of approval for development of the parcel. The conditions imposed may significantly restrict your ability to develop the parcel. 
b.  At the time of sale, the seller causes to be filed for record with the county recorder the notice required by Section 17.04.080(A)(2)(a), including a detailed description of the real property, the name of the seller, and the name of the buyer. If the seller fails to give the notice required by Section 17.04.080(A)(2)(a), the buyer shall have those remedies provided by Section 17.04.090(A) and (B). 
3.  Buyers of land affected by the provisions of this subsection shall obtain a certificate of compliance or a conditional certificate of compliance pursuant to Chapter 17.36 prior to obtaining a permit or other grant of approval for development of the parcel or unit of land. 
B.  Prohibition on Issuance of Permits. No officer, board, commission, agency, department or special district of the city shall issue any permit or grant any approval necessary to develop any real property which has been divided, or which has resulted from a division, in violation of the provisions of this title if it finds or is informed by the planning director that development of such real property is contrary to the public health and safety. Prior to making such a finding that the development of such real property is contrary to the public health and safety, the planning director shall conduct a review. 
1.  At the review, the director shall consider all information and evidence submitted. The decision of the planning director may be appealed therefrom, within thirty (30) days, to the planning commission by any person aggrieved, or by an officer, board, department or agency of the city. The authority to deny such a permit or such approval shall apply whether the applicant therefore was the owner of the real property at the time of such violation, or whether the applicant therefor, if the current owner of the real property, was with or without actual or constructive knowledge of the violation at the time of such violation, at the time of the acquisition of his interest in such real property. If any officer, board, commission, agency, department or special district of the city issues any permit or grants approval for the development of any such real property, it may request a report from the planning director and impose any additional conditions as would have been applicable to the division of the property at the time the current owner of record acquired the property. 
2.  For parcels created before March 4, 1972, notice of the review shall be given, by registered mail, to the owner of such real property as shown on the latest equalized assessment roll book. The review shall be held not less than fourteen (14) days nor more than thirty (30) days after receipt by the owner of the notice of review. 
C.  Statement of Limitations. This section does not apply to any parcel or parcels of a subdivision offered for sale or lease, contract for sale or lease, or sold or leased in compliance with or exempt from any law regulating the design and improvement of subdivisions in effect at the time the subdivision was established. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 88.1201) 
17.04.090 - Remedies. 
    The following remedies are available pursuant to the provisions of this subsection. 
A.  Voiding of Sale by Grantee. Any deed of conveyance, sale or contract to sell real property which has been divided, or which has resulted from a division, in violation of the provisions of this title is voidable at the sole option of the grantee, buyer or person contracting to purchase, heirs, personal representative or trustee in insolvency or bankruptcy within one year after the date of discovery of the violation of the provisions of this divisions but the deed of conveyance, sale or contract to sell is binding upon any successor in interest of the grantee, buyer or person contracting to purchase, other than those above enumerated, and upon the grantor, vendor or person contracting to sell, or any assignee, heir or devisee. 
B.  Superior Court Action by Grantee. Any grantee, or his successor in interest, of real property which has been divided, or which has resulted from a division, in violation of the provisions of this title may, within one year of the date of discovery of such violation bring an action in the superior court to recover any damages he has suffered by reason of such division of property. The action may be brought against the person who divided the property in violation of the provisions of this title, and against any successors in interest who have actual or constructive knowledge of such a division of property. 
C.  Statement of Limitations. The provisions of this section shall not apply to the conveyance of any parcel of real property identified in a certificate of compliance filed pursuant to Chapter 17.36, or identified in a recorded final subdivision map, parcel map, or official map and after the date of recording. The provisions of this section shall not limit or affect in any way the rights of a grantee or his successor in interest under any other provision of law. 
    This section does not bar any legal, equitable or summary remedy to which any aggrieved local agency or other public agency, or any person, firm or corporation may otherwise be entitled. Any such local agency or other public agency, or such person, firm or corporation may file a suit regarding any real property attempted to be subdivided or sold, leased or financed in violation of this title, or to restrain or enjoin any attempted or proposed subdivision or sale, lease or financing in violation of this title, in the Superior Court of the county of San Bernardino. 
D.  Request for Certificate of Compliance. Any person owning real property may request a certificate of compliance in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 17.36. 
E.  Notice of Violation. Whenever the planning director has knowledge that real property has been divided in violation of the provisions of this division then within the guidelines set forth by the city attorney, the planning director shall cause to be mailed by certified mail to the then current owner of record of the property a notice of intention to record a notice of violation, describing the real property in detail, naming the owners thereof, and stating that an opportunity will be given to the owner to present evidence. The notice shall specify a time, date and place at which the owner may present evidence to the planning agency why such notice should not be recorded. The notice shall also contain a description of the violations and an explanation as to why the subject parcel is not lawful under the subdivision (a) or (b) of Section 66412.6 of the Government Code for the State of California. Evidence shall be presented by the owner to the planning agency no sooner than thirty (30) days and no later than sixty (60) days from the date of mailing. If, after the owner has presented evidence, it is determined that there has been no violation, the planning director shall cause to be filed for record with the county recorder a release of the notice of intention to record a notice of violation. If, however, after the owner has presented evidence, the planning agency determines that the property has in fact been illegally divided, or if within fifteen (15) days of receipt of such copy the owner of such real property fails to inform the planning agency of his objection to recording the notice of violation, the planning agency shall cause to be filed for record with the county recorder the notice of violation. The notice of intention to record a notice of violation and the notice of violation, when recorded, shall be deemed to be constructive notice of the violation to all successors in interest in such property. The county recorder shall index the names of the fee owners in the general index. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 88.1205) 
Chapter 17.08 - TENTATIVE AND FINAL MAPS 
Sections: 

17.08.010 - Filing criteria for tentative and final maps. 
    The provisions of this section and the Subdivision Map Act shall govern the necessity for tentative and final maps. 
A.  Tentative and final maps shall be required for all subdivisions creating five or more parcels, five or more condominiums as defined in Section 783 of the Civil Code, a community apartment project containing five or more parcels, or for the conversion of a multiple dwelling containing five or more dwelling units to a stock cooperative except where: 
1.  A condominium is constructed or an existing structure is converted to a condominium on a single parcel shown on a final map or parcel map recorded after January 1, 1960; provided, however, that the planning officer may require that a tentative and final map be required for the purposes of obtaining improvements, additional easements and dedications, or for other circumstances which warrant the filing of a new map; or 
2.  The land before division contains less than five acres, each parcel created by the division abuts upon a maintained public street or highway, and no dedications or improvements are required by the legislative body; or 
3.  Each lot created by the division has a gross area of twenty (20) acres or more and has an approved access (as defined in Chapter 16.08) to a maintained public street or highway; or 
4.  The land consists of a parcel or parcels of land having approved access (as defined in Chapter 16.08) to a public street or highway which comprises part of a tract of land zoned for industrial or commercial development, and which has the approval of the governing body as to street alignments and widths; or 
5.  Each lot created by the division has a gross area of forty (40) acres or more, or each of which is a quarter of a quarter section or larger. 
B.  A parcel map shall be required for those subdivisions described in this title as being excepted from the requirement for tentative and final maps. 
C.  Should a subdivider wish to file multiple final maps for a development project that will be phased, then one of the following shall be completed: 
1.  The subdivider, at the time the tentative map is filed, shall inform the planning agency of the subdivider's intention to file multiple final maps on such tentative map; or 
2.  After filing of the tentative, the planning agency and the subdivider concur in the filing of multiple final maps. 
    A subdivider filing multiple final maps shall show the boundary limits of each phase and designate the sequence of filing to the satisfaction of the development review committee. 
D.  A final map shall be required for a cemetery and shall be recorded only with the approval of the county surveyor, subject to the requirements imposed by Section 16.16.060 of this code and Division 8 of the State of California Health and Safety Code. 
E.  Notices of intention to convert residential real property into a condominium project, a community apartment project, or a stock cooperative project shall be made as required by Government Code Section 66427.1, 66452.8 and 66452.9 prior to the filing of such map. 
F.  At the time of filing a map for a subdivision to be created from the conversion of a mobile home park to another use, the subdivider shall also file a report on the impact of the mobile home park conversion pursuant to Government Code Section 66427.4. At least thirty (30) days prior to public hearing for such a conversion, the county shall inform the applicant in writing of the provisions of Section 798.56 of the California Civil Code and all applicable local requirements which impose upon the applicant a duty to notify residents and mobile home owners of the mobile home park of the proposed change in use. 
G.  At the time of filing a map for the conversion of a stock cooperative or a community apartment project to a condominium, the subdivider shall submit documents showing that the requirements of Government Code Section 66452.10 have been met. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 88.0201) 
17.08.020 - Tentative map format. 
    The content and form of tentative maps shall be governed by the provisions of this section. 
A.  Standards and Preparation. The tentative map shall be prepared by or under the direction of a registered civil engineer licensed to practice surveying or licensed land surveyor in accordance with the Subdivision Map Act, the Hesperia Municipal Code, and any other ordinances, statutes or laws, or any amendments thereto, pertaining to the use, sale, or lease of land. The tentative map shall be prepared in compliance with the officially adopted general, community, or specific plans or any amendments thereto, adopted pursuant to the state planning and zoning law and in accordance with the standard streets and highways plan adopted by the city council, as amended. The tentative map shall show the location of streets and property lines bounding the property and shall conform to all of the following provisions and the standards found on record as prescribed by the planning agency. 
1.  Each tentative map shall be drawn to an engineer's scale and clearly show the details of the plan thereon. Wherever practicable, such scale shall be one inch to one hundred (100) feet or less, and in no case shall the scale be smaller than one inch to two hundred (200) feet. 
2.  The tentative maps shall show or be accompanied by the following information: 
a.  Development proposed on the subdivision (lot sale or building program); 
b.  Source, name of supplier, quality and an estimate of available quantity of water, or, if to be served by an established mutual water company or an established public utility, a letter shall be furnished to indicate that satisfactory arrangements have been made or can be made for water supply; 
c.  Type of street improvements, utilities, and street lights which are proposed to be installed. Pursuant to Government Code Section 66473.3, and Section 17.04.060(C)(1)(c), this information shall include the type of cable television systems to be installed, if any cable television system is available; 
d.  Proposed Method of Sewage Disposal. If by sewers, the applicant must furnish a letter from an authorized representative of the entity or agency which will provide such sanitary sewer service, assuring that such entity or agency can and will accept for disposal sewage generated on the land under consideration after its improvement. The planning agency shall give written notice to the entity or agency which owns the related sewage treatment plant prior to issuance of the written determination of filing of the proposed subdivision. This filing requirement has not been met when, within fourteen days from the date of providing of the above required notice, the entity or agency which owns the related sewage treatment plant has submitted an independently certified engineering report to the office of planning which demonstrates that adequate sewage treatment plan capacity is not available; 
e.  The drainage area tributary to the subdivision and a statement setting forth in detail the manner in which storm runoff will enter the subdivisions, the manner in which it will be carried through the subdivision, and the manner in which disposal beyond the subdivision boundaries will be accomplished; 
f.  Topographical and contour data shall be shown pursuant to adopted county standards; 
g.  The widths and locations of all recorded easements which are to remain; 
h.  Names, addresses and telephone numbers of utilities, school districts, fire protection agencies, and cable television services required in Section 17.04.060(C)(1)(c), serving the tract; 
i.  Remainder parcels shall be indicated as a "remainder parcel" and shall be subject to review for design access, water and sewer availability and other such improvements as may be necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare and are consistent with the intent of this title. Waiver of improvements may be granted for remainder parcels where the size exceeds five acres; 
j.  When any change is made by the subdivider in the statement given in pursuance of this section, such change or changes shall be submitted in writing to the planning agency, and approved prior to the recording of the final map; 
k.  In the case of a subdivision to convert a mobile home park to another use, the subdivider shall file a report on the impact of the conversion upon the displaced residents of the mobile home park to be converted. The report shall discuss the availability of adequate replacement space in mobile home parks in determining the impact of the conversion on displaced mobile home park residents. The subdivider shall make a copy of the report available to each resident of the planning agency is to take action upon the tentative map. 
l.  In the case of a vesting tentative map, at the time it is filed it shall have printed conspicuously on its face the words "Vesting Tentative Map." 
B.  Tract Number. Prior to filing a tentative map of a subdivision or reversion to acreage, a licensed engineer or surveyor shall obtain a tract number or numbers from the county recorder. When a number has been assigned by the county recorder for the subdivision of a particular parcel of land, the subdivider shall place this same number upon each tentative map of the subdivision, and the number issued shall not thereafter be changed or altered in any manner upon the tentative map of the subdivision unless and until a new number shall have been assigned by the county recorder. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 88.0205) 
17.08.030 - Final map format. 
    The content and form of final maps shall be governed by the provisions of this section. 
A.  Standards and Preparation. The final map shall be prepared by, or under the direction of, a registered civil engineer licensed to practice surveying or a licensed land surveyor; shall be based upon a survey; and shall conform to all of the following provisions, the California Subdivision Map Act and the county surveyor's standards as adopted by the board of supervisors; 
1.  It shall be legibly drawn, printed or reproduced by a process guaranteeing a permanent record in black on tracing cloth or polyester-base film. Certificates, affidavits and acknowledgements shall be legibly stamped or printed upon the map with opaque ink. If ink is used on a polyester-base film, the ink surface shall be coated with a suitable substance to assure permanent legibility. 
2.  The size of each sheet shall be eighteen (18) by twenty-six (26) inches. A marginal line shall be drawn completely around each sheet, leaving an entirely blank margin of one inch. The sale of the map shall be large enough to show all details clearly, an enough sheets shall be used to accomplish this end. The particular number of the sheet and the total number of sheets comprising the map shall be stated on each of the sheets, and its relation to each adjoining sheet shall be clearly shown. 
3.  All survey and mathematical information and data necessary to locate all monuments, and to locate and retrace may and all interior and exterior boundary lines appearing thereon shall be shown, including bearings and distances of straight lines, and radii and arc length or chord bearings and length of all curves, and such information as may be necessary to determine the location of the centers of curves and ties to existing monuments used to establish the subdivision boundaries. 
4.  Each lot shall be numbered. Each street shall be named. 
5.  The exterior boundary of the land included within the subdivision shall be indicated by an opaque ink line three times as wide as the widest line on the map, excluding the border line. The map shall show the definite location of the subdivision, and particularly its relation to surrounding surveys. 
6.  If the map includes a remainder parcel, and the gross area of the remainder parcel or similar named parcel is five acres or less, it shall be surveyed and mapped. If the remainder parcel or similar named parcel is more than five gross acres, that parcel shall show record information and parcel size only. 
7.  Proposed public areas and drainage easements shall be shown. 
8.  Additional notes which do not affect record title interests shall not be shown on the final map. Where a composite development plan has been required, a prominent note shall be placed below the surveyor's notes on the final map in one-quarter (1/4) inch high, bolded, block letters, stating: 
COMPOSITE DEVELOPMENT PLAN NOTE; 
    A Composite Development Plan (C.D.P.) affecting this map is on file in the Building and Safety Department. 
B.  Title Sheets. Prior to filing, those certificates and acknowledgements set forth in this title shall appear on the title sheet of the final map and may be combined where appropriate. The title sheet shall also contain a certificate, signed and acknowledged by all parties having any record title interests in real property subdivided, consenting to the preparation and recordation of the final map, and is required except as provided by the Subdivision Map Act. 
    Each sheet of final map shall also contain a title, consisting of the number of the subdivision and a subtitle consisting of a description of all property being subdivided by reference to such map or maps of the property shown thereon, as shall have been previously recorded or filed with the county clerk pursuant to a final judgment in any action in partition, or shall have been previously filed in the office of the county recorder, or by reference to the plat of any United States Survey. The title sheet shall also show, in a form acceptable to the city engineer, such appropriate certificates and acknowledgements as required in the Subdivision Map Act, or any additional certificates as required by the city standards. 
C.  Certificates on Final Maps. The certificates on final maps shall be governed by the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and the final and parcel map standards established by the city engineer's office and as adopted and amended by the city council. 
1.  Dedications of, or offers to dedicate interests in real property for specified public purposes shall be made by a certificate on the title page of the final map, signed and acknowledged by those parties having any record title interest in the real property being subdivided, subject to the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act. 
a.  In the event that any street shown on a subdivision map is not offered for dedication, the certificate may contain a statement to this effect. If such statement appears on the map and if the map is approved by the council, the use of any such street or streets by the public shall be permissive only. 
b.  Any offer of dedication of real property for street or public utility easement purposes shall be deemed not to include any public utility facilities located on or under such real property unless an intent to dedicate such facilities is expressly stated in the certificate, and then only to the extent so stated. 
c.  Any dedication or agreements required within the remainder parcel of a final map shall be executed by the legal owners of record and any holder in a beneficial interest in a trust deed. 
2.  The final map shall contain a certificate for execution by the city clerk, stating that the board approved the map and accepted, subject to improvement, or rejected on behalf of the public, any real property offered for dedication or public use in conformity with the terms of the offer of dedication. 
3.  A certificate is required indicating the engineer or surveyor responsible for the survey and final map. This certificate shall give the date of the survey, state that the survey and final map were made by the engineer or surveyor, and indicate that the survey is true and complete as shown. 
a.  The certificate shall also state that all the monuments are of the character and occupy the positions indicated, or that they will be set in such positions on or before a specified later date. The certificate shall also state that the monuments are, or will be, sufficient to enable the survey to be retraced. 
b.  At least one exterior boundary line of the land being subdivided shall be adequately monumented or referenced before the map may be recorded. 
4.  A certificate by the city engineer shall be provided, stating that: 
a.  The city engineer has examined the map; 
b.  The subdivision as shown is substantially the same as it appeared on the tentative map and any approved alterations thereof; 
c.  All provisions of this title and any local ordinances applicable at the time of approval of the tentative map have been complied with; 
d.  The city engineer is satisfied that the map is technically correct. 
5.  The city engineer shall complete and file, with the city clerk, the certificate as required by this section within twenty (20) days from the time the final map is submitted to the city engineer by the subdivider for approval. 
6.  At the time the subdivider presents the final map, there shall be presented releases executed by the various public utilities, including cable television services identified in Section 17.08.020(A)(2)(c), as to location of their facilities and that satisfactory arrangements have been made for the establishment of any easements required for such facilities. The failure of any public utility to notify the city engineer of the need for such easements within twenty (20) days of receipt of the advance copy of the final map shall be deemed notice that said provisions and arrangements have been made and no further release shall be required. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 88.0210) 
17.08.040 - Tentative maps. 
    The following provisions shall govern the review of tentative and vesting tentative maps. 
A.  Action on Tentative Map. 
1.  The planning agency shall approve, conditionally approve, extend, or disapprove the map or maps of the proposed subdivision within fifty (50) days after an application for a tentative map has been deemed complete and accepted for filing except as otherwise provided by the Subdivision Map Act. An official copy of the planning agency's action shall be filed with the tentative map, and be reported directly to the subdivider and to the Real Estate Commission of the State of California. If no action is taken upon a tentative map by the planning agency within the time limits specified in this title, or any authorized extension thereof, the tentative map as filed shall be deemed to be approved insofar as it complies with other applicable requirements of this title, other applicable ordinances, and all applicable state laws, and it shall be the duty of the city clerk or the secretary of the planning agency to certify such approval. This section shall be inapplicable to extensions of time which are reasonable and required in order to comply with any provision of state law, including the requirements for compliance with the California Environmental Quality Act of 1970; provided, however, if an environmental impact report is prepared, the fifty (50) day period specified in this section shall not be applicable and the planning agency shall take action upon the tentative map within forty-five (45) days after certification of the EIR. Any revised tentative map or portion thereof filed with the planning agency shall comply with the requirements in effect at the time such revised map is considered by the planning agency. 
    A tentative map shall not be approved in the following cases: 
a.  In the case of a conversion of residential real property to a condominium project, community apartment project or stock cooperative, the planning agency shall not approve the tentative map unless evidence is provided by the subdivider, as required by Section 66452.9 of the Government Code, that proper notification has been given to each of the tenants of the proposed conversion notifying of the subdivider's intent to convert. 
b.  In the case of a conversion of a stock cooperative or a community apartment project to a condominium, the planning agency shall not approve a tentative map unless evidence is provided by the subdivider, as required by Section 66452.10 of the Government Code, that the required number of owners in the cooperative or project, as specified in the bylaws or other organizational documents, have voted in favor of such conversion. 
c.  The planning agency shall not approve a tentative map, or a parcel map for which a tentative map was not required, if it finds that the land is subject to a contract entered into pursuant to the California Land Conservation Act of 1965 (Chapter 7 [commencing with Government Code Section 51200] of Division 1 of Title 5) and that the resulting parcels following a subdivision of that land would be too small to sustain their agricultural use. For purposes of this section, land shall be presumed to be in parcels too small to sustain their agricultural use if the land is: (1) less than ten acres in size in the case of prime agricultural land, or (2) less than forty (40) acres in size in the case of land which is not prime agriculture land. For purposes of this section agricultural land shall be presumed to be in parcels large enough to sustain their agricultural use if the land is: (1) at least ten acres in size in the case of prime agricultural land, or (2) at least forty (40) acres in size in the case of land which is not prime agricultural. The planning agency may approve a subdivision with parcels smaller than those listed above if the findings in Section 16.12.405(D), along with the other applicable findings, are made or the land within the subdivision is subject to a contract when one of the following has occurred: 
i.  The local agency formation commission has approved the annexation of the land to a city and the city will not succeed to the contract as provided in Government Code Sections 51243 and 51243.5; 
ii.  Written notice of nonrenewal of the contract has been served prior to March 7, 1985, as provided in Government Code Section 51245; 
iii.  Written notice of nonrenewal of the contract has been served on or after March 7, 1985, as provided in Government Code Section 51245, and, as a result of that notice, there are no more than three years remaining in the term of the contract; 
iv.  The city council has granted tentative approval for cancellation of the contract as provided in Government Code Section 51282. 
2.  The approval or conditional approval by the planning agency of any revised or new tentative map shall annul all previous designs and approvals thereof. 
3.  When modifications in design are conditions of approval of a tentative map, the subdivider shall, at least thirty (30) days prior to the submission of final maps, submit ten copies of the tentative map as modified to the planning agency for distribution to the development review committee representatives. 
B.  Planning Director Referral. When acting as the planning agency for subdivisions where a tentative and final map are required, the planning officer shall determine, prior to taking an action to approve, conditionally approve, extend, or deny the application, that the project is noncontroversial. For the purpose of this section, "noncontroversial" shall mean: (1) that no member of the development review committee objects to the project or any portion thereof; (2) no specific written request has been received requesting public hearing review of the project from person(s) notified in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 16.12; and (3) in the opinion of the planning director, there has been no substantial objection to the proposed project from members of the public. If the planning director determines the project to be controversial, the project shall be referred to the planning commission for action, pursuant to Chapter 16.12. 
C.  Review of Tentative Maps by Other Agencies. When a tentative map has been properly filed and the subdivider has furnished the required number of copies, the office of planning shall, within three county business days of the filing and review cycle deadline (Saturdays, Sundays and holidays excluded) forward a copy or copies thereof to the following: 
1.  Fire marshal, who shall distribute to the appropriate fire jurisdiction; 
2.  Building official; 
3.  District engineer of the California Department of Transportation, Business and Transportation Agency, State of California, if a federal or state highway is involved; 
4.  Other public agencies or officers who, as determined by the planning agency, have an interest in the proposed subdivision; 
5.  Any appropriate public utilities and cable television system. 
D.  Reports on Tentative Map. Any report or recommendation on a tentative map by the staff of the planning agency or the development review committee to the planning agency shall be in writing and a copy thereof sent to the subdivider, or any tenant of the subject property in the case of a proposed conversion of residential real property to a condominium project, community apartment project or stock cooperative project, at least three days prior to any hearing or action on such map by such planning agency. In the event of failure of any officer, department, municipality, district, or agency to report to the planning agency in writing within twenty (20) days after the filing deadline of the tentative map, it shall be deemed that said officer, department, municipality, district or agency has no objections to the proposed map. 
1.  Wherever possible, the reports and recommendations of reviewing departments shall be uniform in content and form and shall be presented to the planning agency by the chairperson of the development review committee or designee. 
2.  Required action in the case of waste discharge violations. The development review committee shall report to the planning agency as to whether the discharge of waste from the proposed subdivision into an existing community sewer system will result in the violation of existing requirements prescribed by a California Regional Water Quality Control Board pursuant to Division 7 (commencing with Section 13000) of the Water Code. In the event that the planning agency finds that the proposed waste discharge would result in or add to violation of the requirements of such board, it may disapprove the tentative map or maps of the subdivision, or take such other action as may be permitted by the policies of the city. 
E.  Expiration of Approval. The initial approval period of an approved or conditionally approved tentative map and any associated development application shall expire thirty-six (36) months after its approval or conditional approval unless an extension is granted as hereinafter provided or as otherwise provided by the development code. The expiration of the approved or conditionally approved tentative map shall terminate all proceedings and no final or parcel map of all or any portion of the real property included within such tentative map shall be filed without first processing a new tentative map. 
    This initial approval period may be extended in the following circumstances: 
1.  If the subdivider is subject to a requirement of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) or more to construct or improve or finance the construction or improvement of public improvements outside the boundaries of the tentative map in order to obtain a final map, each filing of a final map that is part of a series of multiple final maps authorized by Section 17.08.040(C) of this code and Government Code Section 66456.1 shall extend the expiration of the approved or conditionally approved tentative map and any associated development project by thirty-six (36) months from the date of its expiration as provided in this section, or the date of the previously filed final map, whichever is later. Such extensions shall not extend the tentative map more than ten years from its approval or conditional approval. However, a tentative map on property subject to a development agreement authorized by Article 2.5 (commencing with Section 65864) of Chapter 4 of Division 1 of the Government Code may be extended for the period of time provided for in the agreement, but not beyond the duration of the agreement. The number of phased final maps which may be filed shall be determined by the planning agency at the time of the approval or conditional approval of the tentative map. It shall be the responsibility of the developer to notify the office of planning of the filing of the final map so that appropriate arrangements may be made to document such extension. 
    "Public improvements," as used in this section, includes traffic controls, streets, roads, highways, freeways, bridges, over crossings, street interchanges, flood control or storm drain facilities, sewer facilities, water facilities, and lighting facilities. 
2.  This period of time shall not include any period of time during which a moratorium, imposed after approval of the tentative map, is in existence, provided however that the length of the moratorium does not exceed five years. 
    Once a moratorium is terminated, the map shall be valid for the same period of time as that which remained of the map approval period at the time that the moratorium was imposed. However, if the remaining time is less than one hundred twenty (120) days, the map shall be valid for one hundred twenty (120) days following the termination of the moratorium. 
3.  In addition, this period of time, including any extension granted pursuant to subsection (F) of this section, shall not include any period of time during which a lawsuit has been filed and is pending in a court of competent jurisdiction involving the approval or conditional approval of a tentative map if a stay of the time period is approved by the county pursuant to this section. Within ten days of the service of the initial petition or complaint in the lawsuit upon the county, the subdivider may apply to the county for a stay pursuant to the county's adopted procedures. Within forty (40) days after receiving the application, the county shall either stay the time period for up to five years or deny the requested stay. 
F.  Time Extensions on Approved Tentative Maps and/or any Related Development Applications. The planning director may approve extensions of time for a period or periods not exceeding a total of thirty-six (36) additional months unless otherwise provided by the development code. Any application of a subdivider for such extension of time shall be made in writing to the planning director not less than thirty (30) days prior to the expiration date. Such extension of time is subject to an extension fee as found in the city fees resolution. If the final map is not recorded within the approved extension, then the subdivision must be refiled in accordance with all provisions of this title. 
G.  Withdrawal of Tentative Maps. Any subdivider or record owner of property upon which a tentative map has been filed may withdraw such map at any time period prior to the recordation of the final map thereof. Notice of such withdrawal shall be made in writing to the planning agency. Refund in filing fees for any such map withdrawn shall be made in accordance with the city fee resolution. 
H.  Appeal by Subdivider. 
1.  The subdivider, or any tenant of the subject property in the case of a proposed conversion of residential real property to a condominium project, community apartment project, or stock cooperative project or any interested person, may appeal any action of the planning department with respect to a tentative map. Any such appeal shall be filed with the planning department for an action taken by the planning director, or with the city clerk for an action taken by the planning commission in accordance with Section 16.12.055. Such appeals shall be filed within ten days after the action of the planning agency from which the appeal is being taken. 
2.  After the filing of an appeal, the appeal body shall set the matter for public hearing. Such hearing shall be held within thirty (30) days after the date of a request filed by the subdivider or the appellant. Notice of the public hearing shall be as provided by Chapter 16.12. Within ten days following the conclusion of the hearing, the appeal hearing body shall render its decision. The decision of the appeal hearing body shall comply with the provisions of this title and shall include all findings required by this title. If the appeal hearing body fails to act upon an appeal within the time limit specified in this title, the action of the planning agency shall be deemed to be upheld, and it shall be the duty of the secretary of the planning commission or the city clerk, whichever body has heard the appeal, to certify such action. the fee for filing of an appeal shall be established in the city's fee resolution. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 88.0220) 
17.08.050 - Final maps. 
    The following provisions shall govern the filing and recording of the final map: 
A.  Filing the Advance Copy of the Final Map. After receipt of the report of the planning agency approving or conditionally approving the tentative map, and at least fifty (50) days prior to the expiration of the approval or conditional approval or any approved extension of time as provided by this title, the subdivider may cause the real property included within the map, or any part thereof, to be surveyed and a final map thereof prepared in accordance with the approved or conditionally approved tentative map, and an advance copy of the final map to be submitted to the city engineer. The advance copy of the final map shall be accompanied by the following information: 
1.  Traverse sheets showing closures with allowable limits of exterior boundary and of irregular blocks and lots in subdivision; 
2.  Preliminary title report; 
3.  Fees for examining final map in amount specified in the city's fee resolution adopted by the city council; 
4.  In the case of the conversion of residential property to a condominium, community apartment, or stock cooperative, evidence shall be submitted that the notices of intention to convert to prospective tenants, as required by Government Code Section 66427.1 in the form required by Government Code Sections 66452.8 and/or 66452.9, have been given; 
5.  Composite development plan as subject to the provisions of Chapter 17.20; 
6.  Any additional information as may be required by the planning agency or city standards shall be submitted to the appropriate city department. 
    The city engineer shall be the primary coordinator in seeing that the conditions of approval of the tentative map have been fulfilled. The city engineer shall transmit maps to and request written reports from the city departments and public utilities, including any cable television systems, which have submitted recommendations on the tentative map. Within twenty (20) days after receipt of such an advance copy of the final map, said department or utility shall issue a preliminary written report as to the compliance or noncompliance of the advance final map as to the matters under its jurisdiction. 
B.  Filing Official Copy of the Final Map. If the advance copy of the final map has been found satisfactory by the city engineer, the subdivider shall cause the final map to be officially filed with the city engineer at least twenty (20) days prior to expiration of the approval or conditional approval or any approved extension of time as provided by this title. The final map shall not be officially filed until the engineer has received notification from the city engineer that all provisions of the tentative map approval, the Subdivision Map Act, city code and city standards have been complied with. The official filing of the final map with the city engineer will constitute the final map filing date. 
C.  Checking and Reports to the City Council. After the issuance of a receipt for the official filing of the final map, the city engineer shall examine it as to sufficiency of affidavits and acknowledgements, correctness of surveying data, mathematical data and computations, and other matters which may require checking to insure compliance with the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and this title. 
    If the final map is found to be in substantial compliance with the tentative map and is in correct form and the matters shown thereon are sufficient and the city engineer is satisfied that all of the conditions of approval have been met, city engineer shall endorse approval thereon. The city engineer shall combine with the final map the agreements, easements, and securities as required by this title. Such material shall be transmitted to the city council for its consideration of the final map. 
D.  Approval of Final Map by the City Council. 
1.  The city council shall, within a period of ten days after the filing of the final map for approval or at its next regular meeting after the meeting at which it receives the map, whichever is later, approve the map if it conforms to all the requirements of the Subdivision Map Act and this title applicable at the time of approval or conditional approval of the tentative map and any rulings made thereunder or, if it does not so conform, disapprove the map. 
2.  If the city council does not approve or disapprove the map within the prescribed time, or any authorized extension thereof, and the map conforms to all said requirements and rulings, it shall be deemed approved, and the city clerk shall certify its approval thereon. 
E.  Time Limit for Filing Final Map. If the subdivider fails to file the final map with the county recorder and the required accompanying data with the appropriate city or county departments within thirty-six (36) months after the date of first approval by the planning agency or within any authorized extension of time, the tentative map approval or conditional approval shall become void. In such a case, a new filing fee shall be paid and a new tentative map approval shall be obtained. 
F.  Improvement Agreement. If at the time of approval of the final map by the council, any improvements required by local ordinance or as a condition of the approval of the tentative tract map have not been completed in accordance with city standards applicable at the time of the approval or conditional approval of the tentative map, the council, as a condition precedent to approval of the final map, shall require the subdivider to enter into an agreement with the council upon mutually agreeable terms to thereafter complete such improvements at the subdivider's expense. The council shall require that performance of such agreement is guaranteed by appropriate securities. 
G.  If sixty (60) days prior to the submittal of a final or parcel map, the subdivider has failed to comply with the tentative map or minor subdivision plot plan conditions which require the subdivider to construct or install off-site improvements on land in which neither the subdivider nor the city has sufficient title or interest, including an easement or license, then at the time the parcel or final map is filed with the local agency, to permit the improvements to be made, the subdivider shall enter into an agreement with the city through its department of engineering contract services to pay all costs of the city in acquiring such property. The city shall have one hundred twenty (120) days from the filing of the final map or parcel map, pursuant to Section 66457 of the Subdivision Map Act, to obtain interest in the land to permit the improvement to be made by negotiation or proceedings pursuant to Title 7 (commencing with Section 1230.010) of Part 3 of the Code of Civil Procedure, including proceedings for immediate possession of the property under Article 3 (commencing with Section 1255.410) of Chapter 6 of such title. In the event the city fails to meet the one-hundred-twenty-day time limitation, the condition for construction of off-site improvements shall be conclusively deemed to be waived. Prior to approval of the final map, the city may require the subdivider to enter into an agreement to complete the improvements pursuant to subsection (F) of this section above at such time as the city acquires an interest in the land which will permit the improvements to be made. 
    "Off-site improvements," as used in this subsection, do not include improvements which are necessary to assure replacement or construction of housing for persons and families of low or moderate income, as defined in Section 50093 of the Health and Safety Code. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 88.0225) 
17.08.060 - Conditions of map approval. 
    The conditions of map approval shall be as follows: 
A.  Subdivisions for Which a Tentative and Final Map are Required. As a condition of approval of a map of five or more parcels, the planning agency may require such dedications and improvements as are necessary to insure that the lots to be created are provided with adequate public services and utilities, possibly including any appropriate cable television services, to meet the needs of future residents or users; are of adequate design in all respects; act to mitigate any potential environmental impacts identified in the environmental impact report or by other means; and provide for proper grading and erosion control, including the prevention of sedimentation or damage to off-site property. 
    All improvements shall be in accordance with adopted city standards. 
B.  Access. 
1.  Except as provided below, lots created by a subdivision of land shall abut upon a recorded dedicated public right-of-way of a width as established by the circulation element, or shall be assured of access to the city road system by an approved access which connects a lot or lots to a maintained public street or state highway. 
2.  The planning agency may waive the requirements for approved access to subdivisions having lot sizes of forty (40) gross acres or more when all of the following findings are made: 
a.  The applicant is or will be subject to severe hardship unless the waiver is approved; and 
b.  There is an existing traveled roadway which has been in existence for at least five years which roadway is at least twenty (20) feet in width at all points; and 
c.  The roadway has capability for normal passenger car use to each lot in the subdivision. 
3.  Private road easements may be approved for access to each lot if it is determined that public street access cannot be provided due to certain title limitations or topographical conditions. 
4.  Road easements of record established prior to the effective date of this chapter shall be recognized as legal access to each lot of the subdivision. 
5.  Existing traveled roads for which a court has determined that a prescriptive right by users exists for public use shall be recognized as legal access to each lot of the subdivision. 
C.  In determining whether to approve or disapprove an application for a tentative map, the city shall apply only those ordinances, policies and standards in effect at the date the proposal for the subdivision was accepted as complete, as provided in Government Code Section 66474.2. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 88.0230) 
Chapter 17.12 - MINOR SUBDIVISIONS 
Sections: 

17.12.010 - Filing criteria for minor subdivisions plot plan, tentative and parcel maps. 
    The provisions of this section and the Subdivision Map Act shall govern the necessity for minor subdivision plot plan, tentative and parcel maps. 
A.  A tentative map may be required and a parcel map shall be required for subdivisions where a final map is not otherwise required by this title, unless waived pursuant to this title, and further provided that a parcel map shall not be required for subdivisions created, pursuant to Government Code 66428, by short-term leases (terminable by either party on not more than thirty (30) days notice in writing) of a portion of the operating right-of-way of a railroad corporation defined as such by Section 230 of the Public Utilities Code, or land conveyed to or from a governmental agency, public entity, common carrier, public utility, or for land conveyed to a subsidiary of a public utility for conveyance to such public utility for rights-of-way, unless a showing is made in individual cases, upon substantial evidence, that public policy necessitates such a parcel map. 
B.  A parcel map shall not be required for the construction of a condominium project or for the conversion of an existing structure to a condominium on a single parcel shown on a final map or parcel map recorded after January 1, 1960; provided, however, the planning officer may require that a parcel map be filed for the purposes of obtaining improvements, additional easements and dedications, or other circumstances which warrant the filing of a new map. 
C.  The planning director except as otherwise provided may waive the requirement for a parcel map, where two, three, or four parcels and any remainder parcel are involved, and the smallest parcel created is two and one-half (2 1/2) gross acres or a two and one-half (2 1/2) one-half acre aliquot part of a section or greater; provided said director has made a finding that the proposed division of land complies with the requirements as to: (1) area, (2) improvement and design, (3) flood water drainage control, (4) appropriate improved public roads, (5) sanitary disposal facilities, (6) potable water supply availability, (7) environmental protection, (8) other requirements of Title 17, (9) the Subdivision Map Act, (10) other applicable ordinances of the city, and (11) adequate survey data exists to properly identify the property as determined by the city engineer. A record of survey recorded after January 1, 1983, shall not constitute adequate survey data to permit a waiver of the requirement for a parcel map. The finding shall be based upon evidence, information, and recommendations of the development review committee or individual development review committee member acting within the departmental area of expertise. 
D.  The planning director shall not waive a parcel map as a condition of approval of a vesting tentative parcel map. 
E.  Where the requirement for a parcel map is waived pursuant to provisions of this section, a tentative map may be required by the planning director. The planning director may establish application procedures for subdivisions which are not subject to the requirement for tentative and final maps. 
F.  When a parcel map rather than a final map is required by this title, the subdivider has the option of submitting a tentative map. 
G.  The subdivider shall submit a tentative map in place of a minor subdivision plot plan to obtain the rights conferred by the Subdivision Map Act and this title, for a vesting tentative map. 
H.  The requirements of Section 17.08.010(E), (F) and (G) shall apply to the filing of parcel maps for the conversion of residential real property to another use. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 88.0301) 
17.12.020 - Minor subdivision plot plan content. 
    The content and form of the minor subdivision plot plan and applications shall be governed by the provisions of this section. 
A.  Standards and Preparation. The plot plan shall be prepared in conformance with the Subdivision Map Act and any procedures established by the land management department as adopted by the board of supervisors. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 88.0305) 
17.12.030 - Parcel map content. 
    The content and form of parcel maps shall be governed by the provisions of this section. 
A.  Standards and Preparation. The parcel map shall be prepared by, or under the direction of, a registered civil engineer licensed to practice land surveying or licensed land surveyor; shall show the location of streets and property lines bounding the property; and shall conform to all of the following provisions and adopted city standards. 
1.  The parcel map shall be legibly drawn, printed or reproduced by a process guaranteeing a permanent record in black on tracing cloth or polyester-base film. Certificates, affidavits and acknowledgments shall be legibly stamped or printed upon the map with opaque ink. If ink is used on polyester-base film, the ink surface shall be coated with a suitable substance to assure permanent legibility. 
2.  The size of each sheet shall be eighteen (18) by twenty-six (26) inches. A marginal line shall be drawn completely around each sheet, leaving an entirely blank margin of one inch. The scale of the map shall be large enough to show all details clearly and enough sheets shall be used to accomplish this end. The particular number of the sheet and the total number of sheets comprising the map shall be stated on each of the sheets, and its relation to each adjoining sheet shall be clearly shown. 
3.  Each lot shall be numbered and each street shall be named. 
4.  The exterior boundary of the land included within the subdivision shall be indicated as an opaque ink line three times as wide as the widest line on the map excluding the border line. The map shall show the location of each parcel and its relation to surrounding surveys. 
5.  If the map includes a remainder parcel and the gross area of the remainder parcel or similar named parcel is five acres or less, it shall be surveyed and mapped. If the remainder parcel or similar named parcel is more than five acres, that parcel shall show record information and parcel size only. 
6.  Existing natural drainage courses and proposed drainage easements, as necessary, shall be shown on the parcel map. 
7.  Additional notes which do not affect record title interests shall not be shown on the parcel map. Where a composite development plan has been required, a prominent note shall be placed below the surveyor's notes on the parcel map in one-quarter (1/4) inch high, bold block letters, stating: 
COMPOSITE DEVELOPMENT PLAN NOTE 
    A Composite Development Plan (C.D.P.) affecting this map is on file in the Building and Safety Department. 
8.  In the case of a vesting tentative map for a parcel map, at the time it is filed it shall have printed conspicuously on its face "Vesting Tentative Parcel Map." 
B.  Parcel Number. Prior to filing a parcel map, a licensed engineer or surveyor shall obtain a number or numbers from the county recorder. 
C.  Certificates on Parcel Maps. The certificates on parcel maps shall be as required by the city engineer's standards and adopted by the city council. 
1.  Subject to the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act, a certificate, signed and acknowledged by the legal owner of record in the real property subdivided, consenting to the preparation and recordation of the parcel map is required. 
2.  Offers to dedicate interest in real property for specified public purposes shall be made by a certificate on the parcel map, signed and acknowledged by the legal owner of record in the real property being subdivided, subject to the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act. The signature of either the holder of beneficial interests under trust deeds or the trustee under such trust deeds, but not both, may be omitted. The signature of either shall constitute a full and complete subordination of the lien of the deed of trust to the map and any interest created by the map. 
    However, with respect to a division of land into four or fewer parcels, where dedications or offers of dedications are not required, the certificate shall be signed and acknowledged by the legal owner of record only. 
3.  In all cases where a parcel map is required, such map shall be based upon a field survey made in conformity with the Land Surveyors Act, except in the case of reversion to acreage. 
4.  The parcel map shall contain a certificate for execution by the city engineer, stating that the city engineer approved the map and accepted, subject to improvement, or rejected on behalf of the public, any real property offered for dedication for public use in conformity with the terms of the offer of dedication. The city engineer is empowered to accept such dedications on behalf of the city and county flood control district. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 88.0310) 
17.12.040 - Minor subdivision procedures. 
    The provisions for the review of minor subdivision, plot plans, tentative and parcel maps shall be as required in Section 17.08.040 of this code, unless otherwise indicated in that section. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 88.0320) 
17.12.050 - Parcel map procedures. 
    This section shall govern the procedures for the processing, approval, conditional approval, and disapproval of an application to subdivide land into four lots or less with or without a remainder parcel, or more when a parcel map has been required in lieu of a final map and filing parcel maps. 
A.  Filing Advance Copy of Parcel Map. Where the filing of a parcel map is required pursuant to this Title 17 after the approval or conditional approval of the tentative parcel map or minor subdivision plot plan application as provided by this Title 17, the subdivider may cause the real property included within the map to be surveyed and a parcel map thereof shall be prepared in accordance with the approved tentative parcel map or minor subdivision plot plan application, and an advance copy of said parcel map to be filed with the city engineer. 
    The advance copy of the parcel map shall be accompanied by the following information: 
1.  Preliminary title report; 
2.  Fees in the amount specified in the city fee resolution; 
3.  Composite development plan; 
4.  Such additional information as required by the planning agency or approved city standards. 
B.  Filing Official Copy of Parcel Map. The parcel map shall not be officially filed until the engineer or surveyor has received notification that all provisions of the tentative parcel map or minor subdivision plot plan approval, the Subdivision Map Act, and city standards have been complied with and an advance copy of the parcel map has been approved by the city engineer in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
C.  Appeal. Any decision of the planning agency can be appealed as provided in Section 17.08.040 (H). 
D.  Expiration of Approval and Time Extensions on Approved Minor Subdivision Plot Plans and Vesting Tentative Parcel Maps. An approved or conditionally approved minor subdivision plot plan and vesting tentative parcel maps shall expire and may be extended within the time periods as provided in Section 17.08.040(E) and (F). 
E.  The filing and recording of a parcel map shall be subject to the requirements of Section 17.08.050(G) where applicable. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 88.0325) 
17.12.060 - Conditions of approval. 
    The conditions for subdivisions for which a tentative and final map are not required shall be as follows: 
A.  Improvements Consistent with Established Pattern. Improvements shall be limited to the dedication of flood control right-of-way easements and the construction of reasonable off-site and on-site improvements for the parcels being created. Requirements for the construction of such off site and onsite improvements shall be noticed by certificate on the parcel map, on the instrument evidencing the waiver of such parcel map, or by separate instrument and shall be recorded on, concurrently with, or prior to the parcel map or instrument of waiver of parcel map being filed for record. However, such improvements shall be consistent with the pattern established in the area, and further provided that in no case shall the required improvements be greater than required for subdivisions requiring a final map. 
    Fulfillment of such construction requirements shall not be required until such time as a permit or other grant of approval for the development of the parcel is issued by the county or until such time as the construction of such improvements is required pursuant to an agreement between the subdivider and the county except that, in the absence of such an agreement, the county may require fulfillment of such construction requirements within a reasonable time following approval of the parcel map and prior to the issuance of a permit or other grant of approval for the development of a parcel upon a finding by the county that fulfillment of the construction requirements is necessary for reasons of: 
1.  The public health and safety; or, 
2.  The required construction is a necessary prerequisite to the orderly development of the surrounding area. 
B.  Subdivision with Lot Sizes of Less Than Two and One-half Acres. Improvements, consistent with the pattern established in the area, may be required as a condition of approval for a subdivision containing any lot less than two and one-half (21/2) gross acres. Improvements may include paving, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, water supply, approved sewage disposal, and drainage works; provided, however, that in no case shall the required improvements be greater than required for subdivisions with comparable lot sizes. If improvements have not been installed at the time final approval is requested, a bond in an amount equal to the estimated cost of the improvements plus ten (10) percent shall be posted with the county land management department. 
C.  The conditions of approval regarding access that are referenced in Section 17.08.060 shall apply to subdivisions for which a final map is not required. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 88.0330) 
Chapter 17.16 - VESTING TENTATIVE MAPS 
Sections: 

17.16.010 - Filing criteria for vesting tentative maps. 
A.  Whenever a provision of the Subdivision Map Act, as implemented and supplemented by this Title 17, requires the filing of a tentative map or tentative parcel map for a residential development, a vesting tentative map may instead be filed in accordance with the provisions hereof. 
B.  If a subdivider does not seek the rights conferred by the Vesting Tentative Map Statute, the filing of a vesting tentative map shall not be a prerequisite to any approval for any proposed subdivision permit for construction, or work preparatory to construction. 
C.  Except as otherwise set forth, the provisions of this Title 17 shall apply to vesting tentative maps. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 88.0401) 
17.16.020 - Content. 
    The content and form of vesting tentative maps shall be governed by the provisions of this section. 
A.  At the time a vesting tentative map is filed, it shall have printed conspicuously on its face the words "vesting tentative map." 
B.  A vesting tentative map shall be filed in the same form and have the same contents, accompanying data, and reports as set forth in this Title 17 for a tentative map except as hereinafter provided. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 88.0405) 
17.16.030 - Procedures. 
    The following provisions shall govern the filing, processing and review of vesting tentative maps. 
A.  A vesting tentative map shall be processed and reviewed in the same manner as set forth in this Title 17 for a tentative map, except as hereinafter provided. 
1.  Prior to filing a vesting tentative map, the subdivider shall have a preapplication conference with the development review committee to determine if any additional information should be filed with the vesting tentative map application. The applicant shall submit to the development review committee prior to the preapplication conference all information that is required of a tentative map application. This information will be reviewed by the committee and additional information may be required by the committee to be submitted with the vesting tentative map application. 
    The minutes of the preapplication conference shall dictate the filing requirements for the vesting tentative map, and shall accompany the filing of the map. The information required by the development review committee for formal submission of the proposed project may include, but is not limited to the following: 
a.  Drainage plan for control of both on-site and off-site storm runoff, water courses, channels, existing culverts, and drainpipes including existing and proposed facilities for control of storm waters, data as to the amount of runoff and the approximate grade, and dimension of proposed facilities for control of storm waters; 
b.  Building envelopes; 
c.  Proposed land use and types of structures; 
d.  Detailed circulation information (existing and proposed). This information may include area-wide traffic data sufficient for the city to determine future needs; 
e.  Detailed grading plans; 
f.  Geological studies. 
    Any information required by the development review committee shall be clearly detailed and listed with anticipated review periods so it can be acted on within reasonable time. The department/office which requires any additional information shall approve the acceptability of this information from the applicant prior to the filing of the vesting tentative map. 
    The development review committee may require the filing and concurrent review of other related development applications where it is necessary for the review and implementation of the vesting tentative map. 
2.  An approving action on a vesting tentative map shall not occur prior to the effective date of approval of the associated discretionary permit or action. 
3.  Upon filing a vesting tentative map, the subdivider shall pay the fees required as established in the city's fee resolution for the filing and processing of a vesting tentative map. 
4.  The approval or conditional approval of a vesting tentative map shall expire at the end of the same time period, and shall be subject to the same extensions, established by this Title 17 for the expiration of the approval or conditional approval of a tentative map. 
5.  Any time prior to the expiration of a vesting tentative map, the subdivider or assignee may apply for an amendment to the vesting tentative map. No application for amendment shall be required where the reviewing authority finds that such amendment is a minor modification that is in substantial compliance with the original approval and no new conditions of approval are required. 
6.  For a subdivision whose intended development is inconsistent with the zoning ordinance or general plan in existence at that time, that inconsistency shall be noted on the map. The planning agency may deny such a vesting tentative map or approve it conditioned on the subdivider, or his or her designee, obtaining the necessary change in the zoning ordinance or general plan to eliminate the inconsistency. If the change in the pertinent ordinance is obtained, the approved or conditionally approved vesting tentative map shall confer the right to proceed with the development as approved. 
7.  Fees for development permits (e.g., building and grading permits) filed per an approved vesting tentative map or a recorded vesting final/parcel map shall be the fees in effect at the time of issuance of such permit. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 88.0410) 
17.16.040 - Development rights. 
A.  When the planning agency approves or conditionally approves a vesting tentative map, that approval shall confer a vested right to proceed with the development in substantial compliance with the ordinances, policies and standards in effect at the date the application for the subdivision has been determined to be complete and pursuant to Government Code Section 66474.2. If Section 66474.2 is repealed, that approval shall confer a vested right to proceed with development in substantial compliance with the ordinances, policies and standards in effect at the time the vesting tentative map is approved or conditionally approved. 
B.  Notwithstanding subdivision (A) of this section, the planning agency may condition or deny a permit, approval, extension, entitlement, or require an amendment to the map if it determines any of the following: 
1.  A failure to do so would place the residents of the subdivision or the immediate community, or both, in a condition dangerous to their health or safety, or both; 
2.  The condition or denial is required in order to comply with state or federal law. 
C.  The planning agency may alter any condition of a vesting tentative map through an amendment pursuant to Section 17.04.040(E) and (F) in order to protect against conditions dangerous to public health and safety or to comply with state or federal law. 
D.  The rights conferred by this section shall expire if a final or parcel map is not recorded prior to the expiration of the vesting tentative map as provided in Section 17.16.030(A)(4). If the final or parcel map is recorded, these rights shall last for the following periods of time: 
1.  An initial time period of one year. Where several final maps are recorded on various phases of a project covered by a single vesting tentative map, this initial time period shall begin for each phase when the final map for that phase is recorded. 
2.  The initial time period set forth in Section 17.16.040(D)(1) shall be automatically extended by any time used for processing a complete application for a grading permit or for design or architectural review, if such processing exceeds thirty (30) days from the date a complete application is filed. 
3.  A subdivider may apply for a one-year extension at any time before the initial time period set forth in Section 17.16.040(D)(1) expires. If the extension is denied, the subdivider may appeal that denial to the city council within fifteen (15) days. 
4.  If the subdivider submits a complete application for a building permit during the periods of time specified in this section, the rights referred to herein shall continue until the expiration of that permit, or any extension of that permit. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 88.0415) 
Chapter 17.20 - COMPOSITE DEVELOPMENT PLAN 
Sections: 

17.20.010 - Filing criteria for composite development plans. 
A.  The planning agency may require the filing of a composite development plan at the time a final or parcel map is accepted for recordation. These maps will reflect the information required by the planning agency and shall be filed with the building and safety department concurrent with the recordation of the final or parcel map. 
B.  Wherever a composite development plan is required, these plans shall be submitted prior to recordation of the final or parcel map. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 88.0501) 
17.20.020 - Content. 
    The content and form of composite development plans shall be governed by the provisions of this section and composite development plan standards established by the city engineer and adopted by the city council. 
A.  Standards and Preparation. A reproduction shall be made on linen or mylar of the map sheets of the final or parcel map which shall conform to the following provisions and adopted city standards. 
B.  In the top margin of all the map sheets, there shall be prominently labeled "Composite Development Plan." Advance copies shall be submitted for approval by the city engineer and building official prior to submittal of the linen or mylar of the final or parcel map. 
C.  Notes on Composite Development Plans. 
1.  The plan shall contain a section titled "Composite Development Plan Notes." The city may list here any conditions or mitigating measures stipulated for the development of the subject property. Any explanatory notes related to criteria delineated on the map shall also be listed within this section. In addition any related reports regarding development criteria shall be listed, including the following information: 
a.  Title and date of the report; 
b.  Name and credentials of person or firm preparing report; 
c.  The location where the reports are on file. 
2.  The plan may delineate and note applicable criteria to the development of the subject property. These criteria are limited to: 
a.  Building Criteria (e.g., Building Setback Lines). Any yard setback lines that are delineated on composite development plans shall be the street and yard setback distances required on the property within the composite development plan; 
b.  Geological and seismic criteria; 
c.  Grading criteria; 
d.  Flood control criteria (e.g., setbacks); 
e.  Environmental criteria; 
f.  Incorporation of any special map requirements; 
g.  All easements of record shall be delineated on the plan. Where the only information to be detailed by the composite development plan are the minimum yard setbacks established by either a community plan or zone district, then a composite development plan will not be required. 
3.  The following statement shall be prominently displayed on each map sheet: 
COMPOSITE DEVELOPMENT PLAN 
    NOTES ON THIS PLAN ARE FOR INFORMATIONAL PURPOSES, TO INDICATE CONDITIONS AND CRITERIA THAT EXIST ON THIS PROPERTY THAT WERE KNOWN AND IDENTIFIED AS OF THE DATE THIS PLAN WAS FILED. THIS INFORMATION IS DERIVED FROM PUBLIC RECORDS OR REPORTS AND IS NOT INTENDED TO AFFECT RECORD TITLE INTEREST. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 88.0505) 
17.20.030 - Perimeter walls. 
    The plan shall delineate and note all perimeter walls required for all subdivisions in accordance with the following: 
A.  Perimeter walls shall be required for all tentative maps in accordance with the following standards: 
1.  The wall shall be six feet in height and be constructed of noncombustible materials such as concrete block, brick or wood crete. 
2.  Walls shall be required to be constructed along the perimeter where the project boundary is adjacent to undeveloped wild land areas. A wall will not be required where the project boundary is a local street used for individual residential driveway access. 
3.  Walls may be designed with openings to facilitate pedestrian access, and shall be reduced in height to avoid conflicts with required clear sight triangles or standard setback requirements. 
4.  Perimeter walls shall utilize materials with colors that generally blend with the surrounding natural area and the exterior sides treated with a coating to facilitate the removal of graffiti. 
5.  This requirement shall not apply to parcel maps or tentative parcel maps consisting of four lots or less. 
6.  All required walls shall be constructed prior to occupancy of the first unit within the applicable phase of the tentative map. 
(Ord. 231 § 4, 1996) 
17.20.040 - Review process. 
    This subsection shall govern the procedures for the processing, approval or disapproval of a composite development plans. 
A.  Filing Advance Copy. At least three weeks prior to the recordation of the final or parcel map, the composite development plan shall be submitted for coordination of review to the city engineer. 
B.  Filing Official Copy of Composite Development Plan. Concurrent with the filing for recordation of the final or parcel map, the composite development plan, as approved by the planning department and city engineer in accordance with the provisions of this Title 17, shall be filed with the building and safety department. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 88.0510) 
17.20.050 - Amendment to composite development plan. 
A.  Should any correction and amendment to a final or parcel map be made that affects the composite development plan as authorized by Section 17.04.040(E) and (F), then the applicant shall file with the building and safety department a corrected composite development plan that is approved by the city engineer and planning department. The building official is authorized to approve amended maps when they do not adversely impact the conditions of other departments and the amendment is in substantial compliance with the conditions of approval of the tentative or parcel map. 
B.  Any request to modify or deviate from the standards that are shown on a composite development plan shall be made in accordance with the provisions of Section 16.12.210, except as otherwise provided by this section. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 88.0515) 
Chapter 17.24 - LOT LINE ADJUSTMENTS 
Sections: 

17.24.010 - Filing criteria. 
A.  "Lot line adjustment" means the adjustment of a lot line between two or more adjacent parcels, where the land taken from one parcel is added to an adjacent parcel, and where no additional parcels are thereby created or the number of parcels reduced. 
B.  Filing criteria shall be as established by city policy. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 88.0601) 
17.24.020 - Procedures. 
A.  The planning director or designee may approve lot line adjustments as herein provided. A current preliminary title report shall be required to accompany a lot line adjustment request. This report is required in order to ensure that the properties or portions thereof are not encumbered with liens, delinquent taxes, trust deeds, and/or utility easements on the property which would conflict with the requested lot line adjustment. If the boundaries described within a recorded encumbering document do conflict with the boundaries as described in the requested lot line adjustment, the planning director shall require that such a conflict be eliminated. In addition, if any of the lots are improved, the planning director shall refer the proposed lot line adjustment to the city engineer for review of possible encroachments. 
B.  The planning officer or designee shall make the following findings prior to approval of a lot line adjustment: 
1.  The proposed lot line adjustment is consistent with the general plan, development code, and any applicable community and specific plans. 
2.  The proposed lot line adjustment will not adversely affect public health and safety. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 88.0605) 
17.24.030 - Conditions of approval. 
A.  No tentative map, parcel map, or final map shall be required as a condition to the approval of a lot line adjustment. 
B.  A record of survey may be required to facilitate the preparation of the legal description to ensure the accuracy of the description or the elimination of the encroachments. 
C.  A recorded certificate of compliance shall be required of all lot line adjustments. Any certificate of compliance with parcels that are tax delinquent shall not record. The lot line adjustments will be voided if the following are not completed within ninety (90) days after the recordation of the certificate of compliance. 
1.  Grant deeds which describe the new boundaries of the parcels shall be recorded. 
2.  Appropriate trust deeds or partial reconveyance documents which describe the new boundaries shall be recorded. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 88.0610) 
Chapter 17.28 - LOT MERGERS 
Sections: 

17.28.010 - Mandatory merger of substandard lots. 
A.  A mandatory merger of substandard lots may be initiated by the city. A lot may be merged with a contiguous lot held by the same owner if any one of the contiguous lots or units held by the same owner does not conform to standards for minimum lot size or dimension specified by the applicable zone/land use district if all of the following requirements are satisfied: 
1.  At least one of the affected lots is not developed with any structure for which a building permit was issued or for which a building permit was not required at the time of construction, or is developed only with an accessory structure or accessory structures, or is developed with a single structure, other than an accessory structure, that is also partially sited on a contiguous lot involved in the proposed merger; and 
2.  At least one of the affected lots must have one or more of the following conditions: 
a.  The lot comprises less than five thousand (5,000) square feet in area at the time of the determination of merger; 
b.  The lot was not created in compliance with applicable laws and ordinances in effect at the time of its creation; 
c.  The lot does not meet current standards for sewage disposal and/or domestic water supply; 
d.  The lot does not meet slope stability and/or density standards, as specified by this code, community plan or the general plan; 
e.  The lot has no legal access which is adequate for vehicular and emergency equipment access and maneuverability; 
f.  The development of the lot would create health or safety hazards; 
g.  The lot is inconsistent with the applicable general plan and any applicable community plan or specific plan, other than minimum lot size or density standards. 
    For purposes of determining whether contiguous lots are held by the same owner, the ownership of record shall be determined as of the date that notice of intention to determine status is recorded. Ownership of record shall be determined by the verification of the property ownership as recorded with the county recorder in the official county records. 
B.  A lot merger becomes effective when the city causes to be filed for record with the county recorder a notice of merger specifying the names of the record owners and a description of the real property to be merged. This notice shall be transmitted to the county recorder with any certificates for taxes as referenced in Section 17.04.040(D)(1). 
C.  When a notice of merger has been recorded, the resultant parcel so merged shall be developed as a single unit of land. 
D.  When the city initiates a merger of substandard lots, noticing shall be done in compliance with the following provisions: 
1.  Until January 1, 1990, for lots which are four thousand (4,000) square feet or less and which were deemed by the county to be merged prior to January 1, 1984, the noticing procedures shall be as follows: At least thirty (30) days prior to recording a notice of merger, the city shall advise the owner of record of the affected lots, in writing, of the intention to record the notice and specify a time, date, and place at which the owner may present evidence to the planning agency as to why such notice should not be recorded. 
2.  Unless otherwise specified in Section 17.28.020, for all other lots proposed to be merged which do not meet the criteria of subsection (D)(1) of this section, the city shall cause to be mailed by certified mail to the current record owner of the property a notice of intention to determine status, notifying the owner that the affected lots may be merged pursuant to provisions and standards specified by this section, and advising the owner of the opportunity to request a determination of status hearing and to present evidence at the hearing that the property does not meet the criteria for merger. This hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the staff review without notice procedures by the office of planning, as provided in Chapter 16.12. The notice of intention to determine status shall be filed for record with the recorder of the county of San Bernardino on the date that notice is mailed to the property owner. 
E.  At any time within thirty (30) days after recording of the notice of intention to determine status pursuant to subsection (D)(2) of this section, the owner of the affected property may file with the planning department a request for a determination of status hearing. 
F.  Upon receiving a request for a determination of status hearing from the owner of the affected property pursuant to subsection (E) of this section, the planning director shall fix a time, date and place to conduct a hearing and shall notify the property owner of the time, date and place of the hearing by certified mail. The hearing shall be conducted not more than sixty (60) days following the city's receipt of the property owner's request for a hearing, but may be postponed or continued with the mutual consent of the city and the property owner. 
G.  At a determination of status hearing, the property owner shall be given the opportunity to present any evidence that the affected property does not meet the standards for merger specified in this section and Section 17.28.020. At the conclusion of the hearing, the planning department shall make a determination that the affected lots are to be merged or are not to be merged and shall so notify the owner of this determination. A determination of merger shall be recorded within thirty (30) days after conclusion of the hearing. 
H.  If within the thirty (30) day period specified in subsection (E) of this section, the owner does not file a request for hearing in accordance with subsection (F) of this section, the planning department may, at any time thereafter, make a determination that the affected lots are to be merged or are not to be merged. A notice of merger shall be recorded as provided in subsection (B) of this section, no later than ninety (90) days following the mailing of notice required by subsection (E) of this section. 
I.  If, in accordance with subsection (G) or (H) of this section, the planning department determines that the subject property shall not be merged, it shall cause to be recorded in the manner specified in subsection (B) of this section, a release of the notice of intention to determine status, recorded pursuant to subsection (D)(2) of this section and shall mail a clearance letter to the current owner of record. 
J.  Any decisions made by the planning director in accordance with this section may be appealed prior to recordation of the notice of merger in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 16.12. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 88.0701) 
17.28.020 - Voluntary merger of contiguous lots. 
A.  Description and Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to allow property owners to request a voluntary merger of contiguous lots that are under the same ownership. 
B.  Process. The property owner shall file an application for a lot merger. The reviewing authority shall be the planning director and review of the application shall be subject to the provisions for staff review without notice pursuant to Section 16.12.005(3) of the development code and in accordance with the provisions of subsection (C) of this section. The merger of the subject lots becomes effective when the planning director causes a notice of merger specifying the names of the record owners and a description of the real property to be filed for record with the county recorder. 
C.  Requirements. A voluntary merger of lots may be requested by an applicant. A lot may be merged with one or more contiguous lots held by the same owner if any one of the contiguous lots held by the same owner does not conform to standards for minimum lot size or dimension specified by the applicable zone/land use district or if at least one such lot meets one or more of the requirements specified in Section 16.30.010(A)(2). 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 88.0705) 
17.28.030 - Findings. 
    The planning agency shall find and justify the following to be true, prior to recording any notice of merger: 
A.  The lots to be merged at the time of merger are under common ownership; 
B.  The lots as merged will be consistent with or be more closely compatible with the applicable zone/land use district regulations and any other planning policies relating to the subject property and lot configuration; 
C.  The lot as merged will not be deprived of legal access as a result of the merger and access to the adjoining lots will not be restricted by the merger; 
D.  All current and any delinquent taxes have been paid on all affected lots. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 88.0710) 
Chapter 17.32 - REVERSION TO ACREAGE 
Sections: 

17.32.010 - Filing criteria. 
    Requirement for Reversion to Acreage. Reversions to acreage may be required as a condition of approval for a land use application or allowed upon review and approval of a subdividers request pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 88.0801) 
17.32.020 - Reversion to acreage by final map or parcel map. 
    Subdivided real property may be reverted to acreage by a final map or parcel map pursuant to the provisions of this section. 
A.  Initiation of Proceedings. 
1.  Proceedings shall be initiated by petition by the owner of the property. The petition shall be on a form prescribed by the planning department and shall be accompanied by: 
a.  Evidence of ownership; 
b.  Evidence of nonuse or lack of necessity of any streets or easements to be vacated or abandoned; 
c.  Submittal of a tentative map or other application procedure which may be established by the planning director which delineates any streets or easements which are to be left in effect; provided, however, that the planning director may require a tentative tract map prepared to the standard prescribed in this chapter; 
d.  Such other information as required by the planning department. 
2.  The city council, at the request of any person or on its own motion, may by resolution initiate proceedings to revert properly to acreage. The city council shall direct the planning department to obtain the necessary information to initiate and conduct the proceedings. 
B.  Previously subdivided land consisting of four or less contiguous parcels under the same ownership may be reverted to acreage by parcel map; previously subdivided land consisting of five or more parcels under the same ownership shall be reverted to acreage by final map. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 88.0805) 
17.32.030 - Data for reversion to acreage by final map for parcel map. 
    Petitioners shall file the following: 
A.  Evidence of title to the real property; and 
B.  Evidence of the consent of all of the owners of interest(s) in the property; or 
C.  Evidence that none of the improvements required to be made have been made within two years from the date the final map or parcel map was filed for record, or within the time allowed by agreement for completion of the improvements, whichever is later; or 
D.  Evidence that no lots shown on the final or parcel map have been sold within five years from the date such final or parcel map was filed for record; 
E.  A minor subdivision plot plan or tentative map in the form prescribed by this Title 17; 
F.  A parcel map or a final map in the form prescribed by this Title 17. The parcel map or final map shall delineate dedications which will not be vacated and dedications required as a condition to reversion. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 88.0810) 
17.32.040 - Fee. 
    The petition shall be accompanied by a fee as required by the city's fee schedule. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 88.0815) 
17.32.050 - Proceedings. 
A.  The planning commission shall hold a public hearing on all petitions for, and council initiations of, reversions to acreage. Notice of the public hearing shall be given as provided in Chapter 16.12. 
B.  In the case of a reversion to acreage by parcel map, the planning commission may approve the reversion to acreage only if it finds and records in writing the findings required by this section. 
C.  For a reversion to acreage by final map, the planning commission shall render its decision in the form of a written recommendation to the city council. Such recommendation shall include the reasons for the recommendation and shall be transmitted to the city council in such form and manner as may be specified by the city council. Upon receipt of the recommendation of the planning commission, the city council shall hold a public hearing. Notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be given in the same time and manner provided for the giving of notice of the hearing by the planning commission. The city council may approve a reversion to acreage only if it finds and records in writing the findings required by this section. 
D.  Findings. Prior to approval, the reviewing authority shall find and justify the following to be true: 
1.  Dedications or offers of dedication to be vacated or abandoned by the reversion to acreage are unnecessary for present or prospective public purposes; and 
2.  Either: 
a.  All owners of an interest in the real property within the subdivision have consented to reversion; 
b.  None of the improvements required to be made have been made within two years from the date the final or parcel map was filed for record, or within the time allowed by agreement for the completion of the improvements, whichever is later; or 
c.  No lots shown on the final or parcel map have been sold within five years from the date such map was filed for record. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 88.0820) 
17.32.060 - Conditions for reversion to acreage by final map. 
    The council may require as conditions for the reversion the following: 
A.  The owners dedicate or offer to dedicate streets or easements; 
B.  The retention of all or a portion of previously paid subdivision fees, deposits, or improvement security, if the same are necessary to accomplish any of the provisions of this Title 17; 
C.  The retention of drainage easements for drainage and flood control. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 88.0825) 
17.32.070 - Conditions for reversion to acreage by parcel map. 
    After approval of the petition, a parcel map shall be prepared in accordance with this Title 17; provided, however, that said parcel map may be compiled from recorded data if all the following conditions exist: 
A.  New division lines are not created; 
B.  The complete parcel boundary has been monumented and shown on a recorded subdivision map or parcel map; 
C.  When at least one of these boundary lines can be established from an existing monumented line. 
    The parcel map shall contain those certificates as required by Section 17.32.030(C). 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 88.0830) 
17.32.080 - Return of deposits and release of securities. 
    Except as provided in this chapter, upon filing of the final map for reversion to acreage with the county recorder, deposits shall be returned to the subdivider and all improvement securities shall be released by the council. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 88.0835) 
17.32.090 - Delivery of final map or parcel map. 
    After the hearing before the council and approval of the reversion, the final map or parcel map shall be delivered to the county recorder. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 88.0840) 
17.32.100 - Effect of filing reversion map with the county recorder. 
    Reversion shall be effective upon the parcel map or final map being filed for record by the county recorder. Upon filing, all dedications and offers of dedication not shown on the parcel map or final map for reversion shall be of no further force or effect. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 88.0845) 
Chapter 17.36 - CERTIFICATES OF COMPLIANCE 
Sections: 

17.36.010 - Filing criteria. 
A.  A recorded certificate of compliance may be requested by any person owning real property to have the planning director determine whether such property complies with the provisions of this code. 
B.  A certificate of compliance may be required by the planning department prior to recordation of a merger. 
C.  A recorded certificate of compliance shall be required of all lot line adjustments pursuant to Section 17.24.030. 
D.  When an agreement is reached and a deed is recorded regarding the ambiguities of the location of a lot line(s), a certificate of compliance shall be recorded. 
E.  When determined by the city engineer, certificates of compliance may be required for the remainder parcels on final/parcel maps. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 88.0901) 
17.36.020 - Content and form. 
    The content and form of an application for a certificate of compliance shall be as required by city policy. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 88.0905) 
17.36.030 - Procedures. 
    Upon making a determination that real property complies with this Title 17, the planning director shall cause a certificate of compliance to be filed for record with the county recorder. The certificate of compliance shall identify the real property and shall state the division thereof complies with applicable provisions of this Title 17 and the Subdivision Map Act. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 88.0910) 
17.36.040 - Conditions of approval. 
A.  When granting a certificate of compliance for the purpose of determining whether real property is in compliance with this code. 
1.  The requirements of a condition of the granting of a certificate of compliance shall be limited to dedications of flood control and road or street right-of-way easement for lots created before March 4, 1972. 
2.  When a certificate of compliance is requested for a parcel of land created prior to March 4, 1972, the following shall apply: 
a.  If the parcel is less than five acres in size, access, improvement, and map requirements consistent with land division requirements at the time the parcel was created shall be required. 
b.  If the parcel is five acres or greater in size, no parcel or record of survey map shall be required, unless the planning director finds that, due to topographical, geologic, or drainage concerns, delineation of such areas is necessary to assure adequate building sites. Access shall be provided pursuant to subsection (A)(2) of this section. 
c.  Access requirements across lands not in the ownership of the applicant may be deferred until development is requested on the property. A statement of disclosure relating to such lack of access shall be placed on the certificate of compliance advising of this requirement to future buyers of the parcel. 
3.  If the planning director determines that such real property does not comply with the provisions of this Title 17, the planning director shall impose all the access requirements of this Title 17 before issuing a certificate of compliance. The planning director may, as a condition to granting a certificate of compliance, impose those additional improvement requirements and tentative or parcel map requirements provided in this Title 17. Such conditions may be fulfilled and implemented by the property owner who has applied for a certificate of compliance pursuant to this section, or by a grantee of such property owner. If such conditions are not fulfilled or implemented by the applicant, property owner, or the grantee, the certificate of compliance shall have no force or effect upon any subsequent transfer of the property and any subsequent transferee or assignee shall make a new application for a certificate of compliance pursuant to this chapter, and the planning director may impose such conditions as would have been applicable at the time such assignee or transferee acquired the property. 
B.  All certificates of compliance shall be reviewed and approved by the city engineer prior to recordation. A record of survey may be required by the city engineer in order to facilitate the preparation of new legal descriptions or to ensure the elimination of any encroachment. 
C.  A certificate of compliance shall be issued for any real property which has been approved for development pursuant to Section 17.04.090(D). 
D.  A recorded final subdivision map, or parcel map, or recorded lot merger shall constitute a certificate of compliance with respect to the parcels of real property described therein. 
E.  An official map prepared pursuant to subdivision (b) of Section 66499.52 of the Government Code and Chapter 17.40 of this code, shall constitute a certificate of compliance or a conditional certificate of compliance with respect to the parcels of real property described therein and may be filed for record, whether or not the parcels are contiguous, so long as the parcels are within the same section or, with the approval of the city engineer, within contiguous sections of land. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 88.0915) 
Chapter 17.40 - OFFICIAL MAPS 
Sections: 

17.40.010 - Filing criteria. 
A.  Whenever any subdivision of land is platted or divided into lots or blocks, and whenever any addition to any subdivision is laid out into lots or blocks for the purpose of sale or transfer, the city engineer, under the direction and with the approval of the city council, may make an official map of the subdivision, giving to each block on the map a number, and to each lot or subdivision in the block a separate number or letter, and giving names to such streets, avenues, lanes, courts, commons, or parks as may be delineated on the official map. 
B.  Any surveyor or engineer under the review of the city engineer may prepare an official map to be filed for record as a certificate of compliance, pursuant to subdivisions (d) and (e) of the Government Code Section 66499.35 and Section 17.36.040(E) of this code. The map shall be prepared in accordance with the map format specifications of subdivisions A to F, inclusive, of Section 66434 of the Subdivision Map Act and Section 17.08.030 of this code except where noted otherwise in this chapter. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 88.1001) 
17.40.020 - Procedure. 
A.  A tentative map application shall be filed with the city. Filing, map form and content, and procedure requirements for review and approval of official maps shall be as required by city engineer standards as adopted by the city council. This tentative map may be approved if it is consistent with the general plan and zoning or land use district subject to the following requirements: 
1.  Submit proof of approved access; 
2.  Engineer or surveyor shall prepare and file an official map under the review of the city engineer. The map shall contain the following: 
a.  Private road easements or offers of dedication to each lot by separate instrument, or a note placed on the map that dedication will be required prior to building permits, 
b.  Locate and delineate the natural drainage courses, 
c.  Ground height for building pads to preclude flooding, 
d.  Surveyed, mapped and monumented per city engineer's standards, 
e.  Legal description for each lot, 
f.  City council certificate, 
g.  Engineer or surveyor's certificate, 
h.  City engineer's certificate, 
i.  City engineer's official map checking deposit based upon current final map fee schedule, 
j.  Improvements and improvement plans on future roads may be deferred if not needed at this time for access to developed properties, 
k.  Any additional information as required by city engineer standards. 
B.  Each and every map made and adopted under this Title 17 shall be presented to the city council by the city engineer and be certified under the hands of a majority of the members of the city council, the presiding officer, secretary and official seal of the city council. The certificate shall set forth in full the resolution adopting the map, with the date of adoption. 
C.  Fees established for processing of official maps shall be as required in the city's fee resolution. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 88.1005) 
17.40.030 - Recording requirements. 
A.  The certified map shall be forthwith filed in the office of the county recorder. The recorder shall immediately securely fasten and bind each map so filed in one of a series of firmly bound books to be provided, together with the proper indexes thereof, and appropriately marked for the reception of maps provided for in this Title 17. Official maps shall be filed and processed in accordance with provisions for final maps in Chapter 17.04 of this code, unless otherwise indicated in city engineer's standards for official maps. 
B.  The map shall become an official map for the purposes of this Title 17 when certified, filed, and bound, but not before. 
C.  Whenever the city council adopts an official map, it shall be lawful and sufficient to describe the lots or blocks in any deeds, conveyances, contracts or obligations affecting any of the lots or blocks as designated on the official map. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 88.1015) 
Chapter 17.44 - RESIDENT INITIATED MOBILE HOME PARK CONVERSIONS 
Sections: 

17.44.010 - Intent. 
A.  The intent of this chapter is to facilitate resident purchase of mobile home parks. This chapter allows the waiver of certain subdivision requirements and expedites local government processing for mobile home park conversions to condominiums or stock cooperatives. Such conversions will preserve an important source of affordable housing. 
B.  For the purposes of this chapter, an application for subdivision shall be considered "resident initiated" when signed by a resident organization formed by the tenants of the subject mobile home park for the purpose of purchasing the mobile home park. The proposed conversion shall be supported by a minimum of two-thirds of the current residents of the park. The resident organization shall have a legally binding contract, which, if the conditions of the contract are met, would result in the acquisition of an interest in the mobile home park. A preapplication conference may be requested by the applicant(s) prior to formation of the resident organization or prior to entering into a legally binding contract provided the planning agency determines in writing that it is reasonable to believe that such contract may be entered into within a year. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 88.1301) 
17.44.020 - Exclusions. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the following: 
A.  The purchase of mobile home park by a nonprofit corporation which is subject to the provisions of Section 11010.8 of the California Business and Professions Code. 
B.  Special occupancy parks (e.g. recreation vehicle parks) as defined in Section 2008 of the Mobile Home Parks Act, Title 25 of the State Administrative Code. 
C.  Mobile Home Planned Unit Developments. Such developments shall be governed by the following sections of this code: Sections 16.32.010 through 16.32.050, Chapter 16.12, and any land development guidelines for planned developments adopted by the city. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 88.1305) 
17.44.030 - Waiver of tentative and final map requirements. 
    Notwithstanding other provisions of this title the requirement for the filing of a tentative subdivision map and the preparation, filing and recordation of a final map, for a mobile home park conversion to a condominium or stock cooperative on a single parcel, may be waived by the planning agency; provided, that the following procedures are followed by a resident organization desiring to convert their park and the necessary findings are made by the planning agency. 
A.  Preapplication Conference. Prior to filing an application for mobile home park conversion, the resident association shall have a preapplication conference with the development review committee. This conference shall be scheduled in accordance with the policy established by the city for the housing incentive program. The purpose of this conference is to determine that the proposal qualifies under the provisions of this chapter. The following information shall be submitted with the application for this conference: 
1.  Previously approved plot plan for the mobile home park. If none exists, a plot plan shall be filed in accordance with the requirements established by the city reviewing authority and available at the information counter of city hall. 
2.  A supplemental report to include the following information: 
a.  Name of consultant(s), if any; 
b.  Disclosure of all known fees and costs for the conversion process; 
c.  Documentation demonstrating that two-thirds of the residents of the mobile home park support the proposed conversion; 
d.  Declarations from those residents supporting the conversion that their principal place of residence is within the subject mobile home park; 
e.  The location of the park and results of a field inspection done by the applicant(s) or consultant regarding the status of, the compliance of the park with health and safety standards in effect at the time the park was created. Any on-site dedications or public improvements to be required, if any, shall be identified by the committee; 
f.  Proposed tentative schedules to expedite meeting and coordinating any requirements of the city planning agency and the department of real estate, including but not limited to the public report. Such schedule shall include an outline of the permits and noticing required to allow this conversion and the estimated time at which such permits are obtained; 
g.  Evidence showing that the sixty (60) day notice of intent to file the conversion application (as required by Section 66427.1a of the Subdivision Map Act) has been met; 
h.  Initial report on the impact of the conversion on the residents of the mobile home park. This report is needed to determine whether an impact report as required in Section 66427.4 of the Subdivision Map Act is needed. The report shall specify whether any residents of the park are to be involuntarily displaced and any proposed measures to mitigate such displacement. A resident who is offered an opportunity to remain in the park after the conversion through continuation of the tenancy at generally the same terms as existed prior to proposed conversion, shall not be considered involuntarily displaced. At the preapplication conference, the development review committee shall indicate whether an impact report needs to be filed with the formal application for the conversion. If it is required, the development review committee shall identify in detail any additional items to be required as mitigation measures to assist any displaced residents. No current resident shall be involuntarily displaced without proper notice, assistance or compensation, to be worked out on a case-by-case basis. Such noticing, assistance or compensation may include, but is not limited to, the following: 
i.  The project shall comply with the mobile Home Residency Law, Section 798, et seq., of the Civil Code, 
ii.  The project applicant(s) may be required to provide relocation assistance pursuant to federal, state or local laws. 
B.  The development review committee shall field check the park prior to the scheduled meeting. The development review committee shall establish if the proposed mobile home park conversion meets the intent and is capable of meeting the provisions of this chapter. The planning director shall attempt to inform the applicant(s) at the earliest opportunity if a public hearing is to be required. If the proposed mobile home park conversion is acceptable, the development review committee shall identify the information the applicant needs to file to proceed with the proposal. Such information shall include the following: 
1.  Development review committee preapplication conference minutes. These minutes shall include the proposed tentative schedules required by Section 17.44.030(A)(2)(f). 
2.  If the parcel upon which the park lies was created prior to January 1, 1960, a parcel map application shall be required. Such application shall be processed concurrently with any other information filed pursuant to the preapplication conference; 
3.  Mobile home park conversion impact report, if required at the preapplication conference to meet the requirements of Section 66427.4 of the Subdivision Map Act. Such report shall be given to each resident within the mobile home park; 
4.  Mobile home park plot plan if no plot plan was previously approved; 
5.  Any special information which was identified by the committee. Among such information may be information to assist in the environmental review of the proposal; 
6.  Certificate of Compliance Application. The review and processing of any application pursuant to this section shall be subject to the same review and time requirements and appeal procedures as are provided in this title for tentative subdivision maps. In any case where waiver of the tentative and final map is granted, the planning director shall cause to be filed for record with the county recorder a certificate of compliance pursuant to Chapter 17.36. The planning director may require a public hearing pursuant to the provisions of Section 17.08.040(B) of this code. Should a public hearing be required, the noticing provisions of Section 66451.3 of the Subdivision Map Act shall be met. 
C.  Findings of Approval. A mobile home park conversion shall be approved or conditionally approved only if the following are found and justified as being true: 
1.  The mobile home park complies with the requirements established by state law and city ordinance for such uses at the time the mobile home park was constructed. Such regulations shall include those regarding to area, improvement and design, flood water drainage control, public roads, sanitary disposal facilities, water supply and distribution system environmental protection and other requirements of the Subdivision Map Act or this title; 
2.  Any measures necessary to mitigate the impact of the conversion on current residents of the park have been required as conditions of approval; 
3.  Applicable noticing requirements of the Subdivision Map Act have been, or will be, met. 
D.  Conditions of Approval. The following conditions may be required by the planning agency as conditions of approval for the proposed conversion. 
1.  Subdivisions permitted by this chapter may include conditions requiring a compliance survey inspection to the satisfaction of the planning agency. However, such survey shall be limited to require improvements relating only to items of a health and safety nature; 
2.  The mobile home condominiums or stock cooperatives shall be subject to Title 25 of the State Administrative Code; 
3.  Only additional on-site improvements or development standards which were applicable at the time the mobile home park was originally developed may be required; 
4.  Off-site public improvements for qualifying mobile home parks shall be waived, except as follows: 
a.  Any off-site improvements shall be financed with appropriate assessment bonds, 
b.  The certificate of compliance shall not be delayed or contingent upon completion of the off-site improvements; 
5.  Any requirements and/or documents required by the State Common Interest Development Act, Title 6 (commencing with Section 1350), Part 4, Division 2 of the State Civil Code; 
6.  Conditions of approval necessary to ensure any noticing requirements that are required by Section 66427.1 of the Subdivision Map Act are met; 
7.  Any plan or document required to be submitted to the department of real estate shall be reviewed for consistency with the approved project and plot plan. Such plan shall reference the "waiver" notice requirement in subsection (D)(8) of this section, to the satisfaction of the planning director; 
8.  Notice shall be placed on the certificate of compliance that standard subdivision requirements for the creation of condominiums/stock cooperatives have been waived by the city and only conditions applicable to the original development of the mobile home park have been required; 
9.  The applicant(s) shall comply with the indemnification requirements of Section 1.04.090 of this code; 
10.  The planning agency may impose any conditions of approval to assure any appropriate measures for relocation assistance are implemented. 
E.  Any conditions of approval required pursuant to this chapter shall be drafted in such a way so as to expedite the conversion process. No mobile home shall be required to be placed on permanent functions as a result of the conditional approval. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 88.1310) 
17.44.040 - Fees. 
    Fees for the preapplication conference and formal application for a resident initiated conversion of a mobile home park to condominiums or stock cooperatives shall be as specified in the city's fee resolution. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 88.1315) 
Chapter 17.48 - LOT REQUIREMENTS 
Sections: 

17.48.010 - Measurement of lot dimensions. 
    All required lot widths, whether on rectangular, pie-shaped or other irregular lots, are measured at the required building setback line. On any irregularly shaped lot, the required lot dimensions other than lot width must be satisfied by the average dimensions of the lot. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 87.0201) 
17.48.020 - Lot area applicability. 
    Except as provided in this chapter, all parcels of land shall conform to the area regulations of the zone district in which the parcel is located. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 87.0301) 
17.48.030 - Permitted substandard lots. 
    Any legally created parcel having an area, width or depth less than that required by an applicable standard set forth in the development code or applicable community plan, may be used or built upon, provided the development otherwise conforms to the requirements of this code. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 87.0305) 
17.48.040 - Exceptions. 
A.  If two or more legally created parcels of land or portions thereof are being combined in order to create a building site which will more nearly meet the lot area requirements set forth in the development code or applicable community plan, the resulting parcel shall be deemed to have met the applicable area requirements. 
B.  Where a lot area or yard width or depth has been reduced by any government agency to not more than twenty-five (25) percent below the minimum requirements of the development code or applicable community plan by condemnation, acquisition or dedication for a road, drain or other public purpose, including any dedication as a result of a redistricting, deviation or site approval, the lot area existing before reduction shall be what counts for meeting the requirements of the development code or applicable plan. 
C.  In computing the lot area of a lot which abuts upon one or more alleys, one-half the width of such alley(s) may be assumed to be a portion of the lot. 
D.  The subdivision of multiple-family dwellings and mobile home parks that are the subject of an approved site approval shall not be held to the minimum area requirements of the district. 
E.  Lots to be used for the preservation of historic structures or land uses may have less than the minimum lot size for the district provided that: 
1.  The lot's structure(s) or use(s) has been or may be deemed historic by an incorporated, nonprofit historic preservation organization; 
2.  The site will not be used for human habitation nor generate sewage effluent unless it is served by common sewage facilities or contains at least forty thousand (40,000) square feet and the facilities meet the approval of the building and safety department; 
3.  The lot owner will grant an easement in perpetuity to the city or other governmental body empowered to accept such easement, restricting further development of the site to nonhistoric preservation purposes. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; Ord. 75 § 2 (part), 1990; SBCC § 87.0315) 
17.48.050 - Multiple-family residential density limits. 
    The number of units allowed on a parcel located in a multiple-family land use or zone district which specifies the total net lot area per dwelling unit shall be calculated by dividing the total net area of the lot in square feet by the figure before the district designation. Fractional units of fifty (50) percent or greater shall be rounded to the next highest number. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 87.0320) 
17.48.060 - Aliquot part or metes and bounds subdivisions. 
    Metes and bounds divisions may have actual parcel areas that are ten percent less than those required by the applicable zone/land use district, where the parcels have topographical constraints or where the parcels of land are created by aliquot part division. 
(Ord. 250 (part), 1997; SBCC § 87.0325) 
17.48.070 - Alternative lot design and grading standards. 
    The following standards are available as an alternative to the lot size, dimension, and design standards otherwise required in Section 17.04.060: 
A.  General Objectives. 
1.  To preserve, to the maximum extent possible, dense stands of Joshua trees, junipers, yuccas and related native vegetation. 
2.  To minimize the effects of mass grading and preserve the natural vegetation within a suburban residential setting. 
3.  To discourage mass grading of large building pads. 
4.  To provide for alternatives for the design of drainage facilities to safely divert storm water flows across lots and streets. 
5.  To preserve views of significant portions of native vegetation visible from both within and outside the project area. If parks, schools, trails, or other public amenities are included, they should be designed to benefit from these natural areas. 
B.  Alternative Design Standards. 
1.  Design of building envelopes shall be sensitive to the native vegetation and terrain. Structures should be located in such a way as to minimize necessary grading and preserve significant stands of vegetation. 
2.  Dwellings should be sited to respect property views, site features, topography, existing natural vegetation, and adjacent uses. Dwelling units need not be sited parallel to the street if other orientations take better advantage of site features. 
3.  Net lot sizes may be created below the minimum area required by the applicable zone district as long as the average lot size within any phase of a tentative map meets the requirements of the zone. In no case shall any lot be smaller than eighty (80) percent of the required minimum lot size. Land within transmission power line corridor easements shall not be included as part of the net lot area. 
4.  Walls and fences can be used to define the boundaries between private yards and natural areas. Where possible, walls should not have the effect of blocking views of natural areas but can be located to maintain their basic security function for private yards. 
5.  Roadways should conform to the natural terrain and not greatly alter or divide natural vegetation areas. They should not greatly alter the physical and visual character by creating wide, straight alignments. Reduced road sections, split sections to create divided roads, and parking bays should be considered in the layout of streets to reduce disturbance of natural areas. 
6.  Driveways shall be designed to avoid natural areas and/or specimen trees. Where access must be provided to structures more than one hundred fifty (150) feet from a public street, selected vegetation may be removed so as to facilitate access by emergency vehicles during a fire. Removal of vegetation areas and specimen trees shall be considered on a case-by-case basis. 
7.  The area devoted to undisturbed vegetation, shall consist primarily of California Junipers as well as the protected plants listed in Chapter 16.24. Landscaping adjacent to such areas shall not be applied in a conventional pattern, but in patterns resembling natural plant distribution. 
8.  Areas used for the placement of drainage devices to convey storm water flows to retention/detention facilities within the subdivision shall be landscaped in a natural pattern with native plant stock. 
9.  Where applicable, areas to be retained with natural vegetation shall be defined by a private deed restriction, recorded with the county recorder's office. 
C.  Drainage and Runoff Control. 
1.  Runoff from activities subject to a development permit shall be properly controlled to prevent erosion and downstream flooding. Erosion control and surface flow containment facilities shall be constructed and maintained to prevent discharge of sediment to surface water or storm drainage systems. The following measures shall be used for runoff control, and shall be adequate to control runoff from a one hundred (100) year storm. 
2.  The identification of building and access envelopes and non-buildable areas required to minimize disturbance of natural vegetation areas as well as erodible areas of any proposed development site. 
3.  All development drainage systems shall be designed to mitigate effects of runoff, in accordance with the San Bernardino County Flood Control District Manual and good engineering practice. Detention and/or retention facilities shall be provided to mitigate increases in runoff from storms of varying intensity. Desilting and/or debulking facilities shall be provided where necessary to ensure the storm drain system will function as designed. 
4.  Any concentrated runoff, which cannot be effectively dispersed over non-erodible channels or conduits to the nearest drainage course, shall be contained within on-site percolation devices. Where water will be discharged to natural ground or channels, appropriate energy dissipaters shall be installed to prevent erosion at the point of discharge. 
5.  Runoff from disturbed areas shall be treated in a manner to prevent the escape of sediment from the disturbed area. 
6.  No earth, organic or construction material shall be deposited in or placed where it may be directly carried into a lake, stream march, slough, lagoon, or body of standing water. It is the developer's responsibility to secure and maintain any required storm water pollution prevention program and national pollution discharge elimination systems permits from the State Regional Water Quality Control Board. 
7.  Where land disturbing activities are in proximity to lakes, natural watercourses or natural vegetation that is intended to be preserved, a buffer zone is required along the margin of sufficient width to confine visible siltation within twenty-five (25) percent of the buffer zone nearest the land-disturbing activities. 
8.  Where possible, drainage channels should be placed in less visible locations and more importantly, should receive a naturalizing treatment including native rock, colored concrete and landscaping so that the structure appears as an integral part of the environment. In all cases, a suitable liner shall be designed in accordance with city standards. 
9.  Natural drainage courses should be preserved and enhanced to the extent possible. Where they can be incorporated with preserved vegetation areas, they can be integrated as part of the project design in order to enhance the overall quality and aesthetics of a site, to provide attractive open space vistas, and to preserve the natural character of the area. 
D.  Grading. 
1.  Contour grading techniques should be used to preserve and maximize natural areas. Manufactured slopes should be modulated by sufficient berming, and landscaping to create visually interesting and pleasing streetscapes. 
2.  When building pads are adjacent to areas of natural vegetation, the pad configuration should be softened with variable, undulating slopes created to give a more pleasing and natural appearance. 
3.  Except for activities required to extend access and infrastructure, such as driveways and sewage disposal systems, and to provide for drainage, site clearing shall be limited to meet the requirements of the urban-wildland interface for fire protection. Disturbance of an individual home site shall be limited to thirty (30) feet surrounding the building pad. This requirement may be waived where the zone district permits smaller lots that make this impractical. 
4.  The building up of pads on artificial platforms to create or enhance views shall not be permitted. 
(Ord. 2002-12 Exh. A, 2002) 
Chapter 17.52 - DEDICATION OF LAND AND/OR PAYMENT OF FEES FOR PARK AND RECREATION PURPOSES* 
Sections: 

17.52.010 - Required. 
A.  As a condition of approval of a tentative map, prior to the approval of every final map, the city shall require dedication of a portion of such land, payment of a fee in lieu thereof, or a combination of both, as set forth in this chapter, for the purpose of establishing and developing park and recreation facilities to serve the future residents of such subdivided property. 
B.  As a condition of final approval of any building permit for a single-family residence, condominium unit, townhouse unit, apartment unit, second dwelling unit, mobile home space, recreational vehicle space, or any similar unit or space where an individual or group of individuals may reside, the city shall require dedication of a portion of such land, payment of a fee in lieu thereof, or a combination of both, as set forth in this chapter; for the purpose of establishing and developing park and recreational facilities to serve the future residents of such subdivided property. 
(Ord. 2006-19 § 3 (Exh. A (part)), 2006) 
17.52.020 - Procedure. 
    The requirements of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall be complied with prior to the final approval of any building permit by the provision of parkland in whole or in part the payment of a park fee, or by a combination of both as required by the city. 
A.  Subdivider/Owner. At a time of filing a tentative map application, or building permit, the subdivider/owner shall, as part of such filing, state in writing whether it is desired to dedicate property for park and recreational purposes or to pay a fee in lieu thereof. If the subdivider/owner desires to dedicate a park for this purpose, the area shall be designated on the tentative tract map as submitted. 
B.  Action of City. At the time of the tentative tract map approval, or building permit application, the city shall determine as part of such approval, whether to require a dedication of the land within the subdivision, payment of a fee in lieu thereof or a combination of both. 
C.  Prerequisites for Approval of Final Maps. Where dedication is offered and accepted, it shall be accomplished in accordance with the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act. Where fees are required, the same shall be deposited with the city prior to approval of the final inspection for any building permit. 
D.  Determination. The city shall determine whether to require land dedication, require payment of the fee in lieu thereof or a combination of both, by consideration of the following: 
1.  Open space element of the general plan; 
2.  Topography, geology, access and location of land in the subdivision available for dedication; and 
3.  Size and shape of the subdivision and land available for dedication. 
E.  Credit for Private Open Space. Where private open space is and its creation purposes is provided in a proposed subdivision and such space is to be privately owned and maintained by the future residents of the subdivision, such areas shall be credited up to seventy-five (75) percent against the requirement of a dedication for park and recreation purposes, or the payment of fees in lieu thereof, provided the city finds it is in the public interest to do so, and that the following standards are met: 
1.  That yards, court areas, setbacks, and other open area required be maintained by the zoning, land use district, and building regulations shall be included in the computation of such private open space; 
2.  That the private ownership and maintenance of the open space is adequately provided for by written agreement; 
3.  That the use of the private open space is restricted for park and recreational purposes by recorded covenants, which run with the land in favor of the future owners of the property within the tract; 
4.  That the proposed private open space is reasonably adaptable for use for park and recreational purposes, taking into consideration such factors as size, shape, topography, geology, access and location of the private open space land; and 
5.  That facilities proposed for the open space are in substantial accordance with the provisions of the general plan and are approved by the planning commission and/or city council. 
(Ord. 2006-19 § 3 (Exh. A (part)), 2006) 
17.52.030 - Exemptions. 
    The provisions of this chapter do not apply to non-residential subdivisions or developments. 
(Ord. 2006-19 § 3 (Exh. A (part)), 2006) 
STATUTORY REFERENCES FOR CALIFORNIA CITIES 
    The statutory references listed below refer the code user to state statutes relevant to California cities. They are up to date with all 2016 Regular Session laws, and Ch. 8 of 2015-2016 2nd Ex. Sess. Laws, and all propositions on 2016 ballot. 
General Provisions 
Code adoption 
Government Code § 50022.1 et seq. 
Ordinances 
Government Code § 36900 et seq. 
Penalties for ordinance violations 
Government Code §§ 36900 and 36901 
Imprisonment 
Government Code §§ 36903 and 36904 
Citations for misdemeanors 
Penal Code § 853.5 et seq. 
Administrative fines and penalties 
Government Code § 53069.4 
Judicial review of city decisions 
Code of Civil Procedure § 1094.6 
Expedited judicial review of First Amendment cases 
Code of Civil Procedure § 1094.8 
Elections 
Government Code §§ 34050 and 36503 and Elections Code §§ 1301, 9200 et seq. and 10100 et seq. 
Classification of cities 
Government Code § 34100 et seq. 
General powers 
Government Code § 37100 et seq. and Cal. Const. art. XI §§ 7, 9 
Conflict of interest code 
Government Code § 87100 et seq. 
Eminent Domain Law 
Code of Civil Procedure § 1230.010 et seq. 
Administration and Personnel 
Cannibas 
Elections Code § 9217 
City officers generally 
Government Code § 36501 et seq. 
Legislative body 
Government Code § 36801 et seq. 
Meetings 
Government Code § 54950 et seq. 
Mayor 
Government Code § 40601 et seq. 
City clerk 
Government Code § 40801 et seq. 
City treasurer 
Government Code § 41001 et seq. 
City assessor 
Government Code § 41201 et seq. 
Chief of police 
Government Code § 41601 et seq. 
City attorney 
Government Code § 41801 et seq. 
Alternative forms of government-City manager form of government 
Government Code § 34851 et seq. 
Alternative forms of government-Election of legislative body by or from districts 
Government Code § 34870 et seq. 
Alternative forms of government-Elective mayor 
Government Code § 34900 et seq. 
City records 
Government Code § 34090 et seq. 
Removal from office 
Government Code § 3000 et seq. 
Political activities of public employees 
Government Code § 3201 et seq. 
Local planning agencies 
Government Code § 65100 et seq. 
California Emergency Services Act 
Government Code § 8550 et seq. 
Fire department 
Government Code § 38611 
Peace officer standards and training 
Penal Code § 13500 et seq. 
Personnel system, merit system or civil service system 
Government Code § 45000 et seq. 
Retirement systems 
Government Code § 45300 et seq. 
Revenue and Finance 
Financial powers 
Government Code § 37200 et seq. 
Transfer of tax function to county 
Government Code § 51500 et seq. 
Property tax assessment, levy and collection 
Government Code § 43000 et seq. 
Bradley-Burns Uniform Local Sales and Use Tax Law 
Revenue and Taxation Code § 7200 et seq. 
Transient occupancy tax 
Revenue and Taxation Code § 7280 et seq. 
Documentary Transfer Tax Act 
Revenue and Taxation Code § 11901 et seq. 
Unclaimed property 
Civil Code § 2080 et seq. 
Unclaimed money 
Government Code § 50050 et seq. 
Planning and zoning fees for specific purposes 
Government Code § 66012 et seq. 
Public works and public purchases 
Government Code § 4000 et seq. 
Local Agency Public Construction Act 
Public Contract Code § 20100 et seq. 
Uniform Public Construction Cost Accounting Act 
Public Contract Code § 22000 et seq. 
Claims against public entities 
Government Code § 900 et seq. 
Development project fees 
Government Code § 66000 et seq. 
Business Licenses, Taxes and Regulations 
Authority to license businesses 
Government Code § 37101, Business and Professions Code § 16000 et seq. 
Automatic checkout systems 
Civil Code § 7100 et seq. 
Bingo 
Penal Code § 326.4 et seq. 
Cannibas 
Business and Professions Code Ch. 3.5, Div. 8, Div. 10, §§ 7590 et. seq;, 19300.7, 19319, 19349, 26000, 26001, 26050; Health and Safety Code § 11362.775; and Government Code, §§ 911.2, 912.4, 913, 935, 935(b) 
Charitable solicitations 
Business and Professions Code § 17510 et seq. 
Commercial filming 
Government Code § 65850.1 
Community antenna TV systems 
Government Code § 53066 et seq. 
Gambling Control Act 
Business and Professions Code § 19800 et seq. 
Massage parlors 
Government Code § 51030 et seq. 
Private investigators 
Business and Professions Code § 7512 et seq. 
Taxicabs 
Vehicle Code §§ 16500 et seq., 21100, 21112 and Government Code § 53075.5 et seq. 
Telecommunications facilities 
Government Code § 50030 
Animals 
Animals generally 
Food and Agriculture Code § 16301 et seq. 
Dogs 
Government Code § 38792 and Food and Agriculture Code § 30501 et seq. 
Potentially dangerous and vicious dogs 
Food and Agriculture Code § 31601 et seq. 
Rabies control 
Health and Safety Code § 121575 et seq. 
Cruelty to animals and related offenses 
Penal Code §§ 596 et seq. through 600.5 
Health and Safety 
Cannibas related uses and prohibited activities 
Family Code §§ 6922, 7002, 7050, 7120 and Food and Agriculture Code §§ 32501, 81000 and Health and Safety Code Art. 2.5, Ch. 6, Div. 10, §§ 109925, 109935, 11018.5, 11362(b)(5), 11362.1, 11362.5, 11362.7, 11362.775 
Garbage and refuse collection and disposal 
Public Resources Code § 49300 et seq. 
Nuisances and nuisance abatement 
Government Code § 38771 et seq. and Penal Code § 370 et seq. 
Weed and rubbish abatement 
Government Code § 39501 et seq. 
Littering 
Penal Code §§ 374 through 374.8 
Smoking-Places of employment 
Labor Code § 6404.5 
California Indoor Clean Air Act of 1976 
Health and Safety Code § 118875 et seq. 
Graffiti abatement 
Government Code § 38772 and Penal Code § 594.5 
Fire prevention 
Health and Safety Code § 13000 et seq. 
Fireworks 
Health and Safety Code § 12500 et seq. 
Noise control 
Health and Safety Code § 46000 et seq. and Government Code § 65302(f) 
Hospitals 
Government Code § 37600 et seq. 
Sidwalk Vending 
Government Code § 51039(f) et seq. 
Health and Safety Code § 114315(a) 
Public Peace, Morals and Welfare 
Crimes against religion and conscience, and other offenses against good morals 
Penal Code § 302 et seq. 
Obscenity 
Penal Code § 311 et seq. 
Material harmful to minors 
Penal Code § 313 et seq. 
Indecent exposure, obscene exhibitions, and bawdy and other disorderly houses 
Penal Code § 314 et seq. 
Crimes against the public peace 
Penal Code § 403 et seq. 
Vehicles and Traffic 
Rules of the road 
Vehicle Code § 21000 et seq. 
Local traffic rules and regulations 
Vehicle Code § 21100 et seq. 
Traffic signs, signals and markings 
Vehicle Code § 21350 et seq. 
Driving on right side of road, overtaking and passing 
Vehicle Code § 21650 et seq. 
Right-of-way 
Vehicle Code § 21800 et seq. 
Pedestrians' rights and duties 
Vehicle Code § 21949 et seq. 
Turning, stopping and turning signals 
Vehicle Code § 22100 et seq. 
Vehicle speed 
Vehicle Code § 22348 et seq. 
Special stops required 
Vehicle Code § 22450 et seq. 
Stopping, standing and parking 
Vehicle Code § 22500 et seq. 
Bicycles 
Vehicle Code §§ 21200 et seq. and 39000 et seq. 
Vehicle size, weight and load 
Vehicle Code § 35000 et seq. 
Penalties 
Vehicle Code § 42000 et seq. 
Streets, Sidewalks and Public Places 
Improvement Act of 1911 
Streets and Highways Code § 5000 et seq. 
Construction of sidewalks and curbs 
Streets and Highways Code § 5870 et seq. 
Underground utility districts 
Streets and Highways Code § 5896.1 et seq. 
Obstructions and encroachments on public ways 
Government Code § 38775 
Municipal parks 
Public Resources Code § 5181 et seq. 
Tree Planting Act of 1931 
Streets and Highways Code § 22000 et seq. 
Landscaping and Lighting Act of 1972 
Streets and Highways Code § 22500 et seq. 
Charitable solicitations 
Business and Professions Code § 17510 et seq. 
Advertising displays 
Business and Professions Code § 5229 et seq. 
Public Services 
Municipal water systems 
Government Code § 38730 et seq. 
Municipal sewers 
Government Code § 38900 et seq. and Health and Safety Code § 5470 et seq. 
Water wells 
Water Code § 13700 et seq. 
Buildings and Construction 
Authority to regulate buildings and construction 
Government Code §§ 38601 and 38660 
State Housing Law 
Health and Safety Code § 17910 et seq. 
Adoption of construction codes 
Health and Safety Code §§ 17922 and 17958 
California Building Standards Law 
Health and Safety Code § 18901 et seq. 
Mobilehome Parks Act 
Health and Safety Code § 18200 et seq. 
Signs 
Government Code §§ 38774 and 65850; Business and Professions Code § 5200 et seq. 
Inspection warrants 
Code of Civil Procedure § 1822.50 et seq. 
Development fees 
Government Code § 66000 et seq. 
Subdivisions 
Subdivision Map Act 
Government Code § 66410 et seq. 
Zoning 
Planning and Zoning Law 
Government Code § 65000 et seq. 
Local authority to regulate land use 
Government Code § 65850 
Local zoning administration 
Government Code § 65900 et seq. 
Open-space zoning 
Government Code § 65910 et seq. 
Family day care homes 
Health and Safety Code § 1597.30 et seq. 
Environmental Protection 
California Environmental Quality Act 
Public Resources Code § 21000 et seq. 
California Noise Control Act of 1973 
Health and Safety Code § 46000 et seq. 
CROSS-REFERENCE TABLE 
    This table provides users with the current disposition of the sections derived from the San Bernardino County Code, codified in the Hesperia Municipal Code. 
San Bernardino 
County Code § Hesperia 
Municipal Code § 25.011 9.04.010 25.012 9.04.020 28.042 10.12.010 28.043 10.12.010 28.044 10.12.030 28.045 10.12.040 31.022 6.04.060 31.024 6.04.020 32.011 Repealed by 2001-7 32.012 6.04.030 32.013 6.04.040 32.014 6.04.050 32.015 6.04.060 32.017 6.04.070 32.018 6.04.080 32.019 6.04.090 32.0110 6.04.100 32.0111 6.04.110 32.0112 6.04.120 32.0113 6.04.130 32.0114 6.04.140 32.0115 6.04.150 32.0116 6.04.160 32.0117 6.04.170 32.0118 Repealed by 2001-6 32.0119 Repealed by 2001-6 32.0120 6.04.200 32.021 6.08.010 32.022 6.08.020 32.023 6.08.030 32.024 6.08.040 32.025 6.08.050 32.026 6.08.060 32.027 6.08.070 32.028 6.08.080 32.029 6.08.090 32.0210 6.08.100 32.0211 6.08.110 32.0212 6.08.120 32.0213 6.08.130 32.0214 6.08.140 32.0215 6.08.150 32.0216 6.08.160 32.0217 6.08.170 32.0218 6.08.180 32.0219 6.08.190 32.0220 6.08.200 32.0221 6.08.210 32.0222 6.08.220 32.0223 Repealed by 2001-6 32.031 Repealed by 2001-7 32.032 6.12.020 32.033 6.12.030 32.034 6.12.040 32.035 6.12.050 32.093 6.16.010 32.094 6.16.020 32.095 6.16.030 32.096 Repealed by 2001-6 32.097 Repealed by 2001-6 32.098 Repealed by 2001-6 32.099 Repealed by 2001-6 32.0910 Repealed by 2001-6 32.0911 Repealed by 2001-6 32.0912 Repealed by 2001-6 32.121 Repealed by 2001-7 32.122 6.20.020 32.123 6.20.030 32.124 6.20.040 32.125 Repealed by 2001-6 32.126 Repealed by 2001-6 33.1022 15.20.060 33.1023 15.20.070 33.1024 15.20.080 33.1025 15.20.090 33.1026 15.20.100 33.1027 15.20.110 33.1028 15.20.120 33.121 8.16.010 33.125 Repealed by 2001-7 33.1215 8.16.040 33.1220 8.16.050 33.1225 8.16.060 33.1230 8.16.070 33.1235 8.16.080 33.1240 8.16.090 33.1245 Repealed by 2001-6 33.1250 Repealed by 2001-6 33.1270 8.16.120 33.1275 8.16.130 33.1280 8.16.140 33.1281 8.16.150 33.1285 8.16.160 33.1290 8.16.170 33.1295 8.16.180 33.1298 Repealed by 2001-6 33.1299 Repealed by 2001-6 37.01 Repealed by 2001-6 37.02 Repealed by 2001-6 37.03 Repealed by 2001-6 37.04 Repealed by 2001-6 37.05 Repealed by 2001-6 37.06 Repealed by 2001-6 37.07 Repealed by 2001-6 37.08 Repealed by 2001-6 37.09 Repealed by 2001-6 37.10 Repealed by 2001-6 37.11 Repealed by 2001-6 37.12 Repealed by 2001-6 37.13 Repealed by 2001-6 41.0101 5.04.010 41.0102 Repealed by 2001-7 41.0103 5.04.030 41.0104 5.04.040 41.0105 5.04.050 41.0106 5.04.060 41.0107 5.04.070 41.0108 5.04.080 41.0109 5.04.090 41.0110 5.04.100 41.0111 5.04.110 41.0112 5.04.120 41.0113 5.04.130 41.0114 5.04.140 41.0115 5.04.150 41.0116 5.04.160 41.0117 5.04.170 41.0118 5.04.180 41.0119 5.04.190 41.0120 5.04.200 41.0121 5.04.210 41.0122 5.04.220 41.0124(a) 5.16.010 41.0124(b) 5.16.020 41.0124(c) 5.16.030 41.0124(d) 5.16.040 41.0125(a) 5.32.010 41.0125(b) 5.32.020 41.0126(a) 5.24.010 41.0126(b) 5.24.020 41.0126(c) 5.24.030 41.0126(d) 5.24.040 41.0126(e) 5.24.050 41.0126(f) 5.24.060 41.0127(a) 5.28.010 41.0127(b) 5.28.020 41.0127(c) 5.28.030 41.0128(a) 5.40.010 41.0128(b) 5.40.020 41.0128(c) 5.40.030 41.0128(d) 5.40.040 41.0129(a) Repealed by 2001-7 41.0129(b) 5.20.020 41.0129(c) 5.20.030 41.0129(d) 5.20.040 41.0129(e) 5.20.050 41.0129(f) Not codified 41.0129(g) 5.20.060 41.0129(h) 5.20.070 41.0129(i) 5.20.080 41.0129(j) Not codified 41.0129(k) 5.20.090 41.0129(l) 5.20.100 41.0130(a) 5.12.010 41.0130(b) 5.12.020 41.0130(c) 5.12.030 41.0130(d) 5.12.040 41.0130(e) 5.12.050 41.0130(f) 5.12.060 41.0130(g) 5.12.070 41.0130(h) Repealed by 2001-7 41.0131(a) Repealed by 2001-7 41.0131(b) 5.08.020 41.0131(c) 5.08.030 41.0131(d) 5.08.040 41.0131(e) 5.08.050 41.0131(f) 5.08.060 41.0131(g) 5.08.070 41.0131(h) 5.08.080 41.0131(i) 5.08.090 41.0131(j) 5.08.100 41.0131(k) 5.08.110 41.0131(l) 5.08.120 41.0131(m) 5.08.130 41.0131(n) 5.08.140 41.0132(a) Repealed by 2001-7 41.0132(b) 5.36.020 41.0132(c) 5.36.030 41.0132(d) 5.36.040 41.0132(e) 5.36.040 41.0132(f) 5.36.060 41.0132(g) 5.36.070 51.011 12.12.010 51.012 12.12.020 51.013 12.12.030 51.014 12.12.040 51.015 Repealed by 2001-7 51.016 12.12.060 51.018 12.12.070 51.019 12.12.080 51.0110 12.12.090 51.0111 12.12.100 51.0112 12.12.110 51.0113 12.12.120 51.0114 12.12.130 51.0115 12.12.140 51.0116 12.12.150 51.0117 12.12.160 51.0120 12.12.170 51.021 12.24.010 51.022 12.24.020 51.023 12.24.030 51.024 12.24.040 51.025 12.24.050 51.026 12.24.060 51.027 12.24.070 51.028 12.24.080 51.029 12.24.090 51.0210 12.24.100 51.0211 12.24.110 51.0212 12.24.120 51.0213 12.24.130 51.031 12.16.010 51.032 12.16.020 51.033 12.16.030 51.037 12.16.040 51.038 12.16.050 51.039 12.16.060 51.0310 12.16.070 51.041 12.32.010 51.042 12.32.020 51.043 12.32.030 51.044 12.32.040 51.045 12.32.050 51.046 12.32.060 51.048 12.32.070 51.049 12.32.080 51.0410 12.32.090 51.0411 12.32.100 51.0412 12.32.110 51.0413 12.32.120 51.0414 12.32.130 51.0415 12.32.140 51.0416 12.32.150 51.0417 12.32.160 52.013 Repealed by 2001-7 52.015 10.04.020 52.016 10.04.030 52.017 10.04.040 52.018 10.04.050 52.019 10.04.060 52.0110 10.04.070 52.0111 10.04.080 52.0123(a) 10.20.010 52.0123(b) 10.20.020 52.0123(c) 10.20.030 52.0124(a) 10.16.010 52.0124(b) 10.16.020 52.0124(c) 10.16.030 52.0125 10.04.090 52.0126 10.04.100 52.0127(a) 10.12.050 52.0127(b) 10.12.060 52.0127(c) 10.04.110 52.0127(d) 10.04.120 52.0127(e) 10.04.130 52.0127(f) 10.04.140 52.0129(part) 10.16.040 52.0129(part) Repealed by 2001-6 52.0112 10.08.010 52.0113 10.08.020 52.0114 10.08.030 52.0115 10.08.040 52.0116 10.08.050 52.0117 10.08.060 52.0118 10.08.070 52.0119 10.08.080 52.0120 10.08.090 52.0121 10.08.100 52.0122(a) 10.08.110 52.0122(b) 10.08.120 52.0122(c) Not codified 52.0128 10.08.130 55.012 Repealed by 2001-7 53.041 12.36.010 53.042 12.36.020 53.043 12.36.030 81.0101 16.04.010 83.010115 16.08.010 83.010124 16.08.015 83.010130 16.08.020 83.010148 16.08.025 83.010157 16.08.030 83.010163 16.08.035 83.010166 16.08.040 83.010172 16.08.045 83.010175 16.08.050 83.010178 16.08.055 83.010181 16.08.060 83.010184 16.08.065 83.010187 16.08.070 83.010195 16.08.075 83.010210(part) 16.08.790 83.010213 16.08.080 83.010220 16.08.085 83.010230 16.08.090 83.010235 16.08.095 83.010245 16.08.100 83.010250 16.08.105 83.010255 16.08.110 83.010311 16.08.115 83.010314 16.08.120 83.010385 16.08.125 83.010338 16.08.130 83.010342 16.08.135 83.010349 16.08.140 83.010369 16.08.145 83.010372 16.08.150 83.010375 16.08.155 83.010390 16.08.160 83.010405 16.08.165 83.010412 16.08.170 83.010432 16.08.175 83.010438 16.08.180 83.010441 16.08.185 83.010484 16.08.190 83.010487 16.08.195 83.010490 16.08.200 83.010493 16.08.205 83.010525 16.08.210 83.010550 16.08.215 83.010605 16.08.220 83.010610 16.08.225 83.010615 16.08.230 83.010625 16.08.235 83.010677 16.08.240 83.010680 16.08.245 83.010705 16.08.250 83.010710 16.08.225 83.010715 16.08.260 83.010720 16.08.265 83.010740 16.08.270 83.010760 16.08.275 83.010815 16.08.280 83.010825 16.08.285 83.010830 16.08.290 83.010835 16.08.295 83.010840 16.08.300 83.010845 16.08.305 83.010865 16.08.310 83.010850 16.08.315 83.010855 16.08.320 83.010860 16.08.325 83.010875 16.08.330 83.010910 16.08.335 83.010930 16.08.340 83.010935 16.08.345 83.011010 16.08.350 83.011105 16.08.355 83.011110 16.08.360 83.011205 16.08.365 83.011207 16.08.370 83.011220 16.08.375 83.011222 16.08.380 83.011226 16.08.385 83.011230 16.08.390 83.011232 16.08.395 83.011250 16.08.405 83.011252 16.08.410 83.011264 16.08.415 83.011266 16.08.420 83.011268 16.08.425 83.011270 16.08.430 83.011272 16.08.435 83.011274 16.08.440 83.011276 16.08.445 83.011278 16.08.450 83.011280 16.08.455 83.011282 16.08.500 83.011284 16.08.460 83.011286 16.08.465 83.011288 16.08.470 83.011290 16.08.475 83.011291 16.08.480 83.011292 16.08.485 83.011294 16.08.490 83.011296 16.08.495 83.011305 16.08.505 83.011326 16.08.515 83.011330 16.08.520 83.011334 16.08.525 83.011358 16.08.535 83.011366 16.08.540 83.011420 16.08.545 83.011425 16.08.550 83.011430 16.08.560 83.011435 16.08.555 83.011510 16.08.565 83.011515 16.08.570 83.011520 16.08.575 83.011525 16.08.580 83.011530 16.08.585 83.011545 16.08.590 83.011555 16.08.595 83.011570 16.08.600 83.011605 16.08.605 83.011610 16.08.610 83.011613 16.08.615 83.011615 16.08.620 83.011620 16.08.625 83.011625 16.08.630 83.011630 16.08.635 83.011635 16.08.640 83.011640 16.08.645 83.011645 16.08.650 83.011650 16.08.655 83.011675 16.08.660 83.011670 16.08.665 83.011680 16.08.670 83.011685 16.08.675 83.011690 16.08.680 83.011695 16.08.685 83.011805 16.08.690 83.011810 16.08.695 83.011820 16.08.700 83.011840 16.08.705 83.011860 16.08.710 83.011904 16.08.715 83.011906 16.08.720 83.011908 16.08.725 83.011916 16.08.730 83.011916 16.08.735 83.011920 16.08.740 83.011923 16.08.745 83.011924 16.08.750 83.011956 16.08.755 83.011957 16.08.760 83.011961 16.08.765 83.011965 16.08.770 83.011967 16.08.775 83.011970 16.08.780 83.011971 16.08.785 83.011977 16.08.790 83.011980 16.08.795 83.011982 16.08.800 83.011983 16.08.805 83.011985 16.08.810 83.011987 16.08.815 83.011989 16.08.820 83.011995 16.08.830 83.011996 16.08.825 83.011997 16.08.835 83.012004 16.08.840 83.012020 16.08.845 83.012048 16.08.850 83.012052 16.08.855 83.012060 16.08.860 83.012130 16.08.865 83.012240 16.08.870 83.012220 16.08.875 83.012305 16.08.880 83.012307 16.08.885 83.012510 16.08.895 83.012515 16.08.900 83.012520 16.08.915 83.012525 16.08.905 83.012530 16.08.910 83.012610 16.08.920 83.012620 16.08.925 83.012700 16.08.930 84.0330(A) Repealed by 2001-3 84.0330(B) Repealed by 2001-3 84.0330(C)(1) Repealed by 2001-3 84.0330(C)(2) Repealed by 2001-3 84.0330(C)(3) Repealed by 2001-3 84.0330(C)(4) Repealed by 2001-3 84.0330(C)(5) Repealed by 2001-3 84.0330(C)(6) Repealed by 2001-3 84.0330(C)(7) Not codified 84.0330(D) Repealed by 2001-3 84.0331 Repealed by 2001-3 84.0332 Repealed by 2001-3 84.0333 Repealed by 2001-3 84.0334 Repealed by 2001-3 86.0105 16.16.010 86.0110 16.16.020 86.0115 16.16.025 86.0120 16.16.030 86.0125 16.16.035 86.0130 16.16.040 86.0201(a) 16.16.075 86.0201(b) 16.16.080 86.0201(c) 16.16.085 86.0201(d) 16.16.090 86.02019(e) 16.16.095 86.0201(f) 16.16.100 86.0201(g) 16.16.105 86.0201(h) 16.16.110 86.0201(i) 16.16.115 86.0201(j) 16.16.120 86.0201(k) 16.16.125 86.0201(l) 16.16.130 86.0215(part) 16.16.140 86.0215(a) 16.16.145 86.0215(b) 16.16.150 86.0215(c) 16.16.155 86.0215(d) 16.16.160 86.0215(e) 16.16.165 86.0215(f) 16.16.170 86.0215(g) 16.16.175 86.0215(h) 16.16.180 86.0215(i) 16.16.185 86.0215(j) 16.16.190 86.0215(k) 16.16.195 86.0215(l) 16.16.200 86.0215(m) 16.16.205 86.0220(part) 16.16.210 86.0220(a) 16.16.215 86.0220(b) 16.16.220 86.0220(c) 16.16.225 86.0220(d) 16.16.230 86.0220(e) 16.16.235 86.0220(f) 16.16.240 86.0220(g) 16.16.245 86.0220(h) 16.16.250 86.0220(i) 16.16.255 86.0220(j) 16.16.260 86.0220(k) 16.16.265 86.0220(l) 16.16.270 86.0225(a) 16.16.275 86.0225(b) 16.16.280 86.0225(c) 16.16.285 86.0225(d) 16.16.290 86.0225(e) 16.16.295 86.0225(f) Not codified 86.0225(g) 16.16.300 86.0230(a) 16.16.310 86.0230(b) 16.16.315 86.0230(c) 16.16.320 86.0230(d) 16.16.325 86.0230(e) 16.16.330 86.0230(f) 16.16.335 86.0230(g) 16.16.340 86.0240(a) 16.16.345 86.0240(b) 16.16.350 86.0240(c) 16.16.355 86.0240(d) 16.16.360 86.0240(c) 16.16.365 86.0240(f) 16.16.370 86.0240(g) 16.16.375 86.0240(h) 16.16.380 86.0255(a) 16.16.385 86.0255(b) 16.16.390 86.0255(c) 16.16.400 86.0255(d) 16.16.405 86.0255(e) 16.16.410 86.0255(f) 16.16.415 86.0255(g) 16.16.420 86.0255(h) 16.16.425 86.0255(j) 16.16.430 86.0255(j) 16.16.435 86.0255(k) 16.16.440 86.0255(l) 16.16.445 86.0255(m) 16.16.450 86.0255(n) 16.16.455 86.0325 Repealed by 2001-3 87.0101 16.04.020 87.0105 16.04.030 87.0201 17.48.010 87.0301 17.48.020 87.0305 17.48.030 87.0315 17.48.040 87.0320 17.48.050 87.0325 17.48.060 87.0401 16.20.055 87.0405 16.20.060 87.0501 16.20.010 87.0505 16.20.015 87.0510 16.20.020 87.0601 16.20.025 87.0606 16.20.030 87.0701(a) 16.20.035 87.0701(b) 16.20.040 87.0701(c) 16.20.045 87.0701(d) 16.20.050 87.0801 16.20.065 87.0805 16.20.070 87.0810 16.20.075 87.0901 16.16.045 87.0905 16.16.050 87.0910 16.16.055 87.1101 16.20.165 87.1105 16.20.170 87.1110 16.20.175 87.1115 16.20.180 87.1120 16.20.185 87.1305 16.20.125 87.1310 16.20.130 87.1320 16.20.135 87.1330 16.20.140 87.1335 16.20.145 87.1401 16.20.150 87.1901 16.16.060 87.2120 16.16.065 87.2125 16.16.070 88.0101 17.04.010 88.0105 17.04.020 88.0201 17.08.010 88.0205 17.08.020 88.0210 17.08.030 88.0220 17.08.040 88.0225 17.08.050 88.0230 17.08.060 88.0301 17.12.010 88.0305 17.12.020 88.0310 17.12.030 88.0320 17.12.040 88.0325 17.12.050 88.0330 17.12.060 88.0401 17.16.010 88.0405 17.16.020 88.0410 17.16.030 88.0415 17.16.040 88.0501 17.20.010 88.0505 17.20.020 88.0510 17.20.040 88.0515 17.20.050 88.0601 17.24.010 88.0605 17.24.020 88.0610 17.24.030 88.0701 17.28.010 88.0705 17.28.020 88.0710 17.28.030 88.0801 17.32.010 88.0805 17.32.020 88.0810 17.32.030 88.0815 17.32.040 88.0820 17.32.050 88.0825 17.32.060 88.0830 17.32.070 88.0835 17.32.080 88.0840 17.32.090 88.0845 17.32.100 88.0901 17.36.010 88.0905 17.36.020 88.0910 17.36.030 88.0915 17.36.040 88.1001 17.40.010 88.1005 17.40.020 88.1015 17.40.030 88.1101 17.04.030 88.1105 17.04.040 88.1115 17.04.050 88.1120 17.04.060 88.1125 17.04.070 88.1201 17.04.080 88.1205 17.04.090 88.1301 17.44.010 88.1305 17.44.020 88.1310 17.44.030 88.1315 17.44.040 89.0101 16.28.010 89.0105 16.28.020 89.0110 16.28.030 89.0115 16.28.040 89.0120 16.28.050 89.0130 16.28.060 89.0135 16.28.070 89.0201 16.32.010 89.0205 16.32.020 89.0210 16.32.030 89.0215 16.32.040 89.0220 16.32.050 89.0401 Repealed by 266 89.0405 Repealed by 266 89.0410 Repealed by 266 89.0415 Repealed by 266 811.0101 16.24.010 811.0105 16.24.020 811.0110 16.24.030 811.0115 16.24.040 811.0120 16.24.050 811.0125 16.24.060 811.0130 16.24.070 811.0135 16.24.080 811.0140 16.24.090 811.0145 16.24.100 811.0401 16.24.110 811.0405 16.24.120 811.0410 16.24.130 811.0415 16.24.140 811.0420 16.24.150 811.0425 16.24.160 811.0435 16.24.180 811.0501 16.24.190 811.0505 16.24.200 811.0510 16.24.210  
ORDINANCE LIST AND DISPOSITION TABLE 
    Beginning with Supplement No. 7, this table will be replaced with the "Code Comparative Table and Disposition List." 
Ordinance 
Number Disposition 1 Adopts San Bernardino County Code (Expired) 2 City manager (2.08) 3 Special gas tax street improvement fund (3.28) 4 City council meetings (Repealed by 250) 5 Transfers assessment and tax collection duties to county (3.04) 6 Claims and demands against the city (3.24) 7 Documentary stamp tax (3.12) 8 Sales and use tax (3.16) 9 City council salaries (2.04) 10 Planning commission and planning agency (Repealed by 250) 11 Franchise grant to Southern California Edison Company, electricity (Special) 12 Amends the development code (Repealed by 250) 13 Amends development code (Repealed by 138) 14 Personnel system (2.24) 15 Dedication of land and/or payment of fees for parks and recreation purposes (17.52) 16 Rezone (Special) 17 Adopts San Bernardino County Code (Repealed by 250) 18 Adopts San Bernardino County Code (Repealed by 250) 19 Declares need for a community redevelopment agency (2.20) 20 Authorizes contract with California Public Employees' Retirement System (Special) 21 Regulates non-profit car washes (5.60) 22 Rezone (Special) 23 Rezone (Special) 24 Rezone (Special) 25 Rezone (Special) 26 Rezone (Special) 27 Rezone (Special) 28 Rezone (Special) 29 Rezone (Special) 30 Rezone (Special) 31 Rezone (Special) 32 Franchise grant to Southwest Gas Corporation (Special) 33 Amends § 87.0215 of county development code (Repealed by 164) 34 Rezone (Special) 35 Rezone (Special) 36 Rezone (Special) 37 Rezone (Special) 38 General municipal elections (1.08) 39 Amends § 86.0245(k) of development code (Repealed by 250) 40 Rezone (Special) 41 Sanitation and refuse disposal fees (Repealed by 250) 42 Prezone (Special) 43 Amends §§ 87.0701(c) (clear sight triangles) and 87.0810(13) (projections into yards) of development code (16.20) 44 Rezone (Special) 45 Emergency organizations and functions (2.20) 46 Amends § 33.039 and other language of development code (Repealed by 250) 47 Animal control and code enforcement (2.12) 48 Display of harmful matter (5.52) 49 Garage sales (5.56) 50 Amends §§ 84.0330-84.0334 of development code, flood hazard protection (Repealed by 2001-3) 51 Rezone (Special) 52 Rezone (Special) 53 Rezone (Special) 54 Amends Ord. 13, development code (Repealed by 138) 55 Amends § 51.0417 of county code, moving permits (12.20) 56 Garbage and refuse collection (8.04) 57 Rezone (Special) 58 Rezone (Special) 59 Rezone (Special) 60 Repeals and replaces § 22.011 of county code, discharge of weapons within city limits (9.12) 61 Rezone (Special) 62 Rezone (Special) 63 Rezone (Special) 64 Rezone (Special) 65 Mobile Home Parks Act, enforcement (Repealed by 2008-10) 66 Adopts interim sign regulations (Expired) 67 Graffiti (Repealed by 173) 68 Rezone (Special) 69 Rezone (Special) 70 Rezone (Special) 71 Approves development agreement (Special) 72 Rezone (Special) 73 Extends effective date of Ord. 66, interim sign regulations (Expired) 74 Adopts interim adult-oriented businesses (Expired) 75 Amends § 33.039 by substituting city office and officials for county office officials in the development code (8.16, 15.20, 16.08, 16.16, 16.24, 16.28, 16.32, 17.04, 17.48) 76 Amends § 87.1220(e)(2) (sign regulations), development code (Repealed by 250) 77 Adds Ch. 7 to Division 10 of T.8 (historical resources designation, protection) of the development code (16.20) 78 Adopts Rancho Las Flores Specific Plan (Special) 79 Approves development agreement (Special) 80 Amends § 86.0201 (R-1 district accessory uses) of development code (16.16) 81 Franchise grant for cable television systems (Not codified) 82 Adopts Uniform Fire Code (Repealed by 235) 83 Rezone (Special) 84 Adds §§ 83.011306, 83.011348, (definitions); §§ 83.2015(d), 82.2030(f) to development code; amends §§ 83.010118, 83.010850, (definitions); §§ 86.0225 (A-1 district permitted uses), 86.230 (A-2 district permitted uses), 86.0235 (not codified), 86.02115 (not codified), 86.0301(c) (not codified) and 87.1601 (single- family residential construction standards) of development code (16.08, 16.16, 16.20) 85 Extends effective date of Ord. 74, adult-oriented businesses (Expired) 86 Rezone (Special) 87 Rezone (Special) 88 Filming and video taping permit process (12.28) 89 Construction site maintenance and trash containment (Repealed by 250) 90 Rezone (Special) 91 Rezone (Special) 92 Approves development agreement (Repealed by 270) 93 Rezone (Special) 94 Rezone (Special) 95 Rezone (Special) 96 Hazardous waste management siting requirements (8.08) 97 Rezone (Special) 98 Rezone (Special) 99 Weed and rubbish abatement; repeals Ch. 3 of Division 3 of T. 2 of county code (Repealed by 2001-6) 100 Hazardous materials release response plans and inventory (8.08) 101 Underground storage of hazardous materials (8.08) 102 Speed limits (Expired) 103 Extends effective date of Ord. 85, adult-oriented businesses (Expired) 104 Adds Ch. 61.20 to county code, penalties and remedies; repeals and replaces Title 6 of county code, building regulations (Repealed by 166) 105 Rezone (Special) 106 Speed limits (10.20) 107 Fee and service charge revenue/cost comparison system (3.20) 108 Rezone (Special) 109 Not adopted 110 Rezone (Special) 111 Prezone (Special) 112 Amends § 87.1220(d)(2)(B), primary signs (Repealed by 250) 113 Planning commission and planning agency (Repealed by 250) 114 Rezone (Special) 115 Rezone (Special) 116 Rezone (Special) 117 Rezone (Special) 118 Rezone (Special) 119 Rezone (Special) 120 Special tax levy (Special) 121 Rezone (Special) 122 Rezone (Special) 123 Speed limits (10.20) 124 Rezone (Special) 125 Smoking pollution control; repeals § 31.0215 of county code (16.16) 126 Interim zone districts (16.16) 127 Rezone (Special) 128 Design standards for improved equestrian trails (Not codified) 129 Sexually-oriented businesses (5.48) 130 Adopts Ch. 1000, bikeway planning and design, of the Highway Design Manual (Not codified) 131 Rezone (Special) 132 Rezone (Special) 133 Procedures for land use and planning permits (Repealed by 250) 134 Rezone (Special) 135 Standards for vehicular and pedestrian circulation (12.08, 16.20) 136 Rezone (Special) 137 Rezone (Special) 138 Subdivision applications; repeals Ords. 13 and 54 (Repealed by 250) 139 Adopts county Ord. 3349, vehicle abatement and removal of vehicles (8.16) 140 Rezone (Special) 141 Amends development code §§ 86.0255(b)(2)(A) and 87.1220; repeals development code §§ 86.0250(b)(2)(A), 86.0255(o), 86.0265(c)(11), 86.0275(c)(8), (k)(2) and (3) (16.04, 16.36) 142 Rezone (Special) 143 Fair housing (Not codified) 144 Amends Ord. 56, § 27, garbage and refuse collection (8.04) 145 Rezone (Special) 146 Planning commission and planning agency (2.16) 147 Rezone (Special) 148 Adds §§ 83.011249, 83.011909 (definitions) and § 87.2103 to development code; § 87.2101 of development code; repeals Ord. 133, § 2 of Art. 10 and renumbers subsequent sections (16.08) 149 Density bonus program (16.20) 150 Speed limits (10.20) 151 Rezone (Special) 152 Rezone (Special) 153 Rezone (Special) 154 Rezone (Special) 155 Rezone (Special) 156 Establishes procedures for implementation of CEQA (Repealed by 250) 157 Rezone (Special) 158 Rezone (Special) 159 Rezone (Special) 160 Rezone (Special) 161 Rezone (Special) 162 Rezone (Special) 163 Rezone (Special) 164 Amends § 86.0225(d)(1) and (2) of development code; repeals Ord. 33 (16.16) 165 Standards for small lot subdivisions in R-1 district (16.16) 166 Adds Ch. 61.01; repeals and replaces T. 6 of county code, building regulations (Repealed by 250) 167 Rezone (Special) 168 Rezone (Special) 169 Approves development agreement (Special) 170 Approves development agreement (Special) 171 Rezone (Special) 172 Speed limits (10.20) 173 Graffiti; repeals Ord. 67 (9.08) 174 Rezone (Special) 175 Rezone (Special) 176 Rezone (Special) 177 City council meetings (2.04) 178 Adopts redevelopment plan (Special) 179 Business licenses; repeals T. 4 of county code (Repealed by 197) 180 Development impact fee (Repealed by 2001-11) 181 Purchasing system (Repealed by 222) 182 Amends Ord. 135, § 2, parking standards (16.20) 183 Sign regulations (16.36) 184 Amends §§ 52.013, 52.0129 of Ch. 1 of Division 2 of T. 5 of county code; repeals § 52.014 (traffic regulations) (10.08, 10.12, 10.16) 185 Approves development agreement (Special) 186 Speed limits (10.20) 187 Amends § 41.0126 of Ord. 179, business licenses (Repealed by 197) 188 Uniform local sales and use tax (Repealed by 250) 189 Adopts redevelopment plan (Special) 190 Trip reduction and travel demand management program (10.24) 191 Speed limits (10.20) 192 Land use and planning permits (16.12) 193 Standards for commercial and industrial zone districts (16.12, 16.16) 194 Approves development agreement (Special) 195 Approves housing agreement (Not approved) 196 Rezone (Not approved) 197 Business licenses; repeals Ord. 179 (5.04, 5.08, 5.12, 5.16, 5.20, 5.24, 5.28, 5.32, 5.36, 5.40) 198 Fire code; repeals Ord. 82 (Not approved) 199 Approves development agreement (Special) 200 Rezone (Special) 201 Mineral land classifications of concrete aggregate resources in the conservation element (Special) 202 Amends Ord. 165 (standards for small lot subdivisions), § 86.0201 (R-1 district accessory uses), § 86.0215 (R-3 district general uses), 86.0220 (RR district general uses), 86.02225 (A-1 district permitted uses) of development code (16.04, 16.16) 203 Underground utility districts (13.04) 204 Swimming pools, spas and hot tubs (Expired) 205 Swimming pools, spas and hot tubs (15.08) 206 Time limitations for constituent portions of project areas nos. 1 and 2 (Special) 207 Amends Ord. 146, § 5, planning commission and planning agency (Repealed by 2005-01) 208 Amends §§ 86.0201 (R-1 district, accessory uses) and 87.1901 (additional uses in zoning) of development code (16.16) 209 Amends § 87.09.030, political sign regulations (16.36) 210 Amends § 41.0105 of Ch. 1 of T. 4 of county code, business licenses (5.04) 211 Specific plan (Tabled) 212 Proposed development agreement (Tabled) 213 Amends Ord. 192, §§ 83.09.010-83.09.080, land use and planning permits (16.12) 214 Approves specific plan (Special) 215 Approves proposed development agreement (Special) 216 Authorized amendment to contract with California Public Employees' Retirement System (Special) 217 Rezone (Special) 218 Repeals § 83.10.030 of Ord. 192; amends §§ 41.0107 and adds § 41.0133 to Ord. 197, business licenses (5.04, 5.44) 219 Rezone (Special) 220 Rezone (Special) 221 Rezone (Special) 222 Establishes purchasing system; repeals Ord. 181 (3.08) 223 Amends § 13 of Ord. 178, redevelopment plan (Repealed by 282) 224 Repeals and replaces San Bernardino County Code Chapter 61.02 Uniform Administrative Code (Repealed by 280) 225 Adopts Uniform Building Code, Uniform Mechanical Code, Uniform Plumbing Code, Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings, National Electrical Code; repeals San Bernardino County Code Title 6, Building Regulations (Repealed by 280) 226 Adds new Chapter 61.11 to San Bernardino County Code Title 6, construction site sanitation; repeals and replaces San Bernardino County Code Title 6 Chapters 61.09 and 61.10, street naming, numbering, construction site maintenance (12.04, 15.12, 15.16) 227 Rezone (Special) 228 Adds hillside development regulations; amends § 89.0215(A) (planned developments) and repeals Division 9 Chapter 3 (modified subdivisions) of San Bernardino County Code (16.40) 229 Amends Ord. 225, uniform codes (Repealed by 280) 230 Amends Ord. 225, uniform codes (Repealed by 280) 231 Amends § 88.0507, perimeter walls (17.20) 232 Amends Ord. 149 Art. 1 § 4 and Art. 3 § 1, density bonus program (16.20) 233 Establishes speed limits (10.20) 234 Rezone (Special) 235 Ratifies Fire Protection District Ord. 8, Fire Code; repeals Ord. 82 (15.04) 236 (Not adopted) 237 Amends §§ 86.0201(b) (R-1 district accessory uses), 86.0220(c) (RR district accessory uses), 86.0225(b) (15) (A-1 district permitted uses), 86.0230(b) (A-2 district permitted uses) and 87.0810(8), (11) (clear sign triangles) and § 3 of Ord. 135, (parking regulations) (16.16, 16.20) 238 Adds commercial vehicle parking regulations (16.20) 239 Adopts real property preservation and maintenance provisions (Repealed by 2001-6) 240 Establishes overhead allocation provisions for fire protection district fund (Not codified) 241 Establishes in lieu franchise fee for water district (Not codified) 242 Establishes general and administrative indirect cost allocation plan (Not codified) 243 (Number not used) 244 Amends development agreement (Special) 245 Amends contract with public employees' retirement system (Special) 246 Amends § 41.0111, business licenses generally (5.04) 247 Amends development agreement (Special) 248 Establishes daytime curfew applicable to minors (Repealed by voters) 249 Rezone (Special) 250 Code adoption; amends §§ 4 and 5 of Ord. 6, § 4 of Ord. 7, § 2(a) of Ord. 43, § 6(A)(6)(a) of Ord. 45, § 2 (810.0735) of Ord. 77, §§ 5 and 6 of Ord. 84, §§ 2(a), 3(h) and 4(a) of Ord. 106, Art. 1 §§ 3(g) and 3(h) and Art. 3 § 2 of Ord. 135, Exh. A § 2 of Ord. 165 and Exh. A §§ 41.0107, 41.0124, 41.0125, 41.0131 and 451.0132 of Ord. 197; repeals §§ 7.13 and 7.14 of Ord. 2, § 9 of Ord. 21, § 2 of Ord. 47, § 5 of Ord. 107, §§ 4 and 5 of Ord. 141 and §§ 3, 4 and 5 of Ord. 148; repeals Ords. 4, 10, 12, 17, 18, 39, 41, 46, 76, 89, 112, 113, 133, 138, 156, 166 and 188 (1.04, 2.20, 3.12, 3.24, 5.04, 5.08, 5.16, 5.32, 5.36, 16.16, 16.20) 251 Minimum floor area requirements for single-family residences; repeals § 87.1601(a)(5) of Ord. 84 [§ 16.20.160(A)(5)], development code (16.20) 252 (Not adopted) 253 Amends development agreement (Special) 254 City assumes responsibility for the implementation of the Unified Hazardous Waste and Materials Management Regulations Program (Special) 255 City assumes responsibility for the implementation of the Unified Hazardous Waste and Materials Management Regulations Program (Special) 256 Speed limits (10.20) 257 Development standards for adult entertainment businesses (Expired) 258 Extends Ord. 257 (Expired) 259 Cost recovery system for booking fee collections (3.32) 260 Adds Ch. 38.00 [8.32], public nuisances; repeals §§ 33.01-33.0311 of the San Bernardino County Code and those parts of § 4 of Ord. 225 adopting the 1994 editions of the Uniform Housing Code and the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings (8.32) 261 Amends §§ 37.02, 37.03 and 37.06 (i) [8.24.020, 8.24.030 and 8.24.060(I)], real property preservation and maintenance (Repealed by 2001-6) 262 Adopts specific plan (Special) 263 Approves proposed development agreement (Special) 264 Amends § 2.12.010(B), office of code enforcement and animal control (2.12) 265 (Not adopted) 266 Repeals and replaces Art. IX of Ch. 16.20, development standards for adult entertainment businesses (16.20) 267 Rezone (Special) 268 Amends § 2.08.090(A), city manager (2.08) 269 Rezone (Special) 270 Repeals Ord. 92 (Repealer) 271 Adds Ch. 3.10, uniform transient occupancy tax (3.10) 272 Adds Ch. 9.14, regulation of skateboards, roller skates, inline skates and similar devices on posted property (9.14) 273 Rezone (Special) 274 Amends public employees' retirement system contract (Special) 275 Rezone (Special) 276 Amends Ch. 16.36, sign regulations (16.36) 277 Rezone (Special) 278 Amends §§ 16.20.015, 16.16.470, 16.16.505, 16.16.550 and 16.16.580, building setbacks (16.16, 16.20) 279 Urgency ordinance repealing and replacing §§ 15.04.010-15.04.400, uniform codes; repeals §§ 15.04.410-15.04.430 (Expired) 280 Repeals and replaces §§ 15.04.010-15.04.400, uniform codes; repeals §§ 15.04.410-15.04.430 (15.04) 281 Amends redevelopment plan (Special) 282 Amends redevelopment plan; repeals Ord. 223 and § 13 of Ord. 178 (Special) 283 Prima facie speed limit (10.20) 284 Adds Ch. 5.64, telecommunications regulations (5.64) 285 Establishes forty-five mile per hour speed limit for specific street [§ 10.20.070] (10.20) 286 Repeals and replaces §§ 8.32.010-8.32.040, public nuisances (8.32) 287 Authorizes amendment to contract with Public Employees' Retirement System (Special) 288 Amends § 16.12.220(7) and Ch. 16.36, sign regulations (16.12, 16.36) 289 Adopts interim zoning regulations regarding wireless communication facilities (Expired) 290 Adds § 16.16.062, wireless communications facilities (16.16) 291 Amends §§ 8.04.020-8.04.060, 8.04.090, 8.04.100, 8.04.120, 8.04.130, 8.04.260, 8.04.280-8.04.300, garbage and refuse (8.04) 292 Adopts interim zoning regulations regarding off-site real estate signs (Expired) 293 Amends § 16.36.060, off-site signs (16.36) 294 Extends interim zoning ordinance regulating off-site real estate signs (Not adopted) 295 Amends §§ 2.08.050 and 2.24.040, city manager; personnel system (2.08, 2.24) 296 Amends Ch. 16.36, signs (16.36) 297 Adopts interim zoning regulating residential accessory structures (Expired) 298 Amends § 2.08.20 [§ 2.08.020], city manager (2.08) 299 Adds § 16.08.011; amends §§ 16.08.275, 16.12.360, 16.16.080 and 16.20.090, development code (16.08, 16.12, 16.16, 16.20) 2001-1 Extends interim zoning ordinance regulating residential accessory structures (Special) 2001-2 Adds § 8.32.090, animal noise nuisance (8.32) 2001-3 Repeals and replaces Ch. 8.28, flood hazard protection regulations (8.28) 2001-4 Adds §§ 3.08.035, 3.08.055, 3.08.065, 3.08.070(A)(10), 3.08.070(B)(5)-3.08.070(B)(8) and 3.08.095, purchasing system; amends §§ 1.04.050 (definitions), 3.08.070(A)(1), 3.08.070(A)(4) and 3.08.080(G) (purchasing system) (1.04, 3.08) 2001-5 (Number not used) 2001-6 Repeals and replaces Ch. 1.12, and repeals §§ 6.04.180, 6.04.190, 6.08.230, 6.16.040-6.16.100, 6.20.050, 6.20.060, 8.12.100, 8.12.110, 8.16.100, 8.16.110, 8.16.190, 8.16.200, 10.20.090, 15.04.020, 15.04.060, 15.04.070, 15.12.070 and Chs. 8.20 and 8.24, municipal code enforcement (1.12) 2001-7 Amends § 1.04.050(A), and repeals §§ 2.20.020, 3.08.020, 3.10.020(E), 3.32.030, 5.04.020, 5.08.010, 5.12.080, 5.20.010, 5.36.010, 5.48.020, 5.52.010, 5.56.010, 5.60.101 [5.60.010], 5.64.500, 6.04.010, 6.12.010, 6.20.010, 8.04.020, 8.12.020, 8.16.020, 8.20.030, 8.24.020, 8.28.140, 9.08.020, 10.04.010, 12.12.050, 12.28.020, 13.04.010, 15.12.010 and 15.16.020, definitions (1.04, 3.10) 2001-8 Rezone (Special) 2001-09 Amends Ch. 16.20, setback guidelines (16.20) 2001-10 (Number not used) 2001-11 Adds § 16.12.076, repeals Ord. 180, development fees (16.12) 2001-12 (Number not used) 2001-13 Adds §§ 16.08.007, 16.20.385-16.20.405, amends §§ 16.08.005, 16.12.220, 16.12.360, 16.16.080, 16.16.280, development (16.08, 16.12, 16.16, 16.20) 2001-14 Adds §§ 16.20.410-16.20.425, amends § 16.20.075, development (16.20) 2001-15 Repeals §§ 10.20.040-10.20.080 speed limits (Repealer) 2001-16 Rezone (Special) 2001-17 Rezone (Special) 2001-18 (Number not used) 2002-01 Rezone (Special) 2002-02 Rezone (Special) 2002-03 Rezone (Special) 2002-04 Rezone (Special) 2002-05 Rezone (Special) 2002-06 Rezone (Special) 2002-07 Amends § 16.20.125, noise standards (16.20) 2002-08 Amends §§ 1.04.050, 1.12.130; repeals and replaces T. 6, animals (1.04, 1.12, 6.04, 6.08, 6.12, 6.16, 6.20) 2002-09 Adds §§ 16.20.400-16.20.510 [16.20.430-16.20.540], development (16.20) 2002-10 Rezone (Special) 2002-11 Amends §§ 16.12.370-16.12.390, special events and temporary uses (16.12) 2002-12 Adds § 17.48.070, lot requirements (17.48) 2002-13 Repeals Ch. 15.08; repeals and replaces Ch. 15.04, uniform codes (Repealed by 2007-16) 2002-14 Amends §§ 16.12.315-16.12.340, nonconforming uses and structures (16.12) 2003-01 Establishes truck routes program (10.25) 2003-02 Rezone (Special) 2003-03 (Not adopted) 2003-04 Rezone (Special) 2003-05 Amends §§ 16.12.055, 16.12.220, 16.12.360 and 16.12.415; repeals § 16.12.420, permits and procedures (16.12) 2003-06 Rezone (Special) 2003-07 Rezone (Special) 2003-08 (Not used) 2003-09 Rezone (Special) 2003-10 Rezone (Special) 2003-11 Rezone (Special) 2003-12 Rezone (Special) 2003-13 Rezone (Special) 2003-14 Rezone (Special) 2003-15 Amends Ch. 17.52, dedication of land and/or payment of fees for parks and recreation purposes (17.52) 2004-01 Rezone (Special) 2004-02 Rezone (Special) 2004-03 Rezone (Special) 2004-04 Rezone (Special) 2004-05 Amends §§ 16.16.465 and 16.16.480, zone districts (16.16) 2004-06 (Not used) 2004-07 Rezone (Special) 2004-08 Rezone (Special) 2004-09 Rezone (Special) 2004-10 Rezone (Special) 2004-11 Rezone (Special) 2004-12 Rezone (Special) 2004-13 Rezone (Special) 2004-14 Rezone (Special) 2004-15 Rezone (Special) 2004-16 (Not adopted) 2004-17 Amends Ch. 5.20, massage parlor facilities (5.20) 2004-18 (Not passed) 2004-19 Rezone (Special) 2004-20 Amends Ch. 5.20, massage parlor facilities (5.20) 2004-21 Adds § 8.32.022; amends §§ 1.12.130 and 10.12.040, nuisance vehicles and enforcement (1.12, 8.32, 10.12) 2004-22 Rezone (Special) 2004-23 Rezone (Special) 2004-24 Rezone (Special) 2004-25 Rezone (Special) 2004-26 Rezone (Special) 2004-27 Rezone (Special) 2004-28 Rezone (Special) 2005-01 Repeals and replaces §§ 2.16.030 and 2.16.050-2.16.070, planning commission (2.16) 2005-02 Rezone (Special) 2005-03 Rezone (Special) 2005-04 (Number not used) 2005-05 Special tax levy (Special) 2005-06 (Number not used) 2005-07 Rezone (Special) 2005-08 Adds § 2.24.140, personnel system (2.24) 2005-09 Rezone (Special) 2005-10 Rezone (Special) 2005-11 Rezone (Special) 2005-12 Adds §§ 16.08.513, 16.16.073 medical marijuana dispensary 2005-13 Rezone (Special) 2005-14 Rezone (Special) 2005-15 Rezone (Special) 2005-16 (Not adopted) 2005-17 Rezone (Special) 2005-18 Rezone (Special) 2005-19 Rezone (Special) 2005-20 Rezone (Special) 2005-21 Rezone (Special) 2005-22 Rezone (Special) 2005-23 (Pending) 2005-24 (Pending) 2005-25 Rezone (Special) 2005-26 Adds Ch. 8.34, food establishments (8.34) 2005-27 Rezone (Special) 2005-28 Rezone (Special) 2005-29 Rezone (Special) 2005-30 Rezone (Special) 2005-31 Rezone (Special) 2005-32 Rezone (Special) 2005-33 Rezone (Special) 2005-34 Rezone (Special) 2005-35 Rezone (Special) 2005-36 Rezone (Special) 2005-37 Rezone (Special) 2006-01 Adopts redevelopment plan amendment (Special) 2006-02 Approves and adopts redevelopment plan amendment (Special) 2006-03 Rezone (Special) 2006-04 Rezone (Special) 2006-05 Rezone (Special) 2006-06 Rezone (Special) 2006-07 (Number not used) 2006-08 (Number not used) 2006-09 Rezone (Special) 2006-10 Rezone (Special) 2006-11 (Not approved) 2006-12 Rezone (Special) 2006-13 (Not adopted) 2006-14 (Not adopted) 2006-15 Rezone (Special) 2006-16 Rezone (Special) 2006-17 Amends § 3.10.030, uniform transient occupancy tax (3.10) 2006-18 Adds Art. XII of Ch. 16.20; repeals §§ 16.16.505 and 16.16.580, development code general regulations (16.20) 2006-19 Amends Ch. 17.52, dedication of land and/or payment of fees for parks and recreation purposes (17.52) 2006-20 (Number not used) 2006-21 (Number not used) 2006-22 Rezone (Special) 2006-23 Amends § 16.20.075, development code general regulations (16.20) 2006-24 Rezone (Special) 2006-25 Rezone (Special) 2006-26 Rezone (Special) 2007-01 Rezone (Special) 2007-02 Rezone (Special) 2007-03 Rezone (Special) 2007-04 Rezone (Special) 2007-05 Amends Ch. 16.36 [§§ 16.36.040 and 16.36.090], sign regulations (16.36) 2007-06 Rental housing certification (5.06) 2007-07 Adds Ch. 9.16 and § 16.16.072; amends § 16.16.075, loitering and zone districts (9.16, 16.16) 2007-08 Eminent domain program of redevelopment agency (Special) 2007-09 Eminent domain program of redevelopment agency (Special) 2007-10 Rezone (Special) 2007-11 Rezone (Special) 2007-12 Amends § 1.12.130, municipal code enforcement (1.12) 2007-13 (Not adopted) 2007-14 Rezone (Special) 2007-15 Adds § 16.20.077; amends §§ 16.20.080 and 16.20.085, development code general regulations (16.20) 2007-16 Adds Ch. 15.06; repeals and replaces Ch. 15.04, buildings and construction (15.04, 15.06) 2007-17 (Number not used) 2007-18 General plan amendment (Not codified) 2007-19 Amends contract with California Public Employees' Retirement System (Special) 2007-20 (Number not used) 2007-21 (Not adopted) 2008-01 Amends § 16.20.090; repeals §§ 16.20.105-16.20.115 and Hesperia Resolution No. 96-75, development code general regulations (16.20) 2008-02 Rezone (Special) 2008-03 Approves and adopts redevelopment plan amendment (Special) 2008-04 Rezone (Special) 2008-05 Rezone (Special) 2008-06 Rezone (Special) 2008-07 Rezone (Special) 2008-08 Rezone (Special) 2008-09 Rezone (Special) 2008-10 Repeals Hesperia Resolution No. 89-35 and Ord. 65, mobile home parks act enforcement (Repealer) 2008-11 Rezone (Special) 2008-12 Adopts main street and freeway corridor specific plan (Special) 2008-13 Add § 9.08.105; amends § 9.08.030, graffiti (9.08) 2008-14 Rezone (Special) 2008-15 Rezone (Special) 2008-16 Adds Ch. 9.18, handbills (9.18) 2008-17 Rezone (Special) 2008-18 Rezone (Special) 2008-19 Rezone (Special)  
    Beginning with Supplement No. 7, this table will be replaced with the "Code Comparative Table and Disposition List." 
HESPERIA WATER DISTRICT CODE ORDINANCE LIST AND DISPOSITION TABLE 
Ordinance 
Number Disposition 1 Establishes water service rates (Expired) 2 Cross-connections and water backflow prevention devices (Not codified) 3 Amends Ord. 1 § 4, capital improvement charge (Repealed by Ord. 12) 4 Amends Ord. 1 § 2, water rate schedule (Repealed by Ord. 5) 5 Amends Ord. 1 § 2, water rate schedule; repeals Ord. 4 (Not codified) 6 Septic system maintenance (Not codified) 7 (Not sent) 8 Construction and use of wastewater facilities (Not codified) 9 Amends water rates (Not codified) 10 Adopts prior Water District Code Ch. 2, water code (14.12-14.40) 11 Prohibits violation of water code, adopts emergency regulations and prohibits unlawful fire hydrant use (14.16, 14.38) 12 Amends prior Water District Code Ch. 2 §§ 5.11 and 7.13, water code; repeals Ord. 1 § 4, Ord. 1 Amendment, Ord. 3 § 2 and Ord. 5 § 4 (14.22, 14.26) 13 Amends prior Water District Code Ch. 2 §§ 5.14 and 7.05, water code (14.26) 14 Amends prior Water District Code Ch. 2 § 10.18, 10.19, 10.26, water code (14.30) 15 Prohibits connection to Mesa area portion of water system due to water shortage (Expired) 16 Amends Ord. 15 § 3, connection prohibited due to water shortage (Expired) 17 Adds prior Water District Code Ch. 2 §§ 5.15 and 5.16; amends prior Water District Code Ch. 2 § 4.01, water code (14.18, 14.22) 18 Amends prior Water District Code Ch. 2 §§ 4.01, 5.15, 5.16 and 5.28, water code (14.18, 14.22, 14.24) 19 Adds prior Water District Code Ch. 2 §§ 2.00.5, 2.11.5 and 2.17.5; amends prior Water District Code Ch. 2 §§ 2.30, 3.21, 5.14, 5.15, 5.20, 5.21, entirety of Div. VII of said Ch. 2, water code (14.14, 14.16, 14.24, 14.26) 20 Amends Ord. 8 §§ 2.38 and 3.4, construction and use of wastewater facilities (Not codified) 21 Amends Ord. 8 §§ 6.2(d) and 7.2, construction and use of wastewater facilities (Not codified) 22 Amends prior Water District Code Ch. 2 §§ 3.20, 9.04, 10.18 and 10.19, water code (14.16, 14.30) 23 Amends prior Water District Code Ch. 2 § 9.03, water code (14.30) 24 Amends prior Water District Code Ch. 2 §§ 5.10, 5.21 and 5.22, water code (14.22, 14.24, 14.26) 25 Construction and use of wastewater facilities (14.42-14.70) 26 Sewer service fees and charges (Not codified) 27 Adds prior Water District Code Ch. 2 § 14.05; amends prior Water District Code Ch. 2 §§ 14.02 and 14.04, water code (14.36) 28 Adds prior Water District Code Ch. 2 §§ 15.03A and 15.03B, water code (14.38) 29 Adds prior Water District Code Ch. 2 § 2.31; amends prior Water District Code Ch. 2 §§ 4.05, 5.11, 7.05, 7.13, 10.03, 10.05, 10.06, 10.10, 10.11.10.18 and 10. 19; repeals and replaces prior Water District Code Ch. 2 § 5.14; repeals prior Water District Code Ch. 2 § 5.15 (14.14, 14.18, 14.22, 14.26, 14.28, 14.30) 30 Amends Ord. 25, Art. III, construction and use of wastewater facilities (14.46) 31 Adopts program of voluntary water conservation during emergencies (14.40)  
HWD 
Ordinance 
Number Disposition 1 Amends prior Water District Code Ch. 2, § 4.06-4. 10, cross-connection and backflow prevention (14.20) 2 Adopts purchasing system; repeals adoption by reference of San Bernardino County Code Ch. 1, Div. 4 of T. 1 (Repealed by HWD 4) 3 Amends contract with California Public Employees' Retirement System (Special) 4 Purchasing system; repeals HWD Ord. 2 (14.10) 5 Amends prior Water District Code Ch. 2, § 5.21(g), payback agreements for main line extensions (14.24)  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE AND DISPOSITION LIST 
This is a chronological listing of the ordinances of Hesperia, California, beginning with Supplement No. 7, included in this Code. 
Ordinance 
Number  Date Description Section Section 
this Code 2005-12 11-16-05 Definition of "medical marijuana dispensary" 4       Added 16.08.513 Prohibits medical marijuana facilities in the city 5       Added 16.16.073 2008-20 10-21-08 Rezoning 1-5 Omitted 2008-21 10-21-08 Rezoning 1-5 Omitted 2008-22 10-21-08 Amends Main Street and Freeway Corridor Specific Plan 1-6 Omitted 2008-23 12- 2-08 Adds safety assessment program 2       Added 2.20.110 2008-24 12- 2-08 Rezoning 1-5 Omitted 2009-01  2-17-09 Very high fire hazard severity zone 2 Omitted 2009-02  8- 4-09 Amends provisions pertaining to billboards 2       Dltd 16.16.385- 
16.16.455 3 16.36.020 4 16.36.100 2009-03  6- 2-09 Rezoning 2-4 Omitted 2009-04  5-20-09 Extension for building permits 2 Omitted 2009-05  7-21-09 Hesperia Fire Protection District Fund administrative indirect cost allocation plan 1, 2 Omitted 2009-06  8- 4-09 Amends sign regulations regarding promotional and special event signs 3 16.36.090 C. 2009-07 11- 3-09 Amends provisions pertaining to massage facilities and technicians 3 1.04.050 
5.20.010-5.20.100 2009-08 10-20-09 Amends provisions pertaining to approval periods for land use decisions 3 16.12.005, 16.12.060, 16.12.095, 16.12.120, 16.12.360, 16.12.365 2009-09 10-20-09 Amends provisions pertaining to clear areas and projections into yards 3 16.20.045, 16.20.065, 16.20.070, 16.20.075 2009-10 10-20-09 Amends definition of front lot line 3 16.08.465 2009-11 Not passed 2009-12  2-16-10 Amends development code regarding alternative energy technologies 3       Added 16.08.889       Added 16.08.890       Added 16.16.063       Added 16.16.064 16.16.080 16.16.280 2009-13 12- 1-09 Adds provisions regarding fire separations 2       Added 15.04.070, 15.04.080 2009-14  1- 5-10 Amends recycling facility regulations 3 16.16.070 2010-01  2-16-10 Amends development code regarding animals allowed in R-3 and multi-family residential districts 3 16.16.145 2010-002  3- 3-10 Adds regulations pertaining to discharge of fats, oils and grease 2       Added 14.53.010-14.53.100 3 1.04.050 2010-03  4-20-10 Rezoning Omitted 2010-04  5-18-10 Rezoning Omitted 2010-05  5-18-10 Extending building permits for new structures Omitted 2010-06  8-17-10 Amends landscape regulations 2 16.20.550-16.20.650 2010-07 10- 5-10 Amends parking regulations 3 16.20.077 16.20.080 16.20.085 16.20.090 16.20.095 16.20.100 16.20.120 2010-08  9- 7-10 Amends sign regulations extending use of promotional and special event signs 3 16.36.090 2010-09  9- 7-10 Amends nonconforming uses and structures regulations 3 16.08.555       Added 16.08.556       Added 16.08.557 16.12.310 16.12.315 16.12.320 16.12.330       Dltd 16.12.340 2010-10 11- 2-10 Amends provisions pertaining to the Uniform Codes 2       Rpld 15.04.010-15.04.080 3       Added 15.04.010-15.04.070 Amends provisions pertaining to grading 4       Rpld 15.06.010-15.06.120       Added 15.06.010-15.06.120 2010-11 11- 2-10 Restricts motion picture theatres to the Pedestrian Commercial Zone District and the Freeway Corridor Omitted 2011-01  3-15-11 Adds provisions pertaining to service animals 1       Added 5.68.010-5.68.090 2       Added 6.04.200-6.04.230 2011-02  4- 5-11 Amends provisions pertaining to notification mailing requirements for enforcement notices 3(Exh. A) 1.12.110(A) 2011-03  5- 3-11 Amends density bonus program 3(Exh. A) 16.20.190- 
16.20.267 2011-04  5- 3-11 Adds definitions pertaining to environmental quality 3       Added 16.08.338 
16.08.397 
16.08.527 
16.08.542 
16.08.672 
16.08.707 Amends provisions pertaining to CEQA Guidelines 3       Dltd 16.12.410-16.12.435       Added 16.12.410-16.12.450 2011-005  4-19-11 Establishes community development commission 2       Added 2.28.010-2.28.060 2011-06  7-19-11 Adopts new Title 14 "Public Utilities" 4(Exh. A) 14.02.010-14.02.090 14.04.010-14.04.170 14.08.010-14.08.100 2011-07  8- 2-11 Amends provisions regarding parking of commercial vehicles in nonresidential zones       Added 16.20.095(F) 2011-08  8- 2-11 Development code amendments to allow roof-mounted windmills in residential areas 3(Exh. A) 16.16.063 
16.16.064 
16.12.210- 
16.12.255 2011-10  8-16-11 Development code amendments to amend residential land use designation regulations 3(Exh. A) 
Added 16.08.188       Added 16.08.273       Added 16.08.543 16.16.010- 
16.16.040       Dltd 16.16.075- 
16.16.135       Dltd 16.16.140- 
16.16.205       Dltd 16.16.210- 
16.16.270       Dltd 16.16.275- 
16.16.300       Dltd 16.16.310- 
16.16.340       Added 16.16.075- 
16.16.110       Added 16.16.115- 
16.16.130       Added 16.16.135- 
16.16.150       Added 16.16.155- 
16.16.165 2011-11  8- 2-11 Participation in Alternative Voluntary Redevelopment Program Omitted 2011-13  9-20-11 Development code amendments to reorganize and amend animal regulations 3(Exh) A) 
      Added 16.08.237       Added 16.08.353       Added 16.20.660- 
16.20.700 2011-16  9- 6-11 Extends use of promotional and special event signs 3(Exh. A) 16.36.090 2012-02  2- 7-12 Adopting a development code amendment to amend the commercial, industrial an public land use designation regulations (DCA11-10245) 3(Exh. A) 16.08.238       Rpld 16.16.345- 
16.16.380       Added 16.16.310- 
16.16.325       Added 16.16.350- 
16.16.360       Rnbd 16.16.480       As 16.16.365       Rpld 16.16.460- 
16.16.475, 16.16.485- 
16.16.535       Added 16.16.400, 16.16.405       Rpld 16.16.540- 
16.605       Added 16.16.410, 16.16.415       Rnbd 16.16.610       As 16.16.430 2012-03  2-21-12 Amending Chapter 1.12.130.16 of the Hesperia Municipal Code pertaining to Police Service Fees 2 1.12.130 B.16. 2012-04  4- 3-12 Approving a development code amendment to amend the sign regulations to extend the use of promotional and special event signs (DCA12-10111) 3(Exh. A) 16.36.050 G., 16.36.090 I. 2012-06 10- 2-2012 Body art facilities 3(Exh. A) 1.04.050       Added 5.22.010- 
5.22.090 2012-07  6-19-12 Pertaining to the additional uses ordinance and related ordinances (DCA12-10107) 3(Exh. A) 
      Added 16.08.208       Added 16.08.209       Added 16.08.771 16.16.060 A., B. 16.16.063 A.14. 16.16.063 B. 16.16.090 P. 2012-08  6-19-12 Adopting a development code amendment to make minor revisions to the existing animal regulations (DCA12-10123) 3(Exh. A) 16.20.660-16.20.700 2012-09  6-19-12 Adopting an amendment to Chapter 5.40 of the Municipal Code to modify the business license regulations for theaters to allow the sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages 3(Exh. A) 5.40.010, 5.40.020       Rpld 5.40.030 5.40.040 2012-10  7- 3-12 Rescinding Ordinance No. 2011-14, regarding an amendment to the official general plan land use and zoning map (SPL11-10206) Omitted 2012-11  7-17-12 Repealing Chapter 5.06 of the Hesperia Municipal Code 3       Rpld 5.06.010-5.06.040 2012-12  7- 3-12 Revising Chapter 16.20 of the Hesperia Municipal Code regarding commercial vehicle parking (DCA12-10133) 3(Exh. A) 16.20.090 H. 16.20.095 2012-13  7-17-12 Amending Title 6 of the Hesperia Municipal Code entitled, "Animal Care and Control," related to spay/neuter requirements 3 6.08.020 D. 4 6.08.020 E. 2012-14  8- 7-12 An ordinance of the City Council of the City of Hesperia, California, adopting a Development Code amendment pertaining to permits and procedures (DCA12-10117) 3(Exh. A) 16.12.005 16.12.010 16.12.020 16.12.025 16.12.030 16.12.035 16.12.040 16.12.045 16.12.050 16.12.055 16.12.060 16.12.065 16.12.070 16.12.075 16.12.076 16.12.080 16.12.085 16.12.090 16.12.095 16.12.100 16.12.105 16.12.110 16.12.115 16.12.120 16.12.125 16.12.130 16.12.135 16.12.140 16.12.145 16.12.150 16.12.155 16.12.160 16.12.165 16.12.170 16.12.175 16.12.180 16.12.185 16.12.190 16.12.195 16.12.200 16.12.205 16.12.210 16.12.215 16.12.220 16.12.225 16.12.230 16.12.235 16.12.240 16.12.245 16.12.250 16.12.255 16.12.260 16.12.265 16.12.270 16.12.275 16.12.280 16.12.285 16.12.290 16.12.295 16.12.300 16.12.305 16.12.310 16.12.355 16.12.360 16.12.365 16.12.370 16.12.375 16.12.380 16.12.382 16.12.385 16.12.390 16.12.395 16.12.400 16.12.405 2012-15  1-15-13 An ordinance of the City Council of the City of Hesperia, California, amending Title 1 and 5 of the Hesperia Municipal Code pertaining to cottage food operations 3(Exh. A) 1.04.050 5.44.030 2013-01  2- 5-13 An ordinance of the City of Hesperia, California, adopting a Development Code amendment to establish mobile food vehicle regulations (DCA12-10179) 3(Exh. A) 
      Added 16.08.532       Added 16.08.712       Added 16.16.061 2013-003  4- 2-13 An ordinance of the City Council of the City of Hesperia, California, approving a development code amendment to amend the sign regulations to extend the use of promotional and special event signs (DCA13-00004) 3(Exh. A) 16.36.090 I. 2013-04  4- 2-13 An ordinance of the City Council of the City of Hesperia, California, adopting an interim zoning ordinance pursuant to California Government Code Section 65858(b) temporarily prohibiting internet sweepstakes cafés and making findings in support thereof 2-9       Added 16.16.074 
(note) 2013-05  4-16-13 An ordinance of the City Council of the City of Hesperia, California, extending an interim zoning ordinance pursuant to California Government Code Section 65858(b) temporarily prohibiting internet sweepstakes cafés and making findings in support thereof 2-9       Added 16.16.074 
(note) 2013-06  6-18-13 An ordinance of the City Council of the City of Hesperia, California, adding sections to Title 16 of the Hesperia Municipal Code regarding internet sweepstakes cafés (DCA13-00003) 3       Added 16.08.142 3       Added 16.08.347 3       Added 16.16.074 2013-08  8-20-13 Adopting a development code amending recycling facility regulations 4(Exh. A) 16.16.070 2013-09 11- 5-13 Repealing and adopting Chapter 15.04 and 15.06, amending Chapter 1.12, relating to 2013 California Building, Residential, Electrical, Mechanical, Plumbing Fire, Green Building Standards, Energy, Historical, Existing Building, Administrative and Reference Standards Codes 2       Rpld 15.04.010- 
15.04.070 2(Exh. A) 
      Added 15.04.010- 
15.04.070 4       Rpld 15.06.010- 
15.06.120 5(Exh. B) 
      Added 15.06.010- 
15.06.120 6 15.04.070 7       Rpld 1.12.380(D) 15.04.070 2013-10 12-17-13 Amending the official zoning map by reclassifying certain real property within the Main Street and Freeway Corridor Specific Plan Omitted 2013-11 12-17-13 Approving a development agreement between the City of Hesperia and Covington Group, Inc. regarding the Hesperia Commerce Center Project located on the east and west side of Caliente Road between the Union Pacific Railroad and Cedar Street (DA13-00001) Omitted 2013-015 11- 5-13 Adopting a development code amendment to amend sign regulations (DCA13-00001) 4(Exh. A) 16.36.020       Added 16.36.092       Added 16.36.092 2013-016 10-15-13 Adopting a specific plan amendment to amend the pedestrian commercial zone of the Main Street and Freeway Corridor Specific Plan (SPLA13-00003) Omitted 2014-01  2- 4-14 Amending the official zoning map by reclassifying certain real property within the Main Street and Freeway Corridor Specific Plan on 1 acre from public/institutional overlay (PIO) to neighborhood commercial (NC) (SPLA13-00007) Omitted 2014-02  2-18-14 Amending the development code establishing regulations to allow supportive and transitional housing as well as single room occupancy development (DCA13-00007) 4(Exh. A) 
      Added 16.08.332, 16.08.333 16.16.085 2014-03  2-18-14 Amending the Main Street and Freeway Corridor Specific Plan (MSFCSP) establishing regulations to allow single room occupancy development and to allow emergency shelters within the mixed use (MU) and medium density residential (MDR) zones of the MSFCSP (SPLA13-00008) Omitted 2014-04  3-18-14 Amending the official zoning map by reclassifying certain real property within the Main Street and Freeway Corridor Specific Plan Omitted 2014-05  4- 1-14 Adopting a development code amendment to amend the vehicle service and repairs standards to include outdoor hoists (DCA14-00001) 3(Exh. A) 16.16.365 2014-06  4- 1-14 Adopting a specific plan amendment to amend the vehicle service and repairs standards to include outdoor hoists (SPLA14-00001) Omitted 2014-07  4-15-14 Adding Chapter 9.22, limiting certain activities during special and organized events at Civic Plaza Park (DCA14-00002) 3(Exh. A) 
      Added 9.22.010 2014-09  5- 6-14 Amending certain sections of Chapter 3.08, pertaining to the city's purchasing system 1 3.08.010       Added 3.08.020 3.08.030- 
3.08.080       Added 3.08.085 3.08.090 3.08.095 3.08.110- 
3.08.140 2014-10  5- 6-14 Amending the official general plan and zoning map by reclassifying certain real property within the Main Street and Freeway Corridor Specific Plan Omitted 2014-11  5- 6-14 Adopting a specific plan amendment SPLA14-00003 regarding open space policies and implementation measures Omitted 2014-13  5-20-14 Amending the solid waste regulations 2, 3 1.04.050 4       Rpld 8.04.010- 
8.04.300       Added 8.04.010- 
8.04.640 5       Rpld 15.12.020- 
15.12.060       Added 15.12.010 2014-14  8-19-14 Modifying the spay/neuter requirements for certain violations 3(Exh. A) 6.04.010, 6.04.020(G), 6.04.050, 6.08.020 2014-15  8-19-14 Regulation of registered sex offenders to align with state law 2 5.48.050(A) 3 9.16.010 4 9.16.020 5, 6 16.06.072 2015-03  5- 5-15 Extending the moratorium on the commercial and industrial cultivation of marijuana for ten months and fifteen days Omitted 2015-05  7-21-15 Amending the official general plan and zoning map by reclassifying certain real property within the Main Street and Freeway Corridor Specific Plan Omitted 2015-08  8-18-15 Adopting regulations regarding the plan review and inspection of small (10kw or less) residential rooftop solar systems Omitted 2015-09  9- 1-15 Amending the official general plan and zoning map by reclassifying certain real property within the Main Street and Freeway Corridor Specific Plan Omitted 2015-10  2- 2-16 Adopting the Tapestry Specific Plan Omitted 2015-11 10- 6-15 Amending the official general plan and zoning map by reclassifying certain real property within the Main Street and Freeway Corridor Specific Plan Omitted 2015-12 11-17-15 Crime free rental housing program 1       Added 8.20.010- 
8.20.120 2015-13  1-19-16 Wireless communication facilities 3(Exh. A) 16.16.062 2016-03  7-19-16 Amending the Main Street and Freeway Corridor Specific Plan Omitted 2016-04  7-19-16 Amending the Main Street and Freeway Corridor Specific Plan Omitted 2016-05  7-19-16 Adopting a planned development to create senior-oriented development standards implementing a conditional use permit and amending the official general plan and zoning map by reclassifying certain real property within the Main Street and Freeway Corridor Specific Plan Omitted 2016-06 10- 4-16 Minimum floor areas for multiple-family units 4(Exh. A) 16.16.130(B) 2016-08 11-15-16 Building codes; grading 2       Rpld 15.04.010- 
15.04.070 3(Exh. A) 
      Added 15.04.010- 
15.04.070 4       Rpld 15.06.010- 
15.06.120 5(Exh. B) 
      Added 15.06.010- 
15.06.120 2016-09  2- 7-17 Placement of fueling stations 3(Exh. A) 16.16.365(I) 2017-01  3- 7-17 Freeway sign regulations 4(Exh. A) 16.36.020, 16.39.060 
(C)(9)       Rpld 16.36.092, 16.36.120 2017-02  1-17-17 Donation bins 4(Exh. A) 
      Added 16.20.750- 
16.20.800       Rpld 16.36.092 16.36.020 2017-04  3-21-17 Special event and temporary use regulations 3(Exh. A) 16.12.370- 
16.12.390 2017-05  3- 7-17 Urgency interim ordinance imposing a moratorium on certain problematic uses Omitted 2017-06  3-21-17 Residential care facilities, group homes, and sex offender residency 4       Rpld 16.16.072 2017-07  4-18-17 Extending a temporary moratorium on certain problematic uses for ten months and fifteen days Omitted 2017-09  6- 6-17 City council elections by district 2       Added 1.09.010- 
1.09.040 2017-10  6- 6-17 Prohibiting and regulating certain land uses 3(Exh. A) 1.04.050 5.20.020, 5.20.050       Added 5.20.028       Added 16.08.187, 16.08.209, 16.08.227, 16.08.334, 16.08.537, 16.08.642, 16.08.763, 16.08.764, 16.08.843, 16.08.844       Rnbd 16.08.208, 16.08.209       as 16.08.207, 16.08.208 16.16.074 2017-11  6-20-17 Reducing interior setbacks and amending the minimum distance between buildings and multiple-family developments 3(Exh. A) 16.12.085 16.16.120, 16.16.130 (B)(3) 2017-12  6-20-17 Accessory dwelling units 3(Exh. A) 16.12.360 2017-13  7-18-17 Crime free rental housing program 1 8.20.010- 
8.20.140 2017-14  8-15-17 Amending the official zoning map by reclassifying certain real property within the Main Street and Freeway Corridor Specific Plan Omitted 2017-16  9-19-17 Adopting Chapter 5.50, dispensary and delivery of medical marijuana 3(Exh. C) 
      Added 5.50.010- 
5.50.140 2017-18 10-17-17 Reorganizing the animal regulations for ease of use 3(Exh. A) 16.20.660-16.20.690 2017-19 10-17-17 Apiaries 3(Exh. A) 6.12.080, 16.16.095 2017-15 12- 5-17 Amending commercial cannabis activities, adopting Article XIV, cannabis related uses and prohibited activities, map of cannabis delivery services restricted areas 4(Exh. A) 
      Rpld 16.08.513, 16.16.073       Added 16.16.440- 
16.16.475 5(Exh. B) 
      Added Exhibit B(Map) 2018-01 3-20-18 Amending Chapter 5.50, regulating cannabis activities 3(Exh. A) 5.50.020, 
5.50.040, 
5.50.050 
5.50.070       Added 5.50.075       Added 5.50.090 5.50.100 2018-02 3-20-18 Amending Chapter 16.16, regulating cannabis activities 2(Exh. B) 16.16.470 2018-03 3-20-18 Amending Chapter 16.16, regulating cannabis activities 4(Exh. C) 16.16.450, 
16.16.460 2018-04 4- 3-18 Local agency management program 2(Exh. A) 14.08.040 2017-03  5- 2-17 Alcohol sales, regulations 1       Added 16.16.370 2017-08 10- 3-17 Approval of off-sale alcohol establishments 5(Exh. A) 16.16.315 16.16.320 2017-17 10-17-17 Amending the official general plan and zoning map Omitted 2017-21  1-16-18 Development agreement Omitted 2018-05  6-19-18 Establishing a local appeals board and a housing appeals board 2(Exh. B) 1.04.050 3(Exh. B) 1.12.290 1.12.320 2018-06  6-19-18 Amending the official general plan and zoning map by reclassifying certain real property within the Main Street and Freeway Corridor Specific Plan Omitted 2018-37(Res.)  5-10-18 Approving site plan review Omitted 2018-08 11- 6-18 Cannabis Tax 1 3.18.010-3.18.090 2018-09  2- 5-19 Sidewalk vendor activities 2(Exh. A) 
      Added 5.26.030-5.26.210 3(Exh. B) 1.04.050 2019-01  2- 5-19 Fences 3(Exh. A) 8.32.040 16.12.220 16.20.070       Added 16.20.072 2019-02  2- 5-19 Adopting a specific plan amendment to allow vehicle fuel stations and ancillary vehicle wash facilities Omitted 2019-03  2- 5-19 Self-Storage Facilities Exh. A 16.16.060 16.16.315 16.16.365 2019-04  4-16-19 New location for regular meetings of City Council 3 2.04.020 2019-05  5- 7-19 Adopting a specific plan amendment to change approximately 4.1 gross acres Omitted 2019-06  5- 7-19 Adopting a specific plan amendment to change approximately 109 gross acres within the Main Street and Freeway Corridor Specific Plan Omitted  
