Title 1 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Title 2 ADMINISTRATION AND PERSONNEL
Title 3 REVENUE AND FINANCE
Title 4 RESERVED
Title 5 BUSINESS LICENSES AND REGULATIONS
Title 6 RESERVED
Title 7 ANIMALS
Title 8 HEALTH AND SANITATION
Title 9 PUBLIC PEACE, MORALS AND SAFETY
Title 10 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
Title 11 RESERVED
Title 12 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Title 13 PUBLIC UTILITIES
Title 14 BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION
Title 15 RESERVED
Title 16 RESERVED
Title 17 DEVELOPMENT CODE

Title 1 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Chapter 1.01 CODE ADOPTION
Chapter 1.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Chapter 1.08 RIGHT OF ENTRY
Chapter 1.12 OFFICIAL SEAL
Chapter 1.16 ELECTION PRECINCTS
Chapter 1.20 GENERAL PENALTY
Chapter 1.22 ADMINISTRATIVE CITATIONS


Chapter 1.01 CODE ADOPTION
1.01.010 Adoption.
Pursuant to the provisions of Sections 50022.1—5022.8 and 50022.10 of the California Code Annotated, there is hereby adopted the “Jackson Municipal Code” as published by Book Publishing Company, Seattle, Washington, together with those secondary codes adopted by reference as authorized by the California State Legislature, save and except those portions of the secondary codes as are deleted or modified by the provisions of the “Jackson Municipal Code.” (Ord. 353 §1, 1974)

 

1.01.020 Title—Citation—Reference.
A.    This code shall be known as the “Jackson Municipal Code” and it shall be sufficient to refer to said code as the “Jackson Municipal Code” in any prosecution for the violation of any provision thereof or in any proceeding at law or equity.

B.     It shall be sufficient to designate any ordinance adding to, amending, correcting or repealing all or any part or portion thereof as an addition to, amendment to, correction or repeal of the “Jackson Municipal Code.” Further reference may be had to the titles, chapters, sections and subsections of the “Jackson Municipal Code” and such references shall apply to that numbered title, chapter, section or subsection as it appears in the code. (Ord. 353 §2, 1774)

 

1.01.030 Codification authority.
This code consists of all the regulatory and penal ordinances and certain of the administrative ordinances of the City of Jackson, California, codified pursuant to the provisions of Sections 50022.1—50022.8 and 50022.10 of the California Code Annotated. (Ord. 353 §3, 1974)

 

1.01.040 Ordinances passed prior to adoption of code.
A.    The last ordinance included in this code was Ordinance 347, passed in 1973.

B.     The following ordinances, passed subsequent to Ordinance 347, but prior to the adoption of this code, are adopted and made a part of this code: Ordinances 348 through 352. (Ord. 353 §4, 1974)

 

1.01.050 Reference applies to amendments.
Whenever a reference is made to this code as the “Jackson Municipal Code” or to any portion thereof, or to any ordinance of the City of Jackson, California, the reference shall apply to all amendments, corrections and additions theretofore, now or hereafter made. (Ord. 353 §5, 1974)

 

1.01.060 Title, chapter and section headings.
Title, chapter and section headings contained herein shall not be deemed to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any title, chapter or section hereof. (Ord. 353 §6, 1974)

 

1.01.070 Reference to specific ordinances.
The provisions of this code shall not in any manner affect matters of record which refer to, or are otherwise connected with ordinances which are therein specifically designated by number or otherwise and which are included within the code, but such reference shall be construed to apply to the corresponding provisions contained within this code. (Ord. 353 §7, 1974)

 

1.01.080 Effect of code on past actions and obligations.
Neither this adoption of this code nor the repeal or amendments hereby of any ordinance or part or portion of any ordinance of the city shall in any manner affect the prosecution for violations of ordinances, which violations were committed prior to the effective date hereof, nor be construed as a waiver of any license, fee, or penalty at said effective date due and unpaid under such ordinances, nor be construed as affecting any of the provisions of such ordinances relating to the provisions applicable to any violation thereof, nor to affect the validity of any bond or cash deposit in lieu thereof required to be posted, filed or deposited pursuant to any ordinance and all rights and obligations thereunder appertaining shall continue in full force and effect. (Ord. 353 §8, 1974)

 

1.01.090 Effective date.
This code shall become effective on the date the ordinance adopting this code as the “Jackson Municipal Code” shall become effective. (Ord. 353 §9, 1974)

 

1.01.100 Constitutionality.
A.    If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this code is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this code.

B.     The council hereby declares that it would have passed this code, and each section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, clauses or phrases had been declared invalid or unconstitutional, and if for any reason this code should be declared invalid or unconstitutional, then the original ordinance or ordinances shall be in full force and effect. (Ord. 353 §10, 1974)

Chapter 1.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS
1.04.010 Definitions.
The following words and phrases whenever used in the ordinances of the City of Jackson, California, mean as defined in this section unless from the context a different meaning is intended or unless different meaning is specifically defined and more particularly directed to the use of such words or phrases:

“City” means the City of Jackson, California, or the area within the territorial limits of the City of Jackson, California and such territory outside of the city over which the city has jurisdiction or control by virtue of any constitutional or statutory provision.

“Computation of time” means the time within which an act is to be done. It shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last day; and if the last day be Sunday or a legal holiday, that day shall be excluded.

“Council” means the city council of the City of Jackson, California. “All its members” or “all councilmembers” means the total number of councilmembers provided by the general laws of the State of California.

“County” means the county of Amador, California.

“Law” denotes applicable federal law, the constitution and statutes of the State of California, the ordinances of the City of Jackson, and when appropriate, any and all rules and regulations which may be promulgated thereunder.

“May” is permissive.

“Month” means a calendar month.

“Must” and “shall” are mandatory.

“Oath” includes an affirmation or declaration in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases, the words “swear” and “sworn” shall be equivalent to the words “affirm” and “affirmed.”

“Or” may be read “and” and “and” may be read “or” if the sense requires it.

“Ordinance” means a law of the city; provided that a temporary or special law, administrative action, order or directive, may be in the form of a resolution.

“Owner,” applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or a part of such building or land.

“Person” means natural person, joint venture, joint stock company, partnership, association, club, company, corporation, business, trust, organization, or the manager, lessee, agent, servant, officer or employee of any of them.

“Personal property” includes money, goods, chattels, things in action and evidences of debt.

“Preceding” and “following” mean next before and next after, respectively.

“Property” includes real and personal property.

“Real property” includes lands, tenements and hereditaments.

“Sidewalk” means that portion of a street between the curb line and the adjacent property line intended for the use of pedestrians.

“State” means the State of California.

“Street” includes all streets, highways, avenues, lanes, alleys, courts, places, squares, curbs, or other public ways in this city which have been or may hereafter be dedicated and open to public use, or such other public property so designated in any law of this state.

“Tenant” and “occupant,” applied to a building or land, includes any person who occupies whole or a part of such building or land, whether alone or with others.

Title of Office. Use of the title of any officer, employee, board or commission means that officer, employee, department, board or commission of the city.

“Written” includes printed, typewritten, mimeographed or multigraphed.

“Year” means a calendar year.

All words and phrases shall be construed and understood according to the common and approved usage of the language but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in the law shall be construed and understood according to such peculiar and appropriate meaning.

When an act is required by an ordinance the same being such that it may be done as well by an agent as by the principal, such requirement includes all such acts performed by an authorized agent. (Ord. 333 §1, 1973)

 

1.04.020 Grammatical interpretation.
The following grammatical rules apply in the ordinances of the City of Jackson, California:

A.    Gender. The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter genders.

B.     Singular and Plural. The singular number includes the plural and the plural includes the singular.

C.     Tenses. Words used in the present tense include the past and future tenses and vice versa, unless manifestly inapplicable.

D.    Use of Words and Phrases. Words and phrases not specifically defined shall be construed according to the context and approved usage of the language. (Ord. 333 §2, 1973)

 

1.04.030 Prohibited acts include causing, permitting, etc.
Whenever in the ordinances of the City of Jackson, any act or omission is made unlawful, it includes causing, allowing, permitting, aiding, abetting, suffering, or concealing the fact of such act or omission. (Ord. 333 §3, 1973)

 

1.04.040 Construction.
The provisions of the ordinances of the City of Jackson and all proceedings under them are to be construed with a view to affect their objects and to promote justice. (Ord. 333 §4, 1973)

 

1.04.050 Repeal shall not revive any ordinances.
The repeal of an ordinance shall not repeal the repealing clause of such ordinance or revive any ordinance which has been repealed thereby. (Ord. 333 §5, 1973)

 

1.04.060 Effective date and direction to publish.
The ordinance codified in this chapter shall take effect on August 1, 1973. The city clerk is directed to publish a copy of the ordinance codified in this chapter fifteen days after its passage in the Amador Dispatch, a newspaper of general circulation published and circulated within the City of Jackson. (Ord. 333 §6, 1973)

 

1.04.070 No duty of care imposed upon city.
The provisions of this code are not intended to and shall not be construed or given effect in a manner that imposes upon the city or any officer or employee thereof a mandatory duty of care towards persons and property within or without the city so as to provide a basis of civil liability for damages except as otherwise imposed by law. (Ord. 501 §1, 1986)

 

1.04.080 Time provisions directory, except as otherwise required.
Any provisions in this code governing the time within which an official is to act shall in all instances, except for notice requirements and as otherwise required by state law, be deemed directory rather than mandatory, unless otherwise specifically stated. (Ord. 501 §1, 1986)

 

1.04.090 Administrative review.
Section 1094.6 of the California Code of Civil Procedure is adopted. This section provides as follows:

A.    A petition for judicial review of any decision of a local agency must be filed not later than the ninetieth day following the date on which that decision becomes final.

B.     The local agency will include notice in its administrative decision of the ninety-day period within which judicial review must be sought. (Ord. 522 §1, 1989)

Chapter 1.08 RIGHT OF ENTRY
1.08.010 Conditions required.
Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any ordinance or resolution, or whenever there is reasonable cause to believe there exists an ordinance or resolution violation in any building or upon any premises within the jurisdiction of the city, any authorized official of the city, may, upon presentation of proper credentials, enter such building or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed upon him or her by ordinance; provided, that except in emergency situations or when consent of the owner and/or occupant to the inspection has been otherwise obtained, he or she shall give the owner and/or occupant, if they can be located after reasonable effort, twenty-four hours’ written notice of the authorized official’s intention to inspect. The notice transmitted to the owner and/or occupant shall state that the property owner has the right to refuse entry and that in the event such entry is refused, inspection may be made only upon issuance of a search warrant by a duly authorized magistrate. In the event the owner and/or occupant refuses entry after such request has been made, the official is empowered to seek assistance from any court of competent jurisdiction in obtaining such entry. (Ord. 332 §1, 1973)

Chapter 1.12 OFFICIAL SEAL
1.12.010 Designated.
The seal heretofore used and now used by and for the city, (the inscription in the center thereof is “Incorporated Dec. 5, 1905,” and on the circumference thereof is “City of Jackson, Amador County, Cal.”) has been and now is the official seal of the city. The city clerk is the custodian of the city seal. (Ord. 329 §1, 1973; Ord. 16 §1, 1906)

Chapter 1.16 ELECTION PRECINCTS
1.16.010 Established.
The city, for the purposes of the election of officers thereof, general and special elections, and for any other purpose for which an election is or may be held in the city, is divided into six precincts as designated in Sections 1.16.020—1.16.070. (Ord. 338 §1, 1973)

 

1.16.020 Precinct one.
Precinct one is that portion of the city which lies within the following described boundary:

Beginning at 1 3/4 inch wagon axle designating the northeast corner of the city limits of said City of Jackson, as indicated on that certain official map titled “Boundary Survey of the City of Jackson, California” as recorded in the office of the Amador County recorder in Book 9 of Maps and Plats at Page 41; thence from said point of beginning westerly and following the designated courses of the recorded city boundaries of said City of Jackson to a point in the centerline of China Graveyard Road; thence leaving said Jackson city boundary westerly along the centerline of said China Graveyard Road to its intersection with the centerline of North Main Street, also known as Jackson Gate Road; thence southerly along the centerline of said North Main Street to its intersection with the center of North Street; thence easterly along the center of said North Street to its intersection with the center of Church Street; thence southerly along the center of said Church Street to its intersection with the center of Court Street; thence northeasterly along the center of said Court Street to its intersection with the center of Water Street; thence southeasterly along the center of said Water Street to its intersection with the center of Pitt Street; thence southeasterly along the center of said Pitt Street to its intersection with the centerline of California State Highway Route No. 88; thence northeasterly along, the centerline of said Highway No. 88 to its intersection with the city limits of said City of Jackson; thence westerly and following the designated courses of said City of Jackson to the point of beginning. (Ord. 338 §1, 1973)

 

1.16.030 Precinct two.
Precinct two is that portion of the city which lies within the following described boundary:

Beginning at a point on the center right-of-way of California State Highway Routes Number 49 and 88 North at which point the center of North Main Street intersects said Highways 49 and 88; thence from said point of beginning southerly along the centerline of said Highways 49 and 88 through an intersection marking a directional change of said Highway 88 and continuing in said southerly direction along said Highway No. 49 to its intersection with the center of French Bar Road; thence southwesterly along the center of said French Bar Road to its intersection with the Jackson City Limits Boundary; thence easterly and following the designated courses of said Jackson City boundary to the intersection of the centerline of Broadway, city street; thence northwesterly along the center of said Broadway to its intersection with the center of California State Highway No. 88 East; thence northeasterly along the center of said Highway 88 to its intersection with. Pitt Street; thence northwesterly along the center of said Pitt Street; thence northerly along the center of said Water Street to its intersection with the center of Court Street; thence southwesterly along the center of said Court Street to its intersection with the center of Church Street; thence northerly along the center of said Church Street to its intersection with the center of North Street; thence westerly along the center of said North Street to its intersection with the center of North Main Street; thence southerly along the center of said North Main Street to the point of beginning. (Ord. 338 §1, 1973)

 

1.16.040 Precinct three.
Precinct three is that portion of the city which lies within the following described boundary:

Beginning at 11 3/4 inch capped iron pipe, stamped 20, 21, 28, 29 Lis. 2902, designating the section corners common to Sections 20, 21, 28 and 29, Township 6 North, Range 11 East, Mount Diablo Base and Meridian, as shown on that certain official map titled “Boundary Survey of the City of Jackson, California” as recorded in the office of the Amador County recorder in Book 9 of Maps and Plats at page 41, said point being situated on the north-south boundary line of the city limit of said City of Jackson; thence north following the section line common to said Sections 20 and 21 and the designated boundary of said City of Jackson to a point on the southeast right-of-way of Vogan Toll Road; thence leaving said city boundary and continuing north 50 feet more or less along the projection of said section line to its intersection with the centerline of said Vogan Toll Road; thence southeasterly along the centerline of said Vogan Toll Road to its intersection with the centerline of California State Highway Routes 49 and 88 North, also known as Sutter Street; thence southerly along said highway to its intersection with the center of Jackson Creek; thence westerly along the centerline of said Jackson Creek to its intersection with the southerly prolongation of the north-south boundary line of said City of Jackson; thence north along said prolongation to its intersection with said north-south line; thence continuing northerly along the designated courses of said City of Jackson to the point of beginning. (Ord. 338 §1, 1973)

 

1.16.050 Precinct four.
Precinct four is that portion of the city which lies within the following described boundary:

Beginning at a 1/2 inch iron pipe tagged L.S. 3570 designating the northeast corner of the Jackson city annexation as indicated by Jackson city Ordinance 303 filed in the office of the Amador County clerk as official date 21, December 1970, said point also indicated on that certain official map titled “Record of Survey—area to be annexed to the City of Jackson” as recorded in the office of the Amador County recorder in Book 16 of maps and plats at page 100; thence from said point of beginning south and following the designated courses of the boundary of said City of Jackson to a point in the center of French Bar Road, from which point said Jackson city boundary bears east; thence leaving said Jackson city boundary line northeasterly along the centerline of said French Bar Road to its intersection with the centerline of California State Highway Route No. 49 South; thence northwesterly along the center of said Highway 49 to its intersection with the centerline of Jackson Creek; thence westerly along the centerline of said Jackson Creek to its intersection with the southerly prolongation of the north-south boundary line of said City of Jackson; thence north along said prolongation to its intersection with said north-south line; southwesterly along the designated courses of said City of Jackson to the point of beginning. (Ord. 338 §1, 1973)

1.16.060 Precinct five.
Precinct five is that portion of the city which lies within the following described boundary:

Beginning at the intersection of the centerline of California State Highway No. 88 East with the intersection of the centerline of Broadway, city street; thence from said point of beginning southwesterly along the center of said Broadway to its intersection with the City of Jackson boundary line; thence easterly and following the designated courses of said City of Jackson boundary to its intersection with the centerline right-of-way of said California State Highway No. 88 East; thence southwesterly along the centerline of said Highway 88 to the point of beginning. (Ord. 338 §1, 1973)

 

1.16.070 Precinct six.
Precinct six is that portion of the city which lies within the following described boundary:

Beginning at the intersection of the centerline of China Graveyard Road, with the city limit boundary of said City of Jackson as indicated by Jackson city Ordinance 282, filed in the office of the Amador County clerk as official date 19, August 1968; thence from said point of beginning northwesterly and following the designated courses of the recorded city boundaries of said City of Jackson to a point located on the southwest right-of-way line of Vogan Toll Road, said point being the intersection of said city boundary and the east section line of Section 20, Township 6 North, Range 11 East, Mount Diablo Base and Meridian; thence north along said section line 50 feet more or less to the centerline of said Vogan Toll Road; thence southeasterly along the center of said Vogan Toll Road to its intersection with the centerline of California State Highway Route 49 and 88 North, also known as Sutter Street; thence southerly along said Highway Routes to the intersection with the centerline of North Main Street; thence northerly along the center of said North Main Street, also known as Jackson Gate Road, to its intersection with the center of said China Graveyard Road; thence easterly along the center of said China Graveyard Road to the point of beginning. (Ord. 338 §1, 1973)

Chapter 1.20 GENERAL PENALTY
1.20.010 Misdemeanor.
A.    Unless otherwise specifically provided, any person violating any provision or failing to comply with any of the mandatory requirements of the city ordinances is guilty of a misdemeanor. Any person convicted of a misdemeanor under the city ordinances, shall be punished by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars, or by imprisonment not to exceed six months, or by both fine and imprisonment.

B.     Each day and any portion of any day during which a violation of the city ordinances is committed, shall be considered a separate offense regardless of the duration that the violation is allowed to continue or permitted by any person, and each such person shall be punished accordingly. (Ord. 567 §1, 1994; Ord. 334 §1, 1973)

 

1.20.020 Infraction.
A.    Except as otherwise provided, every person failing to comply with any provision of this code or any local ordinance which is punishable as an infraction, shall be punished upon the first conviction by a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars, and for a second conviction within a period of one year by a fine not exceeding two hundred dollars, and for a third conviction within the same year by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars.

B.     Each and every day or any portion of any day during which a violation is allowed to continue may be considered a separate offense. The violator shall be punished accordingly. (Ord. 567 §2, 1994; Ord. 401 §4, 1977)

Chapter 1.22 ADMINISTRATIVE CITATIONS
1.22.010 Title of this article and authority.
This article shall be known as the “administrative citations ordinance.” It is adopted pursuant to Government Code Section 53069.4 authorizing local agencies, by ordinance, to make violation of any ordinance of the city subject to administrative fine or penalty.

 

1.22.020 Applicability.
Administrative citations shall be in addition to all other remedies, whether criminal, civil or equitable, which may be pursued by the city to address any violation of this code.

 

1.22.030 Definitions.
A.    “Administrative citation” shall mean the written notice provided to a responsible person to inform that person of a violation of this code, its adopted codes or applicable state codes.

B.     “Enforcement officer” shall mean any officer or employee, including his or her designee, with the authority to enforce this code, its adopted codes or applicable state codes.

C.     “Hearing officer” shall mean the hearing officer appointed by the city council.

The hearing officer may be a city employee, but in that event the hearing officer shall not have had any responsibility for the investigation, prosecution or enforcement of this chapter and shall not have had any personal involvement in the proceeding to be heard within the past twelve months or possess any disqualifying interest in the outcome of the proceeding.

D.    “Non-emergency health or safety violation” shall mean a violation of any building, plumbing, electrical or other similar structural or zoning ordinance which does not create an immediate danger to health or safety.

E.     “Responsible person” shall mean either of the following:

1.     Any individual or legal entity who is the owner, tenant, co-tenant, lessee, sub-lessee, occupant or other person with any right to possession of the real property, owner or authorized agent of any business, company or entity, or the parent or the legal guardian of any person under the age of eighteen years, who causes, permits or maintains a violation of this code, its adopted codes or applicable state codes.

2.     Any individual, legal entity or the parent or the legal guardian of any person under the age of eighteen years, who causes, permits or maintains a violation of this code, its adopted codes or applicable state codes.

 

1.22.040 Administrative citation.
A.    Whenever an enforcement officer charged with the enforcement of a provision of this code (including those uniform codes adopted herein by reference) determines that a violation of that provision has occurred, the enforcement officer shall have the authority to issue an administrative citation to the person or entity responsible for the violation.

B.     Each administrative citation shall contain the following information:

1.     The date of the violation;

2.     The address or a definite description of the location where the violation occurred;

3.     The code section violated and a description of the violation;

4.     The amount of the fine for the code violation and an order to the responsible person to correct the violation(s) by a correction date if the violation is a non-emergency health and safety violation;

5.     A description of the fine payment process, including a description of the time within which and the place to which the fine must be paid;

6.     An order prohibiting the continuation or repeated occurrence of the ordinance violation described in the administrative citation;

7.     A description of the administrative citation review process, including the time within which the administrative citation may be contested and the place from which a request for hearing form may be obtained;

8.     The name and signature of the citing enforcement officer and the date the administrative citation is issued;

9.     A description of the deposit waiver process, including the time within which a request for deposit waiver may be made and the place from which a request for hearing form may be obtained.

 

1.22.050 Service of administrative citation—Property violation.
An administrative citation for a violation related to real property shall be on a form approved by the city manager and shall be issued to the responsible person by an enforcement officer for violations of this code, its adopted codes or applicable state codes in the following manner:

A.    Personal Service. The enforcement officer shall attempt to locate and personally serve the responsible person and, if possible, obtain the signature of the responsible person on the administrative citation. If the served responsible person refuses or fails to sign the administrative citation, the failure or refusal to sign shall not affect the validity of the administrative citation or of subsequent proceedings.

B.     Service of Citation by Mail.

1.     If the enforcement officer is unable to locate the responsible person, the administrative citation shall be mailed to the responsible person by certified mail, postage prepaid with a return receipt requested. Simultaneously, the administrative citation may be sent by first class mail.

2.     Service by mail shall be sent to the responsible person’s address as shown on public records or as known to the city. If the administrative citation is sent by certified mail and returned unsigned, then service shall be deemed effective by first class mail, provided the administrative citation sent by the first class mail is not returned.

3.     Service of the administrative citation shall be deemed effective three days following deposit of such citation in the U.S. mail.

C.     Service of Citation by Posting Notice.

1.     If the enforcement officer does not succeed in serving the responsible person personally or by certified or first class mail, the enforcement officer shall post the administrative citation in a conspicuous location on any real property within the city in which the city has knowledge that the responsible person has a legal interest.

2.     Posting of the administrative citation shall be deemed effective service as of the date that the citation is actually posted.

 

1.22.060 Service of administrative citation—Non-property violation.
An administrative citation for a non-real property related violation shall be on a form approved by the city manager and shall be issued to the responsible person by an enforcement officer for violations of this code, its adopted codes or applicable state codes in the following manner:

A.    Personal Service. The enforcement officer shall attempt to locate and personally serve the responsible person and, if possible, obtain the signature of the responsible person on the administrative citation. If the served responsible person refuses or fails to sign the administrative citation, the failure or refusal to sign shall not affect the validity of the administrative citation or of subsequent proceedings.

B.     Service of Citation by Posting Notice.

1.     If the enforcement officer does not succeed in serving the responsible person personally, the enforcement officer shall post the administrative citation in a conspicuous location on any personal or real property within the city in which the city has knowledge that the responsible person has a legal interest.

2.     Posting of the administrative citation shall be deemed effective service as of the date that the citation is actually posted.

C.     Service of Citation by Mail.

1.     If the enforcement officer does not succeed in serving the responsible person personally, the administrative citation may be mailed to the responsible person by certified mail, postage prepaid with a return receipt requested. Simultaneously, the administrative citation may be sent by first class mail. Service by mail as set forth in this subsection shall be an alterative to service as set forth in subsection B.

2.     Service by mail shall be sent to the responsible person’s address as shown on public records or as known to the city. If the administrative citation is sent by certified mail and returned unsigned, then service shall be deemed effective by first class mail, provided the administrative citation sent by the first class mail is not returned.

3.     Service of the administrative citation shall be deemed effective three days following deposit of such citation in the U.S. mail.

 

1.22.070 Amount of fines.
Fines imposed under administrative citations shall not exceed the amounts set forth in Government Code Section 36900.

 

1.22.080 Satisfaction of administrative citation.
A.    Upon receipt of an administrative citation, the responsible person shall do the following:

1.     Remedy the violation(s) if the violation(s) is of such a nature that it can be remedied. If a non-emergency health or safety violation(s) is corrected before the correction date provided on the administrative citation, no fine shall be imposed.

2.     Pay the fine to the city within twenty-one calendar days from the correction date on the administrative citation. Payment of a fine shall not excuse or discharge the failure to correct the violation(s) nor shall it bar further enforcement action by the city;

B.     If the responsible person fails to correct the violation(s) set forth in the administrative citation, subsequent administrative citations may be issued for the same violation(s).

C.     Any administrative citation fine paid pursuant to subsection A of this section shall be refunded in accordance with Section 1.22.120(0) of this chapter if it is determined, after a hearing, that the person charged in the administrative citation either was not responsible for the violation or that there was no violation as charged in the administrative citation.

 

1.22.090 Hearing request.
A.    Any recipient of an administrative citation may contest either or both that there was a violation as stated in the administrative citation, or that he or she is the responsible party, by completing a request for hearing form and returning it to the city clerk within twenty-one days from the date of the administrative citation, unless a different time period is otherwise prescribed by law or this code, together with either an advance deposit of the fine or an approved request for a deposit waiver.

B.     A request for hearing form may be obtained from the city clerk.

C.     The person requesting the hearing shall be notified by the city clerk of the time and place set for the hearing at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing.

D.    If the enforcement officer submits an additional written report concerning the administrative citation to the hearing officer for consideration at the hearing, then a copy of this report also shall be served on the person requesting the hearing at least five days prior to the date of the hearing.

 

1.22.100 Deposit waiver.
A.    Any person who requests a hearing who is financially unable to make the advance deposit of the fine as required in Section 1.22.080(A) of this chapter may file a request for deposit waiver.

B.     The request shall be filed with the city manager, or his/her designee, within ten days of the date of the administrative citation on a deposit waiver application form, available from the city clerk. The city manager, or his/her designee, shall either issue or decline to issue the deposit waiver within two business days.

C.     The city manager, or his/her designee, shall issue the deposit waiver if the cited party submits to the city manager, or his/her designee, a sworn affidavit, or declaration under penalty of perjury, together with any supporting documents or materials, demonstrating to the satisfaction of the city manager, or his/her designee, the person’s actual financial inability to deposit with the city the full amount of the fine in advance of the hearing.

D.    The city manager, or his/her designee, shall issue a written determination listing the reasons for his/her determination to issue or not issue the deposit waiver. The written determination of the city manager, or his/her designee, shall be final, and shall be served upon the person who applied for the deposit waiver, the enforcement officer and the city clerk.

 

1.22.110 Hearing procedure.
A.    No hearing to contest an administrative citation shall be held unless the fine has been deposited in advance in accordance with Section 1.22.080(A) of this chapter or a deposit waiver has been issued in accordance with Section 1.22.100 of this chapter.

B.     The hearing shall be set by the city clerk for a date that is not less than ten days and not more than sixty days from the date that the request for hearing is filed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.

C.     The hearing officer may continue the hearing and request additional information from the enforcement officer or the recipient of the administrative citation prior to issuing a written decision. The hearing officer shall ensure an adequate record of the hearing is made.

D.    The city shall bear the burden of proof, by a preponderance of the evidence, that the violation occurred as charged and that the person to whom an administrative citation was issued is responsible for the violation. The city may be represented by the enforcement officer or be represented by counsel.

E.     The recipient of the administrative citation may cross examine the enforcement officer or any other witness against him or her, and may present such evidence as he or she may have. The recipient of the administrative citation may be represented by counsel.

F.     The formal rules of evidence shall not apply. The hearing officer may rely upon such evidence as he or she believes reasonable persons would rely upon in the conduct of their affairs. Any witnesses, including the enforcement officer and the recipient of the administrative citation, shall testify under oath.

G.    The administrative citation and any additional report submitted by the enforcement officer shall constitute prima facie evidence of the respective facts contained on those documents.

 

1.22.120 Hearing officer’s decision.
A.    After considering all of the testimony and evidence submitted at the hearing, the hearing officer shall issue a written decision to uphold or cancel the administrative citation and shall list in the decision the reasons for that decision. The decision of the hearing officer shall be final.

B.     If the hearing officer determines that the administrative citations should be upheld, then the fine amount on deposit with the city shall be retained by the city.

C.     If the hearing officer determines that the administrative citation should be upheld and the fine has not been deposited pursuant to an advance deposit hardship waiver, the hearing officer shall set forth in the decision a payment schedule for the fine.

D.    If the hearing officer determines that the administrative citation should be canceled or reduced and the fine was deposited with the city, then the city shall promptly refund the amount of the deposited fine or excess, as the case may be, together with interest at the average rate earned on the city’s investment portfolio for the period of time that the fine amount was held by the city.

E.     The recipient of the administrative citation shall be served with a copy of the hearing officer’s written decision.

 

1.22.130 Late payment penalties and interest.
Any person who fails to pay any fine imposed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter on or before the date that fine is due also shall be liable for the payment of a late payment penalty in the amount of ten percent of the fine. Thereafter, the amount of the fine, and the penalty, shall accrue interest at ten percent per annum until paid.

 

1.22.140 Recovery of administrative citation fines and costs.
The city may collect any past due administrative citation fine or late payment penalty and interest by use of all available legal means. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, all such fines or late payments shall constitute civil debts and may be recovered in an action at law or, where the violation relates to or occurred upon real property owned by the person to whom an administrative citation was issued, a lien or special assessment may be filed by the city against such real property.

 

1.22.150 Right to judicial review.
A.    The failure of the party contesting the administrative citation to appear at the administrative citation hearing shall result in a forfeiture of the fine and shall constitute a failure to exhaust administrative remedies.

B.     Subject to the provisions of subsection A of this section, any person aggrieved by an administrative decision of a hearing officer on an administrative citation may obtain review of the administrative decision by filing an appeal in a court of competent jurisdiction within twenty days after service of the decision in accordance with the provisions of Government Code Section 53069.4(b)(2).

Title 2 ADMINISTRATION AND PERSONNEL
Chapter 2.04 CITY COUNCIL
Chapter 2.05 CITY MANAGER
Chapter 2.08 FIRE DEPARTMENT
Chapter 2.16 PLANNING COMMISSION
Chapter 2.20 SALARIES
Chapter 2.24 MAYOR
Chapter 2.26 CITY CLERK AND TREASURER
Chapter 2.28 PERSONNEL POLICY
Chapter 2.32 EMERGENCY ORGANIZATION
Chapter 2.36 CEMETERY
Chapter 2.37 CEMETERY COMMITTEE
Chapter 2.44 COMMUNITY HALL
Chapter 2.48 CONSOLIDATION OF ELECTIONS
Chapter 2.52 DISPOSITION OF UNCLAIMED PROPERTY
Chapter 2.56 INSURANCE COVERAGE AND HOLD HARMLESS AGREEMENTS
Chapter 2.60 CLAIMS AGAINST THE CITY

Chapter 2.04 CITY COUNCIL
2.04.010 Meeting—Place.
The city hall is designated as the meeting place of the city council. (Ord. 294 §1, 1969)

 

2.04.020 Meeting—Time.
Regular meetings of the city council shall be held on the second and fourth Mondays of each calendar month at seven p.m. on these days at the place designated in Section 2.04.010. (Ord. 493 §1, 1985; Ord. 294 §2, 1969)

 

2.04.030 Meeting—Audio recordings.
All meetings of the city council, regular or otherwise, which are conducted in open session, shall be recorded in audio. The city council shall designate the person(s) responsible for conducting and storing such audio recordings. The city council shall identify or delegate the responsibility to identify the acceptable format for such recordings from time to time as necessary. All such recordings shall be permanently retained. Nothing in this section shall be construed to require the recording of closed session deliberations of the city council as authorized by California law, nor to require that any such recordings be retained for any period of time. (Ord. 656 §3, 2008)

Chapter 2.05 CITY MANAGER
Show All
Note
2.05.010 Position created.
2.05.020 Appointment and removal by council.
2.05.030 Powers and duties.
2.05.040 Powers and duties—Limitations.
2.05.050 Internal relations.
2.05.060 Manager pro tempore.
2.05.070 Compensation and vacation.
2.05.080 Eligibility.
2.05.090 Bond.
2.05.100 Performance review.

Chapter 2.05 CITY MANAGER
Note
*       Prior ordinance history: Ord. Nos. 475 and 475-B.

 

2.05.010 Position created.
The position of the city manager is created and established. The city manager shall be appointed by the city council wholly on the basis of the city manager’s administrative and executive ability and qualifications and shall hold office for and during the pleasure of the city council as hereinafter provided.

Whenever a reference is made to “city director,” “chief administrative officer” or “city administrator” in this code or in any other ordinance, resolution or action, that reference shall be deemed to mean “city manager.” (Ord. 574 §1, 1995)

 

2.05.020 Appointment and removal by council.
A.    The city council shall appoint the city manager for an indefinite term, and may remove the city manager by a three-member vote. After the expiration of the six months’ probationary period of employment, such removal shall be accomplished in the following manner: at least thirty days before such removal becomes effective, the city council shall, by a three-member vote of its members, adopt a preliminary resolution stating the reason for city manager removal. By the preliminary resolution the council may suspend the city manager from duty, but shall in any case cause to be paid him or her forthwith any unpaid balance of the city manager’s salary. The city council, in removing the city manager, shall use its controlled discretion, and its action shall be final.

B.     During the city manager’s six months’ probationary period of employment, the city manager may resign without notice. After the expiration of six months’ probationary period, the city manager may resign from the position by giving at least thirty days’ written notice of the effective date of the city manager’s resignation; provided, further that the city council may waive all or part of said thirty-day notice period. (Ord. 574 §1, 1995)

 

2.05.030 Powers and duties.
The city manager shall be the administrative head of the government of the city, under the direction and control of the city council. The city manager shall be responsible for the effective administration of all the affairs of the city. In addition to general authorities and power as administrative head, it shall be the duty to and shall have the powers as set forth in the following subsections:

A.    Law Enforcement. It shall be the duty of the city manager to enforce all laws and ordinances of the city and to see that all franchises, contracts, permits and privileges granted by the city council are faithfully observed.

B.     Authority Over Employees. It shall be the duty of the city manager, and he or she shall have the authority, to control, order and give directions to all heads of departments and to subordinate officers and employees of the city under the city manager’s jurisdiction.

C.     Power of Appointment and Removal. Subject to the employee merit system rules and regulations of the city, it shall be the duty of the city manager to appoint, remove, promote and demote any and all officers and employees of the city, except the city clerk, the city treasurer and the city attorney. City manager review with the city council is required prior to appointment or resignation but not prior to change of power of appointment. The city council shall appoint, remove, promote and demote the city attorney and all department heads of the city. City manager shall keep the city council informed of all employee terminations.

D.    In the event the city manager is out-of-town for any reason, the city manager will notify the city council by memorandum of the individual or individuals responsible for overseeing the city manager’s general administrative duties.

E.     Administrative Reorganization of Officers. It shall be the duty and responsibility of the city manager to conduct studies and to recommend to the city council such administrative reorganization of offices, positions or units of the city as may be indicated in the interest of efficient, effective and economical conduct of the city’s business.

F.     Ordinances. It shall be the duty of the city manager to recommend to the city council for adoption such measures, resolutions and ordinances as he or she deems necessary.

G.    Attendance at Council Meetings. It shall be the duty of the city manager to attend all meetings of the city council unless excused therefrom by the mayor individually or the city council.

H.    Financial Reports. It shall be the duty of the city manager to keep the city council at all times fully advised as to the financial condition and needs of the city and to present a monthly report to the city council on the finances and administrative activities of the city.

I.      Budget. It shall be the duty of the city manager to prepare and submit the proposed annual budget and the proposed annual salary plan to the city council for its approval on or before June 15th each year.

J.      Expenditure Control and Purchasing. It shall be the duty of the city manager to see that no expenditures shall be submitted or recommended to the city council except on approval of the city manager or the authorized representative. The city manager or the authorized representative shall be responsible for the purchase of all supplies for all the departments or divisions of the city; further, it shall be the duty of the city manager to establish a centralized purchasing system for all city offices, departments and agencies.

K.    Investigations and Complaints. It shall be the duty of the city manager to make investigations into the affairs of the city and any department or division thereof, and any contract or the proper performance of any obligations of the city; further, it shall be the duty of the city manager to investigate all complaints in relation to matters concerning the administration of the city government and in regard to the service maintained by public utilities in the city.

L.     Public Buildings. It shall be the duty of the city manager to exercise general supervision over all public buildings, public parks and all other public property which is under the control and jurisdiction of the city council.

M.    Emergency. It shall be the duty of the city manager or designated acting city manager in the absence of the city manager to advise the mayor and councilmembers of emergency conditions as soon as practicable.

N.    Additional Duties. It shall be the duty of the city manager to perform such other duties and exercise such other powers as may be delegated to him or her from time to time by ordinance or resolution or other official action of the city council. (Ord. 574 §1, 1995)

 

2.05.040 Powers and duties—Limitations.
It is not intended by the provisions of this chapter to grant any authority to, or impose any duty upon, the city manager which is vested in or imposed by any general law or city regulation in any other city board, officer or employee. The city manager’s functions shall be administrative and not policy making or legislative. (Ord. 574 §1, 1995)

 

2.05.050 Internal relations.
The city council and its members shall deal with the administrative services of the city only through the city manager, except for the purpose of inquiry, and neither the city council nor any member thereof shall give orders or instructions to any subordinates of the city manager. The city manager shall take his or her orders and instructions from the city council only when sitting in a duly convened meeting of the city council, and no individual councilperson shall give any orders or instructions to the city manager. (Ord. 574 §1, 1995)

 

2.05.060 Manager pro tempore.
The city manager shall appoint, subject to council approval, one of the officers or department heads of the city to serve as manager pro tempore during any extended or otherwise significant temporary absence or disability of the city manager. (Ord. 574 §1, 1995)

 

2.05.070 Compensation and vacation.
The city manager shall receive such compensation as the city council shall from time to time determine. The city manager shall take an annual vacation in accordance with the time authorized by the city council for vacation unless the city council extends approved accrued vacation time. (Ord. 574 §1, 1995)

 

2.05.080 Eligibility.
No member of the city council shall be eligible for appointment as city manager until two years have elapsed after such councilmember has ceased to be a member of the city council. (Ord. 574 §1, 1995)

 

2.05.090 Bond.
The city manager shall furnish a corporate surety bond to be approved by the city council, and shall be conditioned upon the faithful performance of the duties imposed upon the city manager as prescribed in this chapter. Any premium for such bond shall be a proper charge against the city. (Ord. 574 §1, 1995)

 

2.05.100 Performance review.
The city council shall on a semiannual basis prepare a written report of the city manager’s performance. (Ord. 574 §1, 1995)

Chapter 2.08 FIRE DEPARTMENT
2.08.010 Organization.
The city fire department shall consist of volunteer companies of firemen, organized into such engine, hose or hook and ladder companies as are allowed by law, and the certificate members thereof shall consist of such number of members as is now or may hereafter be allowed by law. (Ord. 31 §1, 1907)

 

2.08.020 Fire chief.
The fire chief shall have exclusive control of the workings of the fire department in time of conflagration or fire. He or she must aid in the enforcement of all fire ordinances duly enacted, examine buildings in process of erection, report violations of ordinances relating to the prevention and extinguishment of fires when directed by the proper authorities, and institute proceedings therefor, and has general control, management and direction of the city fire companies; and shall perform such other duties as may, by city ordinances, or by law, be imposed upon him or her. His or her compensation is fixed at the sum the city council determines from time to time by resolution. (Ord. 336 §1, 1973; Ord. 31 §2, 1907)

 

2.08.040 Apparatus—Use restrictions.
No fire apparatus, hose, tools or fire appliances of the department shall be used for other than fire purposes unless with written consent of the fire chief. Any person violating the conditions of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 31 §4, 1907)

 

2.08.050 False alarms.
Any person who rings or assists in ringing any fire bell in the city other than for fire alarms, fire meetings or funeral tolling, unless with the written permission of the fire chief, is guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 31 §6, 1907)

 

2.08.060 Water use restrictions.
Any person who opens or leaves open, except for ordinary household purposes, any faucet or water cock directly or indirectly connected with the source whence the fire department derives its supply of water for extinguishing fires, or who uses or continues to use for irrigating purposes any water from any pipe connected with the source of supply, from and after an alarm of fire, during any time the fire department is drawing upon such source of supply for the extinguishment of fire, is guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 31 §1, 1907)

Chapter 2.16 PLANNING COMMISSION
2.16.010 Established—Number of members designated.
A planning commission is established, with membership, powers and duties as provided in this chapter and by the statutes of the state. The planning commission shall consist of five members. (Ord. 537 §1, 1991)

 

2.16.020 Eligibility.
To be eligible for appointment or to hold office as a member of the planning commission, a person shall be a resident and qualified elector of the city. (Ord. 537 §1, 1991)

 

2.16.030 Appointment and term of office.
The mayor shall appoint the members of the planning commission, with the approval of the city council, to serve terms of two years. Appointments shall be made to staggered terms to provide that no more than three appointments expire at the same time. (Ord. 537 §1, 1991)

 

2.16.040 Compensation—Business expenses.
All members of the planning commission shall serve as such without compensation, except such as may be fixed by the city council from time to time. Reasonable travel and other expenses may be allowed from time to time while traveling or engaged on business authorized by the planning commission. (Ord. 537 §1, 1991)

 

2.16.050 Removal from office—Vacancies.
A.    Members of the planning commission may be removed from office by a majority vote of the city council or by the mayor subject to the approval of the city council.

B.     If a member of the planning commission absents him or herself from two regular meetings of the commission within a period of twelve calendar months, unless by permission of the commission expressed in its official minutes, or is convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude or ceases to be qualified elector of the city, his or her office shall become vacant.

C.     If vacancies occur on the planning commission other than by the expiration of the term, they shall be filled by appointment for the unexpired portion of the term. (Ord. 537 §1, 1991)

 

2.16.060 Election of officers—Secretary designated.
At the first regular meeting in December of each calendar year, the planning commission shall elect a chairman and a vice chairman from among its members and other officers as deemed necessary by the commission. The chairman and vice-chairman may serve successive terms. The secretary of the planning commission shall be the city manager or his/her designated deputy. (Ord. 537 §1, 1991)

 

2.16.070 Planning commission meetings.
A.    The planning commission shall meet regularly once each month at a time and place fixed by resolution of the commission, and shall hold such other meetings as shall from time to time be called in the manner and form required by law.

B.     All meetings of the planning commission, regular or otherwise, which are conducted in open session, shall be recorded in audio. The person(s) responsible for conducting and storing audio recordings pursuant to Section 2.04.030 shall conduct and store audio recordings under this section. Such recordings shall be conducted and stored in the same manner and format as recordings conducted pursuant to Section 2.04.030. All such recordings shall be permanently retained. Nothing in this section shall be construed to require the recording of closed session deliberations of the planning commission as authorized by California law, nor to require that any such recordings be retained for any period of time. (Ord. 656 §4, 2008; Ord. 537 §1, 1991)

 

2.16.080 Voting requirement.
The affirmative or negative vote of a majority of the entire membership of the commission is necessary for it to take action. (Ord. 537 §1, 1991)

 

2.16.090 Powers and duties designated.
The planning commission shall have the following powers and duties:

A.    To recommend to the proper officers of the city, plans for the regulation of the future growth and development and beautification of the city;

B.     To carry out the provisions of the zoning ordinance of the city (Title 17 of this code) and to undertake the study for, preparation and recommendation of a master plan or amendments thereto covering a comprehensive, long-term general plan for the physical development of the city and of any land outside its boundaries which bears relation to the development of the city;

C.     To approve, conditionally approve or deny tentative maps, tentative parcel maps and use permits, certify adequacy of C.E.Q.A. documents therefor, and shall conduct meetings and/or public hearings as necessary to review and prepare recommendations to the city council on all zoning, zoning variance, general plan and capital improvement programs;

D.    To do such other things as may be required by other ordinances of the city or by state law. (Ord. 537 §1, 1991)

Chapter 2.20 SALARIES
2.20.010 Councilmembers.
Each member of the city council shall receive a salary of seventy-five dollars per month. This amount shall be payable each month from and after July 1, 1968. (Ord. 280 §1, 1968)

 

2.20.020 Mayor.
The mayor shall receive a salary of one hundred dollars per month. This amount shall be payable each month from and after January 1, 2001. (Ord. 618 §1, 2001)

Chapter 2.24 MAYOR
2.24.010 When chosen.
The mayor and mayor pro tempore shall be chosen one year from the date set by Section 36801 of the Government Code of the State of California for a one-year term or until a duly elected successor takes office. (Ord. 331 §1, 1973)

 

2.24.020 Incumbent—Status.
The persons elected as mayor and mayor pro tempore shall be incumbents. (Ord. 331 §2, 1973)

 

2.24.030 Effective date.
The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be effective at the election in 1974 and the mayor and mayor pro tempore elected in 1974 and each year thereafter shall serve for one year. (Ord. 331 §3, 1973)

 

2.24.040 Duties of the mayor.
The mayor serves at the pleasure of the city council and has all the rights and responsibilities of any councilmember. In addition, the mayor:

A.    Acts as the official head of the council.

B.     Calls for special meetings when needed with guidance from the city manager and city attorney.

C.     Selects a substitute for city representation when unable to attend functions.

D.    Makes judgment calls on proclamations, recognition awards and other ceremonial matters.

E.     Recommends committee assignments as appropriate.

F.     Leads the council into working as an effective, cohesive team.

G.    Signs documents and checks on behalf of the city.

H.    Chairs council meetings, including:

1.     Maintains order, decorum and the fair and equitable treatment of all speakers.

2.     Keeps discussion and questions focused on the specific agenda item under consideration.

3.     Makes parliamentary rulings with advice, if requested, from the city attorney who acts as an advisory parliamentarian.

 

2.24.050 Duties of the mayor pro tempore.
The mayor pro tempore serves at the pleasure of the city council and has all of the rights and responsibilities of any councilmember. In addition, the mayor pro tempore:

A.    Performs the duties of the mayor if the mayor is absent or disabled and unable to perform mayoral duties.

B.     Chairs city council meetings at the request of the mayor.

C.     Reports closed session actions in open session at city council meetings. (Ord. 648, 2005)

Chapter 2.26 CITY CLERK AND TREASURER
Note
*       Prior ordinance history: Ord. 482.

 

2.26.010 Office established.
There is established the consolidated position of city clerk/treasurer, which shall be an elected office, subject to the provisions of the California Government Code Sections 36502 et seq. and 40800 et seq. In the event the voters of the city elect to make such offices appointive, as allowed by Government Code Sections 36508 and 36509, the statutory restrictions regarding residency shall not apply. (Ord. 590 §1, 1996)

 

2.26.020 Duties, qualifications and compensation.
The elected clerk/treasurer position shall be paid the sum of one hundred fifty dollars per month. The position shall not be eligible for city paid benefits of any type.

The clerk/treasurer shall carry out all duties required by Government Code Sections 41001 et seq. and 53630—53638. Any person seeking to be elected to the position of city clerk/treasurer shall provide a statement of qualifications to the voters of the city which demonstrates education or public or private sector financial experience sufficient to allow that person to successfully fill the duties and responsibilities assigned by the Government Code. (Ord. 590 §1, 1996)

Chapter 2.28 PERSONNEL POLICY
Note
*       Prior ordinance history: Ord. Nos. 315, 337, 364, 370, 390, 402, 446 and 466.

 

2.28.010 Adoption of personnel system.
In order to establish an equitable and uniform system for dealing with personnel matters, and to comply with applicable laws relating to the administration of the personnel process, the personnel system set forth in this chapter is adopted. (Ord. 504 §1, 1986)

 

2.28.020 Definitions.
The terms used to administer the personnel system shall be defined in the personnel rules. (Ord. 504 §2, 1986)

 

2.28.030 Administration.
The city manager shall administer the city personnel system under the direction and control of the city council. The city manager shall:

A.    Act as the appointing authority for the city;

B.     Administer all the provisions of this chapter and of the personnel rules not specifically reserved to the city council;

C.     Prepare and recommend to the city council personnel rules and revisions and amendments to such rules;

D.    Prepare and recommend to the city council personnel rules and revisions and amendments to such rules;

E.     Have the authority to discipline employees in accordance with this chapter and the personnel rules of the city;

F.     Provide for the publishing or posting of notices of positions in the city competitive service; the receiving of applications therefor; the conducting and grading of tests; the certification of individuals or lists of persons eligible for appointment to the appropriate positions in the city service; and performing any other duty that may be required to administer the personnel system. (Ord. 504 §3, 1986)

 

2.28.040 Competitive service.
The provisions of the chapter shall apply to all regular full-time offices, positions and employments in the service of the city, except:

A.    Elective officers;

B.     The city manager and any assistants to the city manager;

C.     The city attorney and any assistant or deputy city attorneys;

D.    Members of appointive boards, commissions and committees;

E.     All department heads (e.g., director of public works, chief of police);

F.     Persons engaged under contract to supply expert, professional, technical or any other services;

G.    Volunteer personnel, such as volunteer firefighters;

H.    All council-appointed city officers;

I.      Emergency employees who are hired to meet the immediate requirements of an emergency condition, such as extraordinary fire, flood or earthquake which threatens life or property;

J.      Employees, other than those listed elsewhere in this section, who are not regularly employed in regular full-time positions. “Regularly employed in regular full-time positions” means an employee hired for an indefinite term into a budgeted position, who is regularly scheduled to work no less than one thousand forty hours per year, and has successfully completed the probationary period and been retained as provided in this chapter and the personnel rules;

K.    Any position primarily funded under a state or federal employment program;

L.     Employees not included in the competitive service under this section shall serve at the pleasure of their appointing authority. (Ord. 504 §4, 1986)

 

2.28.050 Adoption and amendment of rules.
Personnel rules shall be adopted by resolution of the city council. The rules may establish regulations governing the personnel system; including:

A.    Preparation, installation, revision and maintenance of a position classification plan covering all positions in the competitive service, including employment standards and qualifications for each class;

B.     Appropriate announcement of the selection process and acceptance of applications for employment;

C.     Preparation and conduct of tests and the establishment and use of resulting employment lists containing names of persons eligible for appointment;

D.    Certification and appointment of persons from employment lists, and the making of provisional appointments;

E.     Establishment of probationary testing periods;

F.     Evaluation of employees during the probationary testing period and thereafter;

G.    Transfer, promotion, demotion, reinstatement, disciplinary action and layoff of employees in the competitive service;

H.    Separation of employees from the city service;

I.      The establishment and maintenance of adequate personnel records for purposes of accounting and legal requirements;

J.      The establishment of any necessary appeal procedures. (Ord. 504 §5, 1986)

 

2.28.060 Appointments.
A.    Appointments to vacant positions in the competitive service shall be made in accordance with the personnel rules. Appointments and promotions shall be based on merit and fitness to be ascertained so far as practicable by examination. Examinations may be used and conducted to aid in the selection of qualified employees and shall consist of selection techniques which will test fairly the qualifications of candidates such as achievement and aptitude tests, written tests, personal interview, performance tests, physical agility tests, evaluation of daily work performance, work samples or any combinations of these or other tests. The probationary period shall be considered an extension of the examination process. Physical, medical and psychological tests may be given as a part of any examination.

B.     In any examination the city manager or his/her designee may include, in addition to competitive tests, a qualifying test or tests, and set minimum standards therefor.

C.     The appointing authority of employees in the competitive service is the city manager. The city manager may delegate the appointing authority to any other officer or employee of the city. (Ord. 504 §6, 1986)

 

2.28.070 Probationary period.
A.    All regular appointments, including promotional appointments, shall be for a probationary period of not less than six months or longer as determined by the personnel rules. During the probationary period, the employees may be rejected at any time without the right of appeal or hearing.

B.     An employee rejected during the probationary period from a position to which he or she has been promoted shall be reinstated to a position in the class from which he or she was promoted unless he or she is discharged from the city service as provided in the personnel rules. If no vacancy exists in such position, he or she shall be placed on a reemployment list as provided in the personnel rules.

C.     An employee in the competitive service promoted or transferred to a position not included in the competitive service shall be reinstated to a position in the class from which he or she was promoted or transferred if action is taken to reject him or her unless he or she is discharged in the manner provided in this chapter and the personnel rules for positions in the competitive service. If no vacancy exists in such a position he or she shall be placed on a reemployment list as provided in the personnel rules. (Ord. 504 §7, 1986)

 

2.28.080 Status of present employees.
A.    Any person holding a position included in the competitive service who, on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, shall have served continuously in such position, or in some other position in the competitive service, for a period equal to the probationary period prescribed in the rules for his/her class, shall assume regular status in the competitive service in the position held on such effective date without qualifying test, and shall thereafter be subject in all respects to the provisions of this chapter and the personnel rules.

B.     Any other persons holding positions in the competitive service shall be regarded as probationers who are serving out the balance of their probationary periods as prescribed in the rules before obtaining regular status. The probationary period shall be computed from the date of appointment or employment. (Ord. 504 §8, 1986)

 

2.28.090 Demotion, dismissal, reduction in pay, suspension, reprimand.
The city manager or any appointing power shall have the authority to demote, discharge, reprimand, reduce in pay, or suspend, any regular employee for cause in accordance with procedures included in the personnel rules. (Ord. 504 §9, 1986)

 

2.28.100 Right of appeal.
A.    Any employee in the competitive service shall have the right to appeal a demotion, reduction in pay, suspension or discharge for disciplinary or medical reasons, except in those instances where the right of appeal is specifically prohibited by this chapter or the rules adopted thereunder.

B.     All appeals shall be processed in accordance with the requirements and procedures as set forth in the personnel rules adopted pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 504 §10, 1986)

 

2.28.110 Lay-off and reemployment.
Lay-off and reemployment actions shall follow the process outlined in the personnel rules. (Ord. 504 §11, 1986)

 

2.28.120 Political activity.
The political activities of city employees shall conform to pertinent provisions of state law and any local provision adopted pursuant to state law. (Ord. 504 §12, 1986)

 

2.28.130 Contracts for special service.
The city manager shall consider and make recommendations to the city council regarding the extent to which the city should contract for the performance of technical services in connection with the establishment or operation of the personnel system. The city council may authorize a contract with any qualified person or public or private agency for the performance of all or any of the following responsibilities and duties imposed by this chapter:

A.    The preparation of personnel rules and subsequent revisions and amendments thereof;

B.     The preparation of a position classification plan, and subsequent revisions and amendments thereof;

C.     The preparation, conduct and grading of competitive tests;

D.    The conduct of employee training programs;

E.     Special and technical services of advisory or informational character on matters relating to personnel administration. (Ord. 504 §13, 1986)

Chapter 2.32 EMERGENCY ORGANIZATION
2.32.010 Purpose.
The declared purposes of this chapter are to provide for the preparation and carrying out of plans for the protection of persons and property within the city in the event of an emergency, the direction of the emergency organization, and the coordination of the emergency functions of this city with all other public agencies, corporations, organizations, and affected private persons. (Ord. 608 §1, 2000)

 

2.32.020 “Emergency” defined.
As used in this chapter, “emergency” shall mean the actual or threatened existence of conditions of disaster or of extreme peril to the safety of persons and property within this city caused by such conditions as air pollution, fire, flood, storm, epidemic, riot, avalanche, or earthquake, or other conditions, including conditions resulting from war or imminent threat of war, but other than conditions resulting from a labor controversy, which conditions are or are likely to be beyond the control of the services, personnel, equipment and facilities of the city, requiring the combined forces or other political subdivisions to combat. (Ord. 608 §1, 2000)

 

2.32.030 Disaster council—Created—Membership.
The city disaster council is created, and shall consist of the following:

A.    The mayor, who shall serve as chairman;

B.     The director of emergency services, who shall serve as vice chairman;

C.     The assistant director of emergency services;

D.    Such chiefs of emergency services as are provided for in a current emergency plan of this city, adopted pursuant to this chapter;

E.     Such representatives of civic, business, labor, veterans, professional, or other organizations having an official emergency responsibility, as may be appointed by the director with the advice and consent of the city council. (Ord. 608 §1, 2000)

2.32.040 Disaster council—Powers and duties.
It shall be the duty of the city disaster council, and it is empowered, to develop and recommend for adoption by the city council, emergency and mutual-aid plans and agreements, and such ordinances and resolutions and rules and regulations as are necessary to implement such plans and agreements. The disaster council shall meet upon call of the chairman or, in his/her absence from the city or inability to call such meeting, upon call of the vice chairman. (Ord. 608 §1, 2000)

 

2.32.050 Director and assistant director of emergency services—Offices created.
A.    There is created the office of director of emergency services. The city manager shall serve as director of emergency services.

B.     There is created the office of assistant director of emergency services, who shall be appointed by the director. (Ord. 608 §1, 2000)

 

2.32.060 Director and assistant director of emergency services—Powers and duties.
A.    The director is empowered to:

1.     Request the city council to proclaim the existence or threatened existence of a “local emergency” if the city council is in session, or to issue such proclamation if the city council is not in session. Whenever a local emergency is proclaimed by the director, the city council shall take action to ratify the proclamation within seven days thereafter or the proclamation shall have no further force or effect;

2.     Request the Governor to proclaim a “state of emergency” when, in the opinion of the director, the locally available resources are inadequate to cope with the emergency;

3.     Control and direct the effort of the emergency organization of this city for the accomplishment of the purposes of this chapter;

4.     Direct cooperation between and coordination of services and staff of the emergency organization of this city, and resolve questions of authority and responsibility that may arise between them;

5.     Activate the emergency operations center to facilitate the emergency efforts of the city;

6.     Represent this city in all dealings with the public or private agencies on matters pertaining to emergencies as defined in this chapter;

7.     In the event of the proclamation of a “local emergency” as provided in this section, the proclamation of a “state of emergency” by the Governor or the Director of the State Office of Emergency Services in the event the Governor is inaccessible, or the existence of a “state of war emergency,” the director is empowered:

a.     To make and issue rules and regulations on matters reasonably related to the protection of life and property as affected by such emergency; provided, however, such rules and regulations must be confirmed at the earliest practical time by the city council,

b.     To obtain vital supplies, equipment, and such other properties found lacking and needed for the protection of life and property and to bind the city for the fair value thereof and, if required immediately, to commandeer the same for public use,

c.     To require emergency services of any city officer or employee and, in the event of the proclamation of a “state of emergency” in the county in which this city is located or the existence of a “state of war emergency,” to command the aid of as many citizens of this community as he or she deems necessary in the execution of his or her duties; such persons shall be entitled to all privileges, benefits and immunities as are provided by state law for registered disaster service workers,

d.     To requisition necessary personnel or material of any city department or agency,

e.     To execute all of his/her ordinary power as city manager, all of the special powers conferred upon him or her by this chapter or by resolution of emergency plan pursuant hereto adopted by the city council, all powers conferred upon him or her by any statute, by any agreement approved by the city council, and by any other lawful authority, and

f.      To seek accreditation of the disaster council formed under Section 2.32.020 of this chapter in accordance with Sections 8581(b) or 8612 of the Government Code.

B.     The director of emergency services shall designate the order of succession to that office, to take effect in the event other director is unavailable to attend meetings and otherwise perform his/her duties during an emergency. Such order of succession shall be approved by the city council.

C.     The assistant director shall, under the supervision of the director and with the assistance of the emergency service chiefs, develop emergency plans and manage the emergency programs of this city, and shall have such other powers and duties as may be assigned by the director. Emergency plans should be consistent with and complementary to the California state emergency plan and the Amador County emergency operations plan. (Ord. 608 §1, 2000)

 

2.32.070 Emergency evaluation committee—Created—Membership.
The emergency evaluation committee is created, and shall consist of the following:

A.    The director of emergency services;

B.     The fire chief;

C.     The police chief;

D.    The director of public works;

E.     The city attorney. (Ord. 608 §1, 2000)

 

2.32.080 Emergency evaluation committee—Powers and duties.
A.    Any member of the emergency evaluation committee may call an emergency meeting of the committee. These emergency meetings may take place in person or by phone, radio, electronic mail, or any other medium that seems appropriate to the members of the committee. A quorum of the committee need not participate in any emergency meeting. However, attempts should be made to contact all members of the committee in the event of an emergency meeting.

B.     The group shall meet to discuss the city’s role in emergency or disaster situations. The director of emergency services has ultimate authority for activation of the emergency operations center (EOC). Other members of the emergency evaluation committee will advise the director on EOC activation.

C.     If there is a question regarding whether city facilities should be activated as an evacuation center, this committee shall meet to discuss what action is necessary. The director has decision-making authority in these matters. Other members of the emergency evaluation committee will advise the director on evacuation center activation.

D.    When appropriate, the committee shall determine evacuation routes and safe zones that would best protect the well being of persons in the city. The committee must instruct the public information officer to have the media broadcast evacuation and safe zone instructions when needed. The committee will also assure that units are dispatched to alert persons to evacuate areas facing significant danger from the hazard.

E.     When the director of emergency services has questions regarding emergency policy or authority, he or she may seek the council of the emergency evaluation committee. (Ord. 608 §1, 2000)

 

2.32.090 Emergency organization—Composition.
All officers and employees of the city, together with those volunteer forces enrolled to aid them during an emergency, and all groups, organizations and persons who may, by agreement or operation of law, including persons impressed into service under the provisions of Jackson City Code charged with duties incident to the protection of life and property in this city during such emergency, shall constitute the emergency organization of this city. (Ord. 608 §1, 2000)

 

2.32.100 Emergency plan.
The city disaster council shall be responsible for the development of the city emergency plan, which plan shall provide for the effective mobilization of all of the resources of the city, both public and private, to meet any condition constituting a local emergency, and shall provide for the organization, powers and duties, services and staff of the emergency organization. Such plan shall take effect upon adoption by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 608 §1, 2000)

 

2.32.110 Expenditures.
Any expenditures made in connection with emergency activities, including mutual-aid activities, shall be deemed conclusively to be for the direct protection and benefit of the inhabitants and property of the city. (Ord. 608 §1, 2000)

 

2.32.120 Violations—Penalties.
It shall be a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not to exceed five hundred dollars, or by imprisonment for not to exceed six months, or both, for any person, during an emergency, to:

A.    Willfully obstruct, hinder or delay any member of the emergency organization in the enforcement of any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter, or in the performance of any duty imposed upon him or her by virtue of this chapter;

B.     Do any act forbidden by any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter, if the act is of such a nature as to give, or be likely to give, assistance to the enemy, or to imperil the lives and property of inhabitants of this city, or to prevent, hinder or delay the defense or protection thereof;

C.     Wear, carry or display, without authority, any means of identification specified by the emergency agency of the state. (Ord. 608 §1, 2000)

Chapter 2.36 CEMETERY
2.36.020 Map on file.
The map of the cemetery on file in the office of the city clerk of the city, is the reference map of the Jackson Public Cemetery. (Ord. 361 §2, 1975; Ord. 89 §2, 1916)

 

2.36.030 Price of plots or lots.
The price of cemetery plots in the city cemetery shall be two hundred dollars each, or as may otherwise be modified or set periodically by city council resolution; except a lot for stillborn or infant (less than twelve months) which shall be ten dollars. (Ord. 492 §1, 1985; Ord. 423 §1, 1979; Ord. 361 §3, 1975; Ord. 321 §§1, 2, 1972)

 

2.36.040 Improvements.
No improvements of any character will be permitted in the cemetery unless the purchase price of the lot on which the improvements are to be made has been paid to the city. All improvements are subject to the inspection and approval of the cemetery commissioner. Before any improvements can be commenced or made, the approval of the cemetery commissioner shall be obtained thereon. (Ord. 361 §4, 1974; Ord. 89 §4, 1916)

 

2.36.050 Lot sale conveyances.
The mayor and city clerk are authorized to execute all necessary conveyances to evidence the sale of any cemetery lot by the city to the purchaser. (Ord. 321 §3, 1972)

 

2.36.060 Permit—When required.
It is unlawful to bury in the cemetery or to remove therefrom for burial or other purpose the body of any deceased person without first having complied with the laws of the State of California. (Ord. 361 §5, 1975; Ord. 41 1/2 §1, 1908)

 

2.36.070 Noncompliance with council’s orders.
It is unlawful to violate or refuse, fail, or neglect to comply with any lawful, general or special order, notice or direction of the city council relating to the cemetery. (Ord. 361 §6, 1975; Ord. 348 §2, 1973; Ord. 41 1/2 §2, 1908)

 

2.36.080 Written permission required for grave digging.
It is unlawful for any person to dig any grave in the cemetery without first having obtained the written permission from the city council. (Ord. 361 §7, 1975; Ord. 348 §2, 1973; Ord. 41 1/2 §3, 1908)

 

2.36.090 Unlawful acts.
Under the authority of California Health and Safety Code Section 8115 and any successor section thereto the following acts shall be unlawful and a violation of this chapter in any cemetery, public or private, within the municipal boundaries of the city:

A.    Defacement, Damage or Theft of Property. No person shall cut, chalk, mark or write upon, or in any manner whatsoever deface, break, mutilate, injure, destroy, damage or steal from any vault, tombstone, mausoleum, gravestone, monument, building or other structure within the boundaries of any cemetery located within the limits of the city.

B.     Destruction of Plants—Molestation of Birds or Wildlife. No person shall cut, break, pluck, or remove or in any manner destroy or injure any tree, shrub, plant or flower, or destroy, injure, or molest any bird, or any bird’s nest or any bird’s eggs or any wildlife within the boundaries of any cemetery located within the limits of the city.

C.     Deposit of Rubbish or Waste. No person shall deposit rubbish, grass, shrub cuttings, waste or other material or substance in any of the roadways or driveways or other areas of any cemetery within the limits of the city.

D.    Loitering and Improper Behavior or Use. No person shall loiter in any cemetery or property used or held exclusively for the burial or other permanent deposit of the human dead. The word “loitering” is defined as idling with intent to commit crime or unlawful acts.

E.     Hours of Operation. No person, without the express consent of the owner of the cemetery, shall enter any cemetery within the limits of the city between one-half hour after sunset and one-half hour before sunrise.

F.     Civil Cause of Action, Treble Damages, Attorneys Fees.

1.     Any person or persons who damages, destroys, mutilates, or vandalizes any property within a cemetery in the city shall be civilly liable to the owner of such property for three times the amount of any actual damage caused by that person and all costs and attorneys fees incurred by the owner in obtaining judgement and recovery.

2.     In the event the person or persons are juveniles, the parents and/or guardians of such juvenile shall be jointly and severably liable for all actual damages, treble damages, costs and attorneys fees. (Ord. 605 §1, 1999; Ord. 348 §2, 1973; Ord. 41 1/2 §4, 1908)

 

2.36.100 Burial of persons who have died from contagious disease.
It is unlawful to bury in the cemetery the remains of any person whose death has occurred from disease that is held by the State Board of Health to be infectious, contagious, or communicable and dangerous to the public health unless the remains are arterially embalmed. (Ord. 361 §8, 1975; Ord. 348 §2, 1973; Ord. 41 1/2 §5, 1908)

 

2.36.110 Refuse disposal and fire restrictions.
It is unlawful to leave or deposit rubbish, dirt, brush or refuse of any kind on graves, walks or passageways in the cemetery, or at any other place therein other than dumping ground selected by the city council, or to build fires for any purpose in the cemetery without permission of the city council. (Ord. 361 §9, 1975; Ord. 348 §2, 1973; Ord. 41 1/2 §6, 1908)

 

2.36.120 Cemetery director.
Pursuant to the authority granted by Sections 2.05.030 and 2.05.120, it shall be the duty of the chief administrative officer of the city to function as the cemetery director, responsible for all fiscal management, cemetery maintenance and improvements, and overall cemetery administration and control.

A.    The cemetery director may appoint a deputy or delegate any specific duties in the interest of efficient, effective, and economical conduct of the city’s cemetery.

B.     The cemetery director shall define and enforce all duties appropriate for proper operation and management of the city cemetery, and shall cause such definitions to be set forth and adopted by resolution.

C.     All references in the ordinances codified in this Chapter 2.36, Cemetery, which designate certain duties to the mayor or city clerk, or cemetery commissioner are modified and shall be substituted with the words, “cemetery director.” (Ord. 492 §2, 1985; Ord. 361 §10, 1975; Ord. 321 §2, 1972; Ord. 41 1/2 §7, 1908)

 

2.36.150 Grave—Depth.
All graves to be hereafter dug in the cemetery shall be in compliance with the State Code. (Ord. 361 §13, 1975; Ord. 41 1/2 §9, 1908)

 

2.36.160 Grave—Price of opening and closing.
The opening and closing price for any grave shall be:

A.

Single grave (depth standard)

$145.00

B.

Single grave (vault size)

185.00

C.

Single grave (depth double)

265.00

D.

Single grave (depth double/vault size)

265.00

E.

Any grave for burial of stillborn or infants

15.00

F.

Any grave for burial of cremated remains

25.00

and may from time to time be changed by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 276 §1, 1976; Ord. 361 §14, 1975; Ord. 321 §1, 1972; Ord. 41 1/2 §11, 1908)

 

2.36.161 Numbered marker.
A numbered marker shall be placed on the grave immediately after the burial. The cost shall be included in the plot or lot price. (See Section 2.36.030). (Ord. 361 §15, 1975)

 

2.36.170 Effective date of rates and charges.
The rates set forth in Sections 2.36.030 and 2.36.160 shall be effective on and after February 1, 1974. (Ord. 361 §16, 1975; Ord. 321 §6, 1972)

 

2.36.180 Violation—Penalty.
The penalty for violations of this chapter shall be as prescribed in Section 1.20.010. (Ord. 334 §2, 1973; Ord. 41 1/2 §12, 1908)

Chapter 2.37 CEMETERY COMMITTEE
2.37.010 Established.
The Jackson cemetery committee is created as an official advisory committee of the city. (Ord. 588 §1, 1996)

 

2.37.020 Number of members designated.
The committee shall be composed of five members who shall act in an advisory capacity to the city council on matters affecting the operation and maintenance of the Jackson cemetery. (Ord. 588 §1, 1996)

 

2.37.025 Eligibility.
To be eligible for appointment or to hold office as a member of the cemetery committee, members shall be a resident and qualified elector of the city. Provided, however, that this provision shall not apply to persons serving as members of the cemetery committee prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. They shall serve in accordance with the terms of their previous appointment by the city council. (Ord. 588 §1, 1996)

 

2.37.030 Appointment and term of office.
The mayor shall appoint members of the cemetery committee, with the approval of the city council, to serve two-year terms. There shall be no limit to the number of terms any member may serve. (Ord. 588 §1, 1996)

 

2.37.040 Removal from office—Vacancies.
A.    Members of the cemetery committee may be removed from office by a majority vote of the city council or by the mayor, subject to the approval of the city council.

B.     A member may resign from the committee by providing written notification to the city council. (Ord. 588 §1, 1996)

 

2.37.050 Compensation.
All members of the cemetery committee shall serve as such without compensation. (Ord. 588 §1, 1996)

 

2.37.060 Election of officers—Secretary designated.
At the first regular meeting following enactment of the ordinance codified in this chapter, and thereafter in December, the cemetery committee shall elect a chairman and a vice-chairman from among its members and other officers as deemed necessary by the committee. The secretary of the cemetery committee shall be the city clerk or his/her designated deputy. (Ord. 588 §1, 1996)

 

2.37.070 Time and place of meetings.
The cemetery committee shall meet regularly each month at a time and place fixed by resolution of the committee and shall hold such other meetings as shall from time to time be called in the manner and form required by law. (Ord. 588 §1, 1996)

 

2.37.080 Powers and duties.
The cemetery committee shall:

A.    Recommend to the city council policy or administration of the Jackson cemetery;

B.     Advise and recommend to the city council policy for maintenance and operation of and improvements to the Jackson cemetery;

C.     Confer and make recommendations on any matter specifically referred by the city council. (Ord. 588 §1, 1996)

Chapter 2.44 COMMUNITY HALL
2.44.010 Policies and regulations established.
There is established the policies and regulations set forth in this chapter regarding public usage of the community hall. (Ord. 415 §1, 1979)

 

2.44.020 Advisory committee.
A community hall advisory committee, composed of the city administrator and the chief of police is created to serve without additional compensation, to investigate each application for a permit required for the use of the community hall. The committee shall have the power to direct investigations and conduct hearings, and to do and perform all other acts which may be necessary or proper within the scope of its duties and functions. The committee shall maintain each application on file, together with its recommendation thereon, all of which shall be subject to public inspection at any reasonable time. (Ord. 415 §1(A), 1979)

 

2.44.030 Permit—Required.
A.    No person or organization shall be permitted or allowed to use or rent the community hall for any purpose without a permit from the city administrator authorizing such use. All rules attached to the permit shall be observed at all times, including those rules posted on the premises of the community hall. Failure to observe the rules shall be grounds for denial of permit.

B.     The provisions of this regulation shall not apply to any person or group functioning as an arm of the city, county, state or federal government, and whose activity in the community hall is directly related to the regular transaction of government business, provided the committee so approves. (Ord. 415 §1(B), 1979)

 

2.44.040 Permit—Application.
An application for a permit to use the community hall as required by Section 2.44.030 shall be made to the city administrator upon forms prescribed by the committee. Such application shall be filed with the administrator at least ten days prior to the time at which the permit applied for is to become effective. The administrator may, for good cause shown, allow the filing of an application less than ten days. The application required in this section shall contain the following information, or in lieu thereof, a statement satisfactory to the administrator of the reasons why such information is not furnished:

A.    Names, addresses, and phone numbers of the person or organization renting the hall; if an organization, then the names, addresses and phone numbers of its principal officers or persons who will be in charge;

B.     The period of time when the hall will be used, beginning with the time when furniture must be set up to the time when cleanup terminates;

C.     A list of references where the person or group has used a similar hall or auditorium in other cities during the past two years;

D.    A full statement of the general character and extent of the type of activity being conducted, and the estimated attendance;

E.     A statement that if a permit is granted, no person under the age of sixteen may be unaccompanied by an adult;

F.     A statement that if a permit is granted, it will not be used or represented in any way as an endorsement by the city of the character of the activity carried out in the hall;

G.    Such other information as may be required by the administrator or the committee in order for them to determine that the proposed activity is in the interest of and not inimical to the public welfare. (Ord. 415 §1(C), 1979)

 

2.44.050 Permit—Investigation.
The committee shall examine all applications filed under Section 2.44.040, and shall make such further investigation of the application and applicant as the committee shall deem necessary in order for them to perform their duties under this chapter. If, upon such investigation, the committee determines that the nature of the activity would involve or produce a public nuisance or anything of immoral character, or would in any way be a detriment to the health, safety, and welfare of the residents of the city, then the permit shall be summarily denied. (Ord. 415 §1(D), 1979)

 

2.44.060 Rental fees and deposits.
A.    At least ten days prior to the usage of the hall, each applicant shall tender to the city payment for such rental fees and deposits as are determined appropriate by the city administrator pursuant to the current resolution establishing the fee schedule for community hall approved by the city council at that time.

B.     In addition to the above, each and every applicant, not otherwise specifically exempted by Section 2.44.030(B), shall post a cleaning deposit for the use of the hall and kitchen in the amount of thirty dollars; which deposit is refundable upon approval of the city administrator in the manner herein designated.

C.     Time and Method of Refunding Deposits. The moneys from all such deposits designated herein shall be held by the city administrator for a maximum of ten days after the event in order for the administrator (or his/her duly authorized representative) to inspect the hall and all equipment used for possible repairs of damage or excess cleaning, etc., which may be required as a result of the applicant’s usage. After the administrator so determines the final charges, he or she shall refund to the applicant all deposit moneys in excess of the amount required to complete repairs or additional cleaning, etc.

D.    If the administrator determines that the final charges will exceed the amount on deposit from the lessee, he or she shall bill the applicant for the difference. The bill shall be due and payable thirty days from the day of transmittal.

E.     Waiver. The city council may for good cause shown waive any fee or deposit required by the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 415 §1(E), 1979)

 

2.44.070 Term of permit.
A.    The permit required by the provisions of this chapter shall be issued no longer than twelve calendar months from its date. The permittee shall be prohibited from renting the hall for the same type of activity for longer than one day per month for twelve months, or three consecutive days together in a three-month time period.

B.     Exception. A scheduled event within a term may be interrupted or postponed upon ten days’ written notice to the permittee by the city council that an approved governmental activity will be using the hall at that time.

C.     Renewal. The committee may renew any such permit upon its expiration if it is satisfied that the requirements of Section 2.44.040 are still being met and that no violation of this chapter has been committed. The committee may, in its discretion, require a new application and its action upon such new application shall be governed by the standards applicable to an original application. (Ord. 415 §1(F), 1979)

 

2.44.080 Approval of application—Issuance of permit.
The committee shall approve the application and authorize the city administrator to issue the necessary permit therefor if the committee finds that:

A.    All of the statements made in the application are true;

B.     The applicant, or its managing officers and agents, are of good character and reputation for honesty and integrity;

C.     The applicant has not engaged in any vandalism or other fraudulent enterprise;

D.    The activity or event will be under the control and supervision of responsible and reliable persons;

E.     The kind, character and method of the proposed activity or event, the time when it will take place, and its duration are such that it will be in the interest of and not inimical to the safety, convenience or welfare of the inhabitants of the city;

F.     The applicant-permittee has signed a rental/hold harmless agreement and agrees to abide by its provisions for as long as the permit continues to be valid;

G.    If the activity or event to be scheduled is a dance, rock-festival or other such type activity, said activity shall be held subject to additional police protection which public service shall be paid for by the applicant, and shall be entirely in the discretion of the chief of police. (Ord. 415 §1(G), 1979)

 

2.44.090 Appeals.
A.    Any person aggrieved by the provisions of this chapter or by the committee’s denial of the application for a permit, may appeal as set forth herein.

1.     Notice of Denial. If the applicant is denied, the committee shall so notify the applicant by certified mail, return receipt requested, at the address given on the application, stating the reasons therefor.

2.     Request for Hearing. Within five days after receiving the above notice of denial, any applicant may file a written request with the city administrator for a hearing on the application before the committee, together with written exceptions to the reasons upon which the committee based its denial of the application.

3.     Notice of Hearing. Upon the filing of such a request, the committee shall fix a time and place for the hearing and shall notify the applicant thereof. The hearing shall be held within ten days after the request is filed.

4.     Hearing. At the hearing the applicant may present evidence in support of his or her application and exceptions. Any interested person may, in the discretion of the committee, be allowed to participate in the hearing and present evidence in opposition to the application and exceptions.

5.     Decision. Within ten days after the conclusion of the hearing, the committee shall render a written report either granting or denying the application for a permit. The report shall state the facts upon which the decision is based and the rulings upon any exceptions filed to the original reasons for denying the application.

6.     Appeal. Any such decision of the committee denying the application for a permit may be appealed to the city council pursuant to the provisions set forth herein.

7.     Appeal to Council. Any such decision of the committee may be appealed to the city council upon the applicant filing a written request with the city administrator for such an appeal, together with written exceptions to the reasons upon which the committee based its denial of the application, within ten days after the committee’s decision.

B.     The city council shall hear and determine the appeal within thirty days after it is filed, and the decision of the city council on the appeal shall be final. (Ord. 415 §1(H), 1979)

Chapter 2.48 CONSOLIDATION OF ELECTIONS
2.48.010 Authorized.
The general municipal election is called and ordered to be consolidated with the statewide general election in November of all even-numbered years; and the election shall be held and conducted, the votes canvassed, the returns thereof made, and, in all particulars the election shall be conducted as all other city elections; and that as a result of the change in the date of this election, the elected city office holders terms in office will be extended and that no terms will be decreased. (Ord. 497 §1, 1986)

Chapter 2.52 DISPOSITION OF UNCLAIMED PROPERTY
2.52.010 Delivery to chief of police.
It shall be and it is declared to be the duty of every employee and officer of the city who shall find any lost money or other property in or upon any public grounds, highways, road, public building, place or property in the city to deliver the same to the chief of police, together with a statement in writing stating fully the circumstances of the finds, including the time and place of the finding and the name and address of the owner or person believed to be the owner, if known. (Ord. 604 §1, 1998)

 

2.52.020 Protection of property—Sale—Retention for public use.
The chief of police for the city shall care for and protect all property coming into his or her possession by virtue of the preceding section, or otherwise, including items of evidence obtained during investigations and shall restore such property to its true owner upon proof of ownership satisfactory to him or her and upon payment of all necessary costs incurred in the care and protection thereof. Should any such property remain unclaimed by its true owner for a period of four months from the date of finding, or for a period of three months with respect to bicycles, the chief of police is authorized at any time thereafter to publish a notice describing the property and stating that five days after such publication the property will be placed for sale at public auction. Such property shall not thereafter be redeemable by the owner or the person entitled to possession. If the city manager determines that any such property transferred to the city for sale is needed for public use, such property may be retained for use by the city and need not be sold. Property determined by the chief of police or his/her designee to be of no or of insufficient value to recover cost of sale, may be disposed of without first complying with this chapter. (Ord. 604 §1, 1998)

 

2.52.030 Notice of sale—Disposal of unsold property.
Prior to the sale of any property at public auction, the chief of police shall publish a notice of time and place of sale, describing the items to be sold, at least five days prior to the sale. Any property remaining unsold after being offered at such public auction may be destroyed or otherwise disposed of. The proceeds of such sale shall be deposited in the general fund. (Ord. 604 §1, 1998)

 

2.52.040 Perishable property.
Should any property coming into the custody of the chief of police be in danger of perishing or of losing the greater part of its value, or should the lawful charges as a finder of such property amount to two-thirds of its value, the same may be immediately sold by the chief of police. (Ord. 604 §1, 1998)

Chapter 2.56 INSURANCE COVERAGE AND HOLD HARMLESS AGREEMENTS
2.56.010 Requirements for city contracts and permits.
The following provisions shall govern all contracts and/or permits granted by the city for the use of public property:

A.    Hold Harmless Provision of Contracts and/or Permits. All contracts and/or permits awarded by the city shall contain a hold harmless provision which shall read substantially as follows:

1.     Contractor and/or permittee agree to, and shall, hold city, its elective and appointive boards, officers, agents and employees, harmless from any liability for damage or claims for damage for personal injury, including death, as well as from claims for property damage which may arise from contractor and/or permittee or any of its subcontractor’s operations under this agreement, whether such operations be by contractor and/or permittee or subcontractors, or by any one or more persons directly or indirectly employed by, or acting as agent for, contractor and/or permittee or any subcontractor. Contractor and/or permittee agrees to, and shall, hold city, its elective and appointive boards, officers, agents and employees from any suits or actions at law or in equity for damage caused, or alleged to have been caused, by reason of any of the aforesaid operations, provided as follows:

a.     That city does not, and shall not, waive any rights against contractor and/or permittee which it may have by reason of the aforesaid hold harmless agreement, because of the acceptance by city, or the deposit with city by contractor and/or permittee, of any of the insurance policies hereinafter set forth.

b.     That the aforesaid hold harmless agreement by contractor and/or permittee shall apply to all damages and claims for damages of every kind suffered, or alleged to have been suffered, by reason of any of the aforesaid operation of contractor and/or permittee or any subcontractor, regardless of whether or not such insurance policies shall have been determined to be applicable to any such damages or claims for damages.

Except where for good cause shown the city council shall approve different provisions, all contracts and/or permits awarded by the city shall contain insurance provisions which shall read substantially as follows:

Contractor and/or permittee shall not commence work or activity under any contract or permit until he or she shall have obtained all insurance required under this section and such insurance shall have been approved by the city as to form, amount and carrier, nor shall contractor and/or permittee allow any subcontractor or agent to commence work on this subcontract until all similar insurance required of the subcontract shall have been so obtained and approved.

B.     Compensation Insurance. Contractor and/or permittee shall, to the extent required by law, take out and maintain during the life of this contract, worker’s compensation insurance for all employees employed at the site of improvements and if any work is sublet, contractor and/or permittee shall require subcontractor similarly to provide worker’s compensation insurance for all of the latter employees, unless such employees are covered by the protection afforded by contractor and/or permittee. If any class of employees engaged in work under this contract at the site of the project is not protected under any worker’s compensation law, contractor and/or permittee shall provide and shall cause each subcontractor to provide, adequate insurance for the protection of employees not otherwise protected. Contractor and/or permittee indemnifies city for any damage resulting to it from failure of either contractor and/or permittee or any subcontractor to take out or maintain such insurance.

C.     Public Liability and Property Damage Insurance. Contractor and/or permittee shall take out and maintain during the life of this contract such public liability and property damage insurance as shall protect city, its elective and appointive boards, officers, agents and employees and contractor and/or permittee from any claims for damages for personal injury, including death, as well as from claims for property damages which may arise from contractor’s and/or permittee’s or any subcontractor’s operations under this contract, whether such operations be by contractor and/or permittee or by any subcontractor, or by anyone directly or indirectly employed by either contractor and/or permittees or subcontractor and the amounts of such insurance are as follows:

Public liability insurance in an amount not less than one million dollars combined single limit per occurrence covering bodily injury, death and aggregate property damage.

No policies of insurance carried by the contractor and/or permittee shall be subject to cancellation except after notice to the city attorney by certified mail at least thirty days prior to the date of cancellation. The city shall be provided certificates of insurance and policy endorsements satisfactory to the city attorney for such insurance prior to the commencement of any activity under any such contract or permit. (Ord. 607 §1, 2000)

Chapter 2.60 CLAIMS AGAINST THE CITY
2.60.010 Government Code Section 935 claims.
A.    All claims for money or damages against the city which are excepted from the presentation of claim requirement under Government Code Section 905 shall be processed in accordance with this section under the authority of Government Code Section 935.

B.     All such excepted claims shall be presented by the claimant within the time prescribed by Government Code Sections 900 and 910 et seq. and shall be acted upon by the city within the time provided by the provisions of this chapter and Government Code Sections 911.2 and 912.4. Claims not presented within the required time shall be processed by the city in accordance with Government Code Section 935(e).

C.     This section shall apply, to the following types of claims against the city. This list shall be automatically expanded, by operation of law, to include any other type of claim added to the exemptions set forth in Government Code Section 935.

1.     Claims under the Revenue and Taxation Code or other statute prescribing procedures for the refund, rebate, exemption, cancellation, amendment, modification or adjustment of any tax, assessment, fee or charge or any portion thereof, or of any penalties, costs or charges related thereto;

2.     Claims in connection with which the filing of a notice of lien, statement of claim, or stop notice is required under any provision of law relating to mechanics’, laborers’ or materialmen’s liens;

3.     Claims by public employees for fees, salaries, wages, mileage or other expenses and allowances;

4.     Claims for which the worker’s compensation authorized by Division 4 (commencing with Section 3201) of the Labor Code is the exclusive remedy;

5.     Applications or claims for any form of public assistance under the Welfare and Institutions Code or other provisions of law relating to public assistance programs, and claims for goods, services, provisions or other assistance rendered for or on behalf of any recipient of any form of public assistance;

6.     Applications or claims for money or benefits under any public retirement or pension system;

7.     Claims for principal or interest upon any bonds, notes, warrants or other evidences of indebtedness;

8.     Claims which relate to a special assessment constituting a specific lien against the property assessed and which are payable from the proceeds of such an assessment, by offset of a claim for damages against it or by delivery of any warrant or bonds representing it;

9.     Claims by the state or by a state department or agency or by another local public entity;

10.   Claims arising under any provision of the Unemployment Insurance Code, including, but not limited to, claims for money or benefits, or for refunds or credits of employer or worker contributions, penalties or interest, or for refunds to workers of deductions from wages in excess of the amount prescribed. (Ord. 635 §1, 2003)

Title 3 REVENUE AND FINANCE
Chapter 3.04 GAS TAX STREET IMPROVEMENT FUND
Chapter 3.08 PURCHASING OF SUPPLIES, EQUIPMENT AND SERVICES
Chapter 3.09 PUBLIC WORKS PROJECTS
Chapter 3.12 TRANSFER OF TAX FUNCTIONS
Chapter 3.16 DOCUMENTARY STAMP TAX
Chapter 3.20 SALES AND USE TAX
Chapter 3.24 TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY TAX
Chapter 3.28 INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY

Chapter 3.04 GAS TAX STREET IMPROVEMENT FUND
3.04.010 Creation.
To comply with the provisions of Article 5 of Chapter 1 of Division I of the Streets and Highways Code, with particular reference to the amendments made thereto by Chapter 642, Statutes of 1935, there is created in the city treasury a special fund to be known as the “special gas tax street improvement fund.” (Ord. 149 §1, 1936)

 

3.04.020 Source of moneys.
All moneys received by the city from the State of California under the provisions of the Streets and Highways Code for acquisition, maintenance or improvement of streets or highways other than State Highways shall be paid into this fund. (Ord. 149 §2, 1936)

 

3.04.030 Expenditures of moneys.
All moneys in this fund shall be expended exclusively for the purposes authorized by, and subject to all of the provisions of Article 5, Chapter 1, Division I of the Streets and Highways Code. (Ord. 149 §3, 1936)

Chapter 3.08 PURCHASING OF SUPPLIES, EQUIPMENT AND SERVICES
3.08.010 Adoption of purchasing system.
In order to establish efficient procedures for the purchase of supplies and equipment at the lowest possible cost commensurate with quality needs, to exercise positive financial control over purchases, to clearly define authority for the purchasing function and to assure the quality of purchases, a purchasing system is adopted. (Ord. 615 §1, 2000)

 

3.08.020 Scope of chapter.
The procedures established by this chapter shall apply only to the purchase of supplies, equipment and services, and shall not apply to public projects as defined in Section 20161 of the California Public Contracts Code. (Ord. 615 §1, 2000)

 

3.08.030 Centralized purchasing division.
There is created a centralized purchasing division in which is vested authority for the purchase of supplies and equipment. (Ord. 615 §1, 2000)

 

3.08.035 Eco-procurement policy.
All city departments shall use recycled products whenever possible. Special emphasis shall be placed on the purchase of products manufactured with post-consumer recycled materials. (Ord. 649, 2005)

 

3.08.040 Purchasing agent.
There is created the position of purchasing agent, who may also be known as the purchasing officer, and shall be appointed by the city manager. The purchasing agent shall be the head and have general supervision of the purchasing division. The duties of purchasing agent may be combined with those of any other office or position. The purchasing agent shall have the authority to:

A.    Purchase or contract for supplies and equipment required by any using agency in accordance with purchasing procedures prescribed by this chapter, such administrative regulations as the purchasing agent shall adopt for the internal management and operation of the purchasing division and such other rules and regulations as shall be prescribed by the city council or the city manager;

B.     Negotiate and recommend execution of contracts for the purchase of supplies and equipment;

C.     Act to procure for the city the needed quality in supplies and equipment at least expense to the city;

D.    Discourage uniform bidding and endeavor to obtain as full and open competition as possible on all purchases;

E.     Prepare and recommend to the city council rules governing the purchase of supplies and equipment for the city;

F.     Prepare and recommend revisions and amendments to the purchasing rules;

G.    Keep informed of current developments in the field of purchasing, prices, market conditions and new products;

H.    Prescribe and maintain such forms as are reasonably necessary for the operation of this chapter and other rules and regulations;

I.      Supervise the inspection of all supplies and equipment purchased to insure conformance with specifications.

J.      Recommend the transfer of surplus or unused supplies and equipment between departments as needed;

K.    Maintain an approved vendors list, vendors’ catalog file and records needed for the efficient operation of the purchasing division.

L.     Promote the use of recycled products by publicizing its eco-procurement policy whenever practicable. (Ord. 615 §1, 2000)

 

3.08.050 Purchasing regulations.
The purchasing agent shall be responsible for determining that the regulations and procedures in Sections 3.08.060 through 3.08.120 are carried out. (Ord. 615 §1, 2000)

 

3.08.060 Exemptions from centralized purchasing.
The city manager may authorize, in writing, any department to purchase specified supplies, services and equipment independent of the purchasing agent, but such purchases shall be made in conformity with the procedures established by this chapter and shall require further periodic reports from the department on the purchases made under such written authorization. (Ord. 615 §1, 2000)

 

3.08.070 Estimates of requirements.
All departments shall file detailed estimates of their requirements in supplies, services and equipment in such manner, at such time, and for such future periods as the purchasing agent shall prescribe. (Ord. 615 §1, 2000)

 

3.08.080 Requisitions.
Departments shall submit requests for supplies, services and equipment purchases of one thousand dollars and over to the purchasing agent by standard requisition form, or by other means as may be established by the purchasing rules and regulations. (Ord. 615 §1, 2000)

 

3.08.090 Purchase orders.
Purchases of supplies, services and equipment costing one thousand dollars and over shall be made only by purchase orders. Except as otherwise provided herein, no purchase order shall be issued unless the prior approval of the purchasing agent or designated representative has been obtained. Open purchase orders may be issued with vendors who are expected to provide products or services on an on-going basis throughout the year. (Ord. 615 §1, 2000)

 

3.08.100 Encumbrance of funds.
Except in cases of emergency, the purchasing agent shall not issue any purchase order for supplies or equipment unless there exists an unencumbered appropriation in the fund account against which such purchase is to be charged. (Ord. 615 §1, 2000)

 

3.08.110 Inspection and testing.
The purchasing agent shall, with discretion, inspect supplies and equipment delivered to determine their conformance with the specifications set forth in the order. The purchasing agent shall have authority to require chemical and physical tests of samples submitted with bids and samples of deliveries, which are necessary to determine their quality and conformance with specification. (Ord. 615 §1, 2000)

 

3.08.120 Bidding.
Purchases of supplies and equipment shall be by bid procedures pursuant to Sections 3.08.130 through 3.08.280. Bidding may be dispensed under conditions stated in Section 3.08.290. (Ord. 615 §1, 2000)

 

3.08.130 Formal (sealed) bid procedures.
Except as otherwise provided herein, purchases of supplies and equipment of an estimated value greater than two hundred thousand dollars shall be awarded to the lowest responsible bidder pursuant to the formal bid procedure hereinafter prescribed. (Ord. 710 §2, 2019; Ord. 615 §1, 2000)

 

3.08.140 Notice inviting formal bids.
Notices inviting formal bids shall include a general description of the article or service desired, shall state where bid documents and specifications may be secured and shall state the time and place for opening bids. (Ord. 615 §1, 2000)

 

3.08.150 Published notice for formal bids.
Notices inviting formal bids shall be published at least ten days prior to the date of opening the bids. Notices shall be published at least once for all projects in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. (Ord. 615 §1, 2000)

 

3.08.160 Approved vendors list.
The purchasing agent shall also solicit formal sealed bids from responsible suppliers whose names are on the approved vendors list, or who have made written request that their names be added thereto. (Ord. 615 §1, 2000)

 

3.08.170 Bulletin board notice.
The purchasing agent shall advertise the pending formal purchases by posting a notice on the public bulletin board at the city offices. (Ord. 615 §1, 2000)

 

3.08.180 Bidder’s security.
Where deemed necessary by the purchasing agent, formal bids shall be accompanied by security, either cash, cashier’s check, certified check or surety bond, in a sum equal to ten percent of the total aggregate of the bid, and shall be designated in the notice inviting bids. Bidders shall be entitled to return of bid security; provided, however, that a successful bidder shall forfeit the bid security upon refusal or failure to execute the contract within ten days after the notice of award of contract has been mailed, unless the city is solely responsible for the delay in executing the contract. The city council may, on refusal or failure of the successful bidder to execute the contract, award it to the next lower responsible bidder who is willing to execute the contract, or may reject all bids and readvertise. (Ord. 615 §1, 2000)

3.08.190 Other formal bond requirements.
The city council shall have authority to require a faithful performance bond or other bonds. If bonds are required, the form and amount thereof shall be designated in the notice inviting bids. (Ord. 710 §3, 2019; Ord. 615 §1, 2000)

 

3.08.200 Prebid conference.
When deemed necessary by the purchasing agent or his/her designated representative, prospective bidders shall be required to attend a prebid meeting at which the bid package will be reviewed in order to avoid misconceptions and ambiguities. A written addendum shall follow the meeting to address changes, if any, to the bid document. (Ord. 615 §1, 2000)

 

3.08.210 Formal bid opening procedure.
Sealed bids shall be submitted to the purchasing agent and shall be identified as “bids” on the envelope. The purchasing officer, or designee, shall publicly open all bids at the time and place stated in the public notices. A tabulation of all bids received shall be available for public inspection in the purchasing office during regular business hours for a period of not less than thirty calendar days after the bid opening. (Ord. 615 §1, 2000)

 

3.08.220 Rejection of formal bids.
In its discretion, the city council may reject any and all bids presented and may cause readvertising for bids pursuant to the procedure hereinabove prescribed. However, when all bids exceed the authorized budgeted amount, the city manager may authorize rejection of all bids and authorize rebidding based upon the procedure hereinabove prescribed. However, when all bids exceed the authorized budgeted amount, the city manager may authorize rejection of all bids and authorize rebidding based upon the original specifications or as they may be modified, in accordance with procedures prescribed herein. (Ord. 615 §1, 2000)

 

3.08.230 Award of formal bid contracts.
Except as otherwise provided herein, formal bid contracts shall be awarded by the city council to the lowest responsible bidder. The determination of “lowest responsible bidder” shall be at the discretion of the city council pursuant to findings and recommendations presented by the purchasing agent at the time of award of contract. (Ord. 615 §1, 2000)

 

3.08.240 Tie formal bids.
If two or more formal bids received are for the same total amount or unit price, quality and service being equal, and if the public interest will not permit the delay of readvertising for bids, the city council may in its discretion accept the one it chooses or accept the lowest bid made by and after negotiation with the tie bidders at the time of the bid opening or award of contract. (Ord. 615 §1, 2000)

 

3.08.250 No formal bids.
When no formal bids or no responsive bids are received, the purchasing officer is authorized to negotiate for written proposals, and make recommendation to the city manager and the award, if any, shall be made in accordance with applicable provisions prescribed herein. A responsive bid is defined as a bid which conforms in all material respects to the terms and conditions, the specifications and other requirements of the invitation for bid/request for proposal. (Ord. 615 §1, 2000)

 

3.08.254 Determination of irresponsible bidder.
A.    A bidder may be found to be irresponsible, and his or her bid may be rejected upon determination that any or all of the following circumstances exist:

1.     That a bid submitted by a bidder did not strictly conform to the required bid specifications; provided, that the city council or bid coordinator shall have the authority to waive nonsubstantial deviations from such specifications.

2.     That a bidder has demonstrated, through documented past performance in the industry or through prior dealings with the city, that he or she is unable to satisfactorily meet the responsibilities required of a successful low bidder.

3.     That a bidder’s product has been demonstrated, through documented past performance in the industry or through prior use by the city, to be incapable of satisfactorily meeting the accepted demands to be placed upon such product.

Determination of irresponsibility of a bidder shall be made by the city council in any formal bid process requiring city council award of contract.

B.     In any informal bid process where it appears irresponsibility of the bidder may be present, the purchasing agent shall, in consultation with the city attorney, review the bidder’s qualifications and the reason or reasons for which they believe the bidder should be deemed irresponsible. In any case where the bidder is so deemed irresponsible, the bidder shall be disqualified from consideration on the subject bid, and the purchasing agent shall, on the next available city council agenda, request that the council make a formal determination as to the bidder’s irresponsibility. In the event the city council finds a bidder to be irresponsible, the bidder shall be excluded from future city bidding procedures until such time as the bidder has obtained consent from the city council to resume his or her active status to bid.

C.     Requests for reinstatement for active bidder status may be made no sooner than one year following the determination that a bidder has been irresponsible. All such requests shall be made directly to the city council, and shall be granted only upon a determination by the city council that the bidder’s status should be reinstated for future bids. (Ord. 615 §1, 2000)

 

3.08.255 Protest procedure.
After the award of any bid, anyone who submitted a bid who wishes to challenge the bid procedure, the bids, or the award of the bid shall file a written protest within ten days of the award of the bid with the city attorney, stating the reasons for the challenge. The city attorney shall review the protest and provide the protestor with a written reply regarding the protest. Following the city attorney’s decision, the protestor shall have ten days to file an appeal with the city manager or city council (the one with authority to award the bid). The appropriate authority shall review the protest and provide the protestor with a written reply regarding the protest. Failure to file a timely initial written protest or appeal waives any such challenge to the bid procedure, the bids or the award of the bid. (Ord. 615 §1, 2000)

 

3.08.260 Open market or informal bid procedure.
Purchases of supplies and equipment of an estimated value in the amount of two hundred thousand dollars or less may be made by the purchasing agent in the open market pursuant to the procedure prescribed in Sections 3.08.260 through 3.08.280 and without observing the procedure prescribed in Section 3.08.130 through 3.08.255; provided, however, all bidding may be dispensed with for purchases of supplies and equipment having a total estimated value of less than sixty thousand dollars. In addition, the city council shall approve all purchases of twenty thousand dollars or more. (Ord. 710 §4, 2019; Ord. 615 §1, 2000)

 

3.08.270 Minimum number of informal bids.
Open market purchases shall, wherever possible, be based on at least three informal bids, and shall be awarded to the bidder offering the most advantageous bid to the city after consideration of price, quality, durability, servicing, delivery time, standardization, and other factors.

 

3.08.275 Preference for recycled content.
The purchasing agent shall aggressively pursue the acquisition of recycled material products whenever possible without incurring unreasonable additional costs. The purchasing agent may provide a ten percent price preference to the suppliers of recycled paper or other recycled products over the lowest bid or price quoted by suppliers offering unrecycled paper or other products. Such preference shall be set forth in any notice inviting bid or similar solicitation. (Ord. 710 §5, 2019; Ord. 649, 2005)

 

3.08.280 Notice inviting informal bids.
The purchasing agent shall solicit informal bids by written requests to prospective vendors, or by telephone, or by public notice posted on a public bulletin board at the city offices. (Ord. 615 §1, 2000)

 

3.08.290 Record of informal bids.
The purchasing agent shall keep a written record of all open market purchases and informal bids for a period of two years. This record, while so kept, shall be open to public inspection. (Ord. 615 §1, 2000)

 

3.08.300 Exceptions to competitive bidding requirement.
Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter to the contrary, the competitive bidding procedures and requirements may be dispensed with in any of the following instances:

A.    When the commodity and/or service can be obtained from only one responsible source;

B.     The city manager may authorize the purchase of materials, supplies, equipment and services where an emergency is deemed to exist and it is determined that service involving the public health, safety or welfare would be interrupted if the normal procedure were followed. Notice of all emergency purchases which would otherwise require formal bidding procedures made pursuant to this section shall be provided to the city council at the next regular council meeting after the purchase is authorized;

C.     Contracts for personal and professional services may be executed without observing the bidding procedures provided herein. Contracts for maintenance and similar services shall be executed under the bidding procedures applicable to supplies and equipment unless otherwise provided in this chapter. The city manager is authorized to enter into such contracts where the amount of the contract does not exceed twenty thousand dollars; provided there exists an unencumbered appropriation in the fund account against which such expense is to be charged. Where the amount of the contract exceeds twenty thousand dollars, the contract shall be approved by the city council. The council may waive bidding for other services contracts as appropriate;

D.    Any agreement involving acquisition of supplies, equipment or service entered into with another governmental entity. (Ord. 710 §6, 2019; Ord. 615 §1, 2000)

 

3.08.310 Regulations regarding selection of contract services.
The city council may, by resolution, prescribe procedures, rules and regulations governing the solicitation, selection and award of proposals or bids for the furnishing of personal services or professional or consulting services or for other contractual services, the contract for which may be awarded without observing the bidding procedures provided for in this chapter. Such procedures, rules and regulations shall have as one purpose the obtaining of contractual services of the highest quality together with cost-effectiveness. (Ord. 615 §1, 2000)

 

3.08.320 Surplus supplies and equipment.
All using departments shall submit to the purchasing agent, at such times and in such forms as prescribed, reports showing all supplies and equipment which are no longer used or which have become obsolete and worn out. (Ord. 615 §1, 2000)

 

3.08.330 Surplus supplies—Trade-ins.
The purchasing agent shall have authority to exchange for or trade-in for supplies and equipment all supplies and equipment which cannot be used by any department or which have become unsuitable. (Ord. 615 §1, 2000)

 

3.08.340 Surplus supplies—Sale.
The purchasing agent shall have authority, subject to approval of the city manager, to dispose of surplus supplies or equipment by auction or by sale or otherwise after receiving bids or proposals which provide the maximum return to the city. City employees or officers may participate in the purchase of surplus supplies and/or equipment on the same basis as other members of the general public; provided, however, there is no direct bid involvement or conflict of any kind. (Ord. 615 §1, 2000)

 

3.08.350 Conveying surplus personal property to charitable, nonprofit organizations.
A.    Notwithstanding the other provisions of this article, the city council may convey to charitable, nonprofit organizations surplus personal property as it is determined by the city council that the use to which the personal property will be put will be for the benefit of the general welfare of the community in matters such as recreation, education, aid to the destitute, city beautification, or any other activity in which the city government may legitimately participate.

B.     The organization accepting such personal property shall sign a statement that accepts such property on the condition that it will be used for the purpose designated by the city council; that it shall not be used for any other purpose without permission of the city council; and that if such property is ever diverted to other than a charitable use, the city may reclaim such property. (Ord. 615 §1, 2000)

 

3.08.360 Cooperative purchasing programs.
Purchases of supplies, materials, equipment or services and sales of surplus property made under a cooperative purchasing program, utilizing purchasing agreements maintained by the state, county or other public agencies are exempt from the requirements of this chapter. To the extent possible, cooperative purchases will be competitively awarded, and documentation as to the advantage of the cooperative purchase will be retained. (Ord. 615 §1, 2000)

 

3.08.370 Credit card purchases.
Purchases with credit cards shall be for gasoline, telephone, travel expenses, and for supplies that will not be billed by a vendor. These purchases, except for telephone, shall be submitted to the purchasing agent for prior approval. The operational policy, as established in the purchasing rules and regulations, for the use of all credit cards shall be utilized. (Ord. 615 §1, 2000)

 

3.08.380 Bid computation—Local bids.
The bid of any bidder from within the city shall be computed by subtracting from his or her bid that amount of sales tax that would be received by the city if the bid were awarded to such local bidder. As a condition precedent to the deduction of such tax from a local bid, a local bidder must, upon submission of his or her bid, provide the amount of tax to be rebated to the city, which figure shall be subject to confirmation and correction by the purchasing agent. (Ord. 615 §1, 2000)

Chapter 3.09 PUBLIC WORKS PROJECTS
3.09.010 Definitions.
For the purposes of this article the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings:

A.    Act means the Uniform Public Construction Cost Accounting Act (California Public Contracts Code Section 22000 et seq.).

B.     Commission means the California Uniform Construction Cost Accounting Commission.

C.     Facility means any plant, building, structure, ground facility, utility system, subject to the limitation of subsection (D)(4) of the definition for public project below, real property, streets and highways, or other public work improvement.

D.    Public project means any of the following:

1.     Construction, reconstruction, erection, alteration, renovation, improvement, demolition and repair work involving any city-owned, city-leased or city-operated facility;

2.     Painting or repainting of any city-owned, city-leased, or city-operated facility;

3.     In the case of a city-owned utility system, “public project” shall include only the construction, erection, improvement, or repair of dams, reservoirs, power plants, and electrical transmission lines of two hundred thirty thousand volts and higher;

4.     “Public project” does not include maintenance work. For purposes of this section, “maintenance work” includes all of the following:

a.     Routine, recurring and usual work for the preservation or protection of any city-owned or city-operated facility for its intended purposes,

b.     Minor repainting,

c.     Resurfacing of streets and highways at less than one inch,

d.     Landscape maintenance, including mowing, watering, trimming, pruning, planting, replacement of plants, and servicing of irrigation and sprinkler systems,

e.     Work performed to keep, operate, and maintain city-owned water, power or waste disposal systems, including, but not limited to, dams, reservoirs, power plants and electrical transmission lines of two hundred thirty thousand volts and higher. (Ord. 710 §7, 2019)

 

3.09.020 Public projects contracting procedures.
The city shall follow the contracting procedures set forth in Article 3 of the Uniform Public Construction Cost Accounting Act (Section 22030 et seq., of the Public Contracts Code). (Ord. 710 §7, 2019)

 

3.09.030 Contractors list.
The public works director shall compile and maintain a list of qualified contractors identified according to categories of work. This list shall comply with the requirements of the Act and the criteria promulgated, from time to time, by the commission. (Ord. 710 §7, 2019)

 

3.09.040 Informal bidding—Notice.
A.    When a public project is to be performed which qualifies for informal bidding, notice of such project shall be given as follows except where the product or service is proprietary:

1.     Mailed notice shall be sent to all contractors on the contractors list for the category of work being bid; and

2.     Mailed notice shall be given to all construction trade journals specified by the commission for the receipt of such notice for Amador County;

3.     Additional notice to other contractors and/or trade journals may, in the discretion of the city, be given.

B.     If the product or service to be acquired is proprietary in nature such that it can only be obtained from a certain contractor or contractors, notice inviting bids may be sent only to such contractor or contractors.

C.     All mailing of notices to contractors and construction trade journals shall be completed not less than ten days before bids are due.

D.    The notice shall describe the project in general terms, how to obtain more detailed information about the project and shall state the time and place for submission of bids. (Ord. 710 §7, 2019)

 

3.09.050 Award of contracts.
The city manager is authorized to award contracts for public projects of sixty thousand dollars or less. (Ord. 710 §7, 2019)

 

3.09.060 Rejection of bids.
The city manager or the city council, as the case may be, may, in the manager’s or council’s discretion, reject all bids and proceed as authorized by the Act. (Ord. 710 §7, 2019)

 

3.09.070 Approval of plans and designs.
The city engineer, or designee, is authorized to approve plans and designs, and all amendments and addenda thereto, for performance of a public project of the city. (Ord. 710 §7, 2019)

 

3.09.080 Emergencies.
In situations determined by the city manager to constitute an emergency for a public project pursuant to Section 22035 of the Uniform Public Construction Cost Accounting Act and Public Contract Code Section 22050, the city council hereby delegates to the city manager the power to declare a public emergency and take any directly related and immediate action required by the emergency. Work shall be performed without the benefit of competitive bidding, either formal or informal, only so long as necessary under those sections.

A report on the emergency and work performed shall be provided at the next regular meeting of the city council, and then at every meeting thereafter required by Section 22050. At such meetings, the city council shall determine, by a four-fifths vote, that there is a need to continue the action without the benefit of informal or formal competitive bidding in accordance with Section 22035 of the Uniform Public Construction Cost Accounting Act and Public Contract Code Section 22050. The city council shall terminate the emergency action at the earliest possible date that conditions warrant, so that the remainder of the emergency action may be completed pursuant to a formal bidding procedure. (Ord. 710 §7, 2019)

Chapter 3.12 TRANSFER OF TAX FUNCTIONS
3.12.010 Definitions.
The following words and expressions when used in this chapter shall, for the purpose of this chapter, have the meanings respectively ascribed to them as follows:

A.    “City” means the City of Jackson, a municipal corporation, situated in the county of Amador, State of California.

B.     “County” means the county of Amador, a political subdivision of the State of California. (Ord. 234 §1, 1960)

 

3.12.020 Transfer of duties.
The assessment and tax collection duties, and the collection of assessments levied for municipal improvements, now performed by the city assessor and city tax collector, are transferred to the county assessor and county tax collector for the purpose of assessment and collection of and for ad valorem property taxes that become a lien after December 1, 1960; and the collection of assessments for municipal improvements becoming due and payable on and after July 1, 1961. (Ord. 234 §2, 1960)

 

3.12.030 Filing of certified copy.
The city clerk shall cause a certified copy of the ordinance in this chapter to be filed with the county auditor on or before the first Monday of February, 1961 and immediately thereafter shall notify the State Board of Equalization. (Ord. 234 §3, 1960)

Chapter 3.16 DOCUMENTARY STAMP TAX
3.16.010 Title.
The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be known as the “real property transfer tax ordinance of the City of Jackson.” It is adopted pursuant to the authority contained in the Revenue and Taxation Code Section 11901 et seq. of the State of California. (Ord. 279 §1, 1967)

 

3.16.020 Rate.
There is imposed on each deed, instrument or writing by which any lands, tenements, or other realty sold within the city shall be granted, assigned, transferred or otherwise conveyed to, or vested in, the purchaser or purchasers, or any other person or persons, by his/her or their direction, when the consideration or value of the interest or property conveyed (exclusive of the value of any lien or encumbrances remaining thereon at the time of sale) exceeds one hundred dollars, a tax at the rate of twenty-seven and one-half cents for each five hundred dollars or fractional part thereof. (Ord. 279 §2, 1967)

 

3.16.030 Payment.
Any tax imposed pursuant to Section 3.16.020 shall be paid by any person who makes, signs or issues any document or instrument subject to the tax, or for whose use or benefit the same is made, signed or issued. (Ord. 279 §3, 1967)

 

3.16.040 Instrument to secure debt.
Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply to any instrument in writing given to secure a debt. (Ord. 279 §4, 1967)

 

3.16.050 Government agency.
The United States or any agency or instrumentality thereof, any state or territory, or political subdivision thereof, or the District of Columbia shall not be liable for any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter with respect to any deed, instrument, or writing to which it is a party, but the tax may be collected by assessment from any other party liable therefor. (Ord. 279 §5, 1967)

 

3.16.060 Receivership.
Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply to the making, delivering or filing of conveyances to make effective any plan of reorganization or adjustment:

A.    Confirmed under the Federal Bankruptcy Act, as amended;

B.     Approved in an equity receivership proceeding in a court involving a railroad corporation, as defined in subdivision (a) of Section 205 of Title 11 of the United States Code, as amended;

C.     Approved in an equity receivership proceeding in a court involving a corporation, as defined in subdivision (3) of Section 506 of Title 11 of the United States Code, as amended; or

D.    Whereby a mere change in identity, form or place of organization is effected.

Subsections A to B, inclusive, of this section shall only apply if the making, delivery or filing of instruments of transfer or conveyances occurs within five years from the date of such confirmation, approval or change. (Ord. 279 §6, 1967)

 

3.16.070 Securities and Exchange Commission.
Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply to the making or delivery of conveyances to make effective any order of the Securities and Exchange Commission, as defined in subdivision (a) of Section 1083 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954; but only if:

A.    The order of the Securities and Exchange Commission in obedience to which such conveyance is made recites that such conveyance is necessary or appropriate to effectuate the provisions of Section 79k of Title 15 of the United States Code, relating to the Public Utility Holding Company Act of 1935;

B.     Such order specifies the property which is ordered to be conveyed;

C.     Such conveyance is made in obedience to such order. (Ord. 279 §7, 1967)

 

3.16.080 Partnership.
A.    In the case of realty held by a partnership, no levy shall be imposed pursuant to this chapter by reason of any transfer of an interest in a partnership or otherwise, if:

1.     Such partnership (or another partnership) is considered a continuing partnership within the meaning of Section 708 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954; and

2.     Such continuing partnership continues to hold the realty concerned.

B.     If there is a termination of any partnership within the meaning of Section 708 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, for purposes of this chapter, such partnership shall be treated as having executed an instrument whereby there was conveyed, for fair market value (exclusive of the value of any lien or encumbrance remaining thereon), all realty held by such partnership at the time of such termination.

C.     Not more than one tax shall be imposed pursuant to this chapter by reason of a termination described in subsection B and any transfer pursuant thereto, with respect to the realty held by such partnership at the time of such termination. (Ord. 279 §8, 1967)

 

3.16.090 Administration.
The county recorder shall administer this chapter in conformity with the provisions of the Revenue and Taxation Code Section 11901 et seq. and the provisions of any county ordinance adopted pursuant thereto. (Ord. 279 §9, 1967)

 

3.16.100 Claims for refund.
Claims for refund of taxes imposed pursuant to this chapter shall be governed by the provisions of Chapter 5 (commencing with Section 5096) of Part 9 of Division 1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the State of California. (Ord. 279 §10, 1967)

 

3.16.110 Operative date.
This chapter becomes operative upon the operative date of any ordinance adopted by the county of Amador, pursuant to the Revenue and Taxation Code Section 11901 et seq. or January 1, 1968, whichever is the later. (Ord. 279 §11, 1967)

 

3.16.120 Copies to be filed.
Upon its adoption the city clerk shall file two copies of the ordinance codified in this chapter with the county recorder of Amador County. (Ord. 279 §12, 1967)

Chapter 3.20 SALES AND USE TAX
3.20.010 Short title.
This chapter shall be known as the “uniform local sales and use tax ordinance.” (Ord. 349 §1, 1973)

 

3.20.020 Rate.
The rate of sales tax and use tax imposed by this chapter shall be one percent. (Ord. 350 §1, 1973; Ord. 349 §2, 1973)

 

3.20.030 Operative date.
This chapter shall be operative on January 1, 1974.

A.    Section 3.20.120 shall be operative January 1, 1984.

B.     Section 3.20.130 shall be operative on the operative date of any act of the Legislature of the state which amends Section 7202 of the Revenue and Taxation Code or which repeals and reenacts Section 7202 of the Revenue and Taxation Code to provide an exemption from city sales and use taxes for operators or waterborne vessels in the same, or substantially the same, language as that existing in subdivisions (i)(7) and (i)(8) of Section 7202 as those subdivisions read on October 1, 1983. (Ord. 481 §3, 1983; Ord. 349 §3, 1973)

 

3.20.040 Purpose.
The city council declares that this chapter is adopted to achieve the following, among other purposes, and directs that the provisions hereof be interpreted in order to accomplish those purposes:

A.    To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which complies with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code;

B.     To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which incorporates provisions identical to those of the Sales and Use Tax Law of the state insofar as those provisions are not inconsistent with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code;

C.     To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which imposes a tax and provides a measure therefor that can be administered and collected by the State Board of Equalization in a manner that adapts itself as fully as practicable to, and requires the least possible deviation from, the existing statutory and administrative procedures followed by the State Board of Equalization in administering and collecting the California State Sales and Use Taxes;

D.    To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which can be administered in a manner that will, to the degree possible consistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, minimize the cost of collecting city sales and use taxes and at the same time minimize the burden of record keeping upon persons subject to taxation under the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 349 §4, 1973)

 

3.20.050 Contract with state.
Prior to the operative date, this city shall contract with the State Board of Equalization to perform all functions incident to the administration and operation of this sales and use tax chapter; provided, that if this city has not contracted with the State Board of Equalization prior to the operative date, it shall nevertheless so contract and in such a case the operative date shall be the first day of the first calendar quarter following the execution of such a contract rather than the first day of the first calendar quarter following the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter. (Ord. 349 §5, 1973)

 

3.20.060 Sales tax.
For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail, a tax is imposed upon all retailers in the city at the rate stated in Section 3.20.020 of this chapter of the gross receipts of the retailer from the sale of all tangible personal property sold at retail in this city on and after the operative date. (Ord. 349 §6, 1973)

 

3.20.070 Place of sale.
For the purposes of this chapter, all retail sales are consummated at the place of business of the retailer unless the tangible personal property sold is delivered by the retailer or his/her agent to an out-of-state destination or to a common carrier for delivery to an out-of-state destination. The gross receipts from such sales shall include delivery charges, when such charges are subject to the State Sales and Use Tax, regardless of the place to which delivery is made. In the event a retailer has no permanent place of business in the state or has more than one place of business, the place or places at which the retail sales are consummated shall be determined under rules and regulations to be prescribed and adopted by the State Board of Equalization. (Ord. 349 §7, 1973)

 

3.20.080 Use tax.
An excise tax is imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in this city of tangible personal property purchased from any retailer on and after the operative date for storage, use or other consumption in the city at the rate stated in Section 3.20.020 of this chapter of the sales price of the property. The sales price shall include delivery charges when such charges are subject to State Sales or Use Tax regardless of the place to which delivery is made. (Ord. 349 §8, 1973)

 

3.20.090 Adoption of provisions of state law.
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter and except insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, all of the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code are adopted and made a part of this chapter as though fully set forth herein. (Ord. 349 §9, 1973)

 

3.20.100 Limitations on adoption of state law.
In adopting the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, wherever the State of California is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the name of this city shall be substituted therefor. The substitution, however, shall not be made when the word “State” is used as part of the title of the State Controller, the State Treasurer, the State Board of Control, the State Board of Equalization, the State Treasury or the Constitution of the State of California; the substitution shall not be made when the result of that substitution would require action to be taken by or against the city, or any agency thereof, rather than by or against the State Board of Equalization, in performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of this chapter; the substitution shall not be made in those sections, including, but not necessarily limited to, sections referring to the exterior boundaries of the State of California, where the result of the substitution would be to provide an exemption from this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not otherwise be exempt from this tax while such sales, storage, use or other consumption remain subject to tax by the state under the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, or to impose this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not be subject to tax by the state under the provisions of that code; the substitution shall not be made in Sections 6701, 6702 (except in the last sentence thereof), 6711, 6715, 6737, 6797 or 6828 of the Revenue and Taxation Code; and the substitution shall not be made for the word “State” in the phrase “retailer engaged in business in this State” in Section 6203 or in the definition of that phrase in Section 6203. (Ord. 349 §1, 1973)

 

3.20.110 Permit not required.
If a seller’s permit has been issued to a retailer under Section 6067 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, an additional seller’s permit shall not be required by this chapter. (Ord. 349 §11, 1973)

 

3.20.120 Exclusions and exemptions.
A.    The amount subject to tax shall not include any sales or use tax imposed by the state upon a retailer or consumer.

B.     The storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property, the gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to tax under a sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code by any city and county, county, or city in this state, shall be exempt from the tax due under this chapter.

C.     There are exempted from the computation of the amount of the sales tax the gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the city in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of this state, the United States or any foreign government.

D.    In addition to the exemptions provided in Sections 6366 and 6366.1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code the storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of this state, the United States or any foreign government is exempted from the use tax. (Ord. 481 §1, 1983; Ord. 349 §12, 1973)

 

3.20.130 Exclusions and exemptions.
A.    The amount subject to tax shall not include any sales or use tax imposed by the state upon a retailer or consumer.

B.     The storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property, the gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to tax under a sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code by any city and county, county, or city in this state, shall be exempt from the tax due under this chapter.

C.     There are exempted from the computation of the amount of the sales tax the gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators of waterborne vessels to be used or consumed principally outside the city in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the carriage of persons or property in such vessels for commercial purposes.

D.    The storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators of waterborne vessels and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the carriage of persons or property of such vessels for commercial purposes is exempted from the use tax.

E.     There are exempted from the computation of the amount of the sales tax the gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the city in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of this state, the United States or any foreign government.

F.     In addition to the exemptions provided in Sections 6366 and 6366.1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code the storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of this state, the United States or any foreign government is exempted from the use tax. (Ord. 481 §2, 1983; Ord. 349 §13, 1973)

 

3.20.140 Application of provisions relating to exclusions and exemptions.
Section 3.20.130 of this chapter shall be operative as long as Section 7202 of the Revenue and Taxation Code provides for an exemption from city sales and use taxes for operators of waterborne vessels as existing in subdivisions (a)(9)(g) and (h) of Section 7202 as these subdivisions read on October 1, 1986. Section 3.20.130 shall become operative effective as the operative date of any act of the Legislature of the state which amends Section 7202 of the Revenue and Taxation Code or which repeals and reenacts Section 7202 of the Revenue and Taxation Code to eliminate an exemption from city sales and use taxes for operators of waterborne vessels as described above in this section. (Ord. 513 §1, 1987; Ord. 349 §14, 1973)

 

3.20.150 Amendments to state law.
All subsequent amendments of the Revenue and Taxation Code which relate to the sales and use tax and which are not inconsistent with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code shall automatically become a part of this chapter. (Ord. 349 §15, 1973)

 

3.20.160 Enjoining collection forbidden.
No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall issue in any suit, action or proceeding in any court against the state or this city, or against any officer of the state or this city, to prevent or enjoin the collection under this chapter, or Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected. (Ord. 349 §16, 1973)

 

3.20.170 Penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars or by imprisonment for a period of not more than six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 349 §17, 1973)

Chapter 3.24 TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY TAX
3.24.010 Short title.
The short title of this chapter shall be the “transient occupancy ordinance.” (Ord. 531 §2, 1990)

 

3.24.020 Definitions.
Except where the context otherwise requires, the definitions given in this section shall govern the construction of this chapter:

A.    “Hotel” means any structure, or any portion of any structure, which is occupied or intended or designed for use or occupancy by transients, including but not limited to dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes, and includes any hotel, inn, tourist home or house, motel, studio hotel, bachelor hotel, lodging house, rooming house, apartment house, time-share project or facility, dormitory, public or private club, mobile home, motor home recreation vehicle, house trailer or other similar structure or portion thereof, any duplex, triplex, or single family dwelling units, except, any private dwelling or other dwelling unit or portion thereof rented only very infrequently and incidental to the normal occupancy by the owner or his or her family. The authority to establish that housing or facility as a hotel as defined in this subsection shall vest solely with the tax administrator, and the owner or operator thereof shall file with the tax administrator such information as the tax administrator may require to determine and maintain such status.

B.     “Occupancy” means the use or possession, or the right or entitlement to the occupancy, use or possession, of any hotel, room, rooms or any portion thereof offered for rent to be used or occupied for dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes regardless of the purpose for which the rooms are rented or provided.

C.     “Operator” means the person who is proprietor of the hotel whether in the capacity of owner, lessee, sublessee, mortgagee in possession, licensee, time-share project or facility manager or operator, or in any other capacity. Where the operator performs his or her or its functions through a managing agent of any type or character, the managing agent shall also be deemed an operator for the purpose of this chapter, and shall have jointly and severally the same duties and liabilities as the principal. Compliance with the provisions of this chapter by either the principal or the managing agent shall, however, be considered to be compliance by both.

D.    “Person” means any individual, firm, partnership, church, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate, school or any other group or organization acting as a unit.

E.     “Rent” means the consideration charged, whether or not received, for the occupancy of space in a hotel valued in money, whether to be received in money, goods, labor or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits and property and services of any kind or nature, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever.

F.     “Tax administrator” means the city manager or his or her designated agent.

G.    “Time-share occupancy” means occupancy related to the situation wherein a purchaser receives the right or entitlement in perpetuity, for life, or for a term of years or other extended term, to the recurrent, exclusive use or occupancy of a lot, parcel, unit, room(s), hotel or portion thereof, or segment of real property, annually or on some other seasonal or periodic basis, for a period of time that has been or will be allotted from the use or occupancy periods into which the time-share project which is involved has been divided. The right or entitlement to occupancy may attach in advance to a specific lot, parcel, unit, room(s), or portion of a hotel, or segment of real property, or may involve designation or selection of the same at a future time or times.

H.    “Transient” means any person who exercises occupancy or is entitled to occupancy by reason of concession, permit, right of access, license, time-share arrangement or ownership or agreement, or other agreement of whatever nation, for a period of thirty consecutive calendar days or less, counting portions of calendar days as full days. Any person continuously occupying the same space in a hotel, as defined above, shall be deemed to be a transient if his or her actual total period of uninterrupted occupancy does not exceed thirty days. Unless days of occupancy or entitlement to occupancy by one person are consecutive without any break, then prior or subsequent periods of such occupancy or entitlement to occupancy shall not be counted when determining whether a period exceeds the stated thirty calendar days. (Ord. 696 §1, 2016; Ord. 531 §2, 1990)

3.24.030 Tax imposed.
Effective January 1, 2003, for the privilege of occupancy in any hotel, each transient is subject to, and shall pay a tax in the amount of, ten percent of the rent charged by the operator. Said tax constitutes a debt owed by the transient to the city for which the operator is the collecting agent, which is extinguished only by payment to the operator of the city. The transient shall pay the tax to the operator of the transient lodging facility at the time the rent is paid. If for any reason the tax due is not paid to the operator of the lodging facility, it must be paid directly to the city. The rent deemed payable on the account of time-share or similar interval or fractional ownership occupancy by a transient shall be established by resolution of the city council in a manner consistent with the provisions of California Revenue and Taxation Code Section 7280(b) or any successor section thereto. (Ord. 632 §1, 2002; Ord. 550 §1, 1992; Ord. 531 §2, 1990)

 

3.24.040 Exemptions.
A.    No tax shall be imposed upon any person as to whom, or any occupancy as to which, it is beyond the power of the city to impose the tax herein provided.

B.     Charges incurred by a person in the performance of official duties as an employee of local, State, Federal and foreign governmental entities shall be exempt from the tax herein provided if an exemption certificate is submitted and payment is made either: (1) directly to the hotel for rentals by the governmental entity; or (2) by government-sponsored corporate charge card. As an alternative to (1) or (2), the exemption certificate may be submitted with official government travel papers.

C.     No exemption shall be imposed on the owner of a timeshare estate occupying a room or rooms in a timeshare project, as defined in Section 3.24.020(G).

D.    The tax will be imposed on persons occupying space in a hotel until the period of thirty consecutive calendar days has expired unless there is an agreement in writing between the operator and the occupant for a period longer than thirty consecutive calendar days of occupancy. Absent an agreement, anyone occupying space for more than thirty consecutive days will be exempt from the tax after the first thirty consecutive days, the first thirty days are subject to tax.

E.     No exemption shall be granted except upon a claim therefore made at the time rent is collected and under penalty of perjury upon a form prescribed by the Tax Collector. All exemptions should be reported and remitted as outlined in Section 3.24.080. All claims for exemption forms and rental agreements shall be kept and preserved for three years as outlined in Section 3.24.140. (Ord. 696 §1, 2016; Ord. 531 §2, 1990)

 

3.24.050 Operator’s duties.
Each operator shall collect the tax imposed by this chapter to the same extent and at the same time as the rent is collected from every transient. The amount of the tax shall be separately stated from the amount of the rent charged. No operator of a hotel shall advertise or state in any manner, whether directly or indirectly, that the tax or any part thereof will be assumed or absorbed by the operator; or that it will be refunded except in the manner provided in this chapter. (Ord. 531 §2, 1990)

 

3.24.060 Registration.
A.    Every person desiring to engage in or conduct business as operator of a hotel renting to transients within the city shall file with the tax administrator an application for a transient occupancy registration permit for each place of business. Every application for such a permit shall be made upon a form prescribed by the tax administrator and shall set forth the name under which the applicant transacts or intends to transact business, the location of his or her place of business and such other information as the tax administrator may require. The application shall be signed by the owner if a natural person, by a member or partner, if an association or partnership, by an executive officer or some person specifically authorized by the corporation to sign the application in the case of a corporation, and all such signatures shall be confirmed by the attestation of a notary public. The transient occupancy registration permit must be in effect at all times while business is in operation and shall be at all times posted in a conspicuous place on the premises. The permit shall, among other things, state the following:

1.     Name of hotel;

2.     Name of operator;

3.     Hotel address;

4.     The date upon which the permit was issued;

5.     “This Transient Occupancy Registration Permit signifies that the person named on the face hereof has fulfilled the requirements of the Transient Occupancy Tax Chapter by registering with the Tax Administrator for the purpose of collecting from transients the Transient Occupancy Tax and remitting said tax to the Tax Administrator. This Permit does not authorize any person to conduct any unlawful business in any unlawful manner, nor operate a hotel without strictly complying with all applicable laws, including but not limited to those requiring a permit from any board, commission, department or office of this City. This Permit does not apply in lieu of such other permits which are otherwise required.”

B.     At the time of filing an application for a registration permit, the applicant shall pay a registration fee for each permit issued. (Ord. 531 §2, 1990)

 

3.24.070 Returns and remittances.
The tax imposed under Section 3.24.030 is:

A.    Due to the tax administrator at the time it is collected by the operator; and

B.     Becomes delinquent and subject to penalties if not post marked or received by the tax administrator on or before the last working day of the month following the close of each calendar quarter. (Ord. 696 §1, 2016; Ord. 531 §2, 1990)

 

3.24.080 Reporting and remitting.
Commencing on or before the last working day of the month following the close of each calendar quarter throughout the fiscal year, commencing each July 1st, each operator shall file a return with the tax administrator on the forms provided by him or her, of the total rents charged or chargeable as provided in Section 3.24.030, whether or not received, including any rentals charged for occupancies exempt under the provisions of Sections 3.24.020(G) and 3.24.040 and, all such amount of tax collected for transient occupancies. The assessor-collector may establish shorter reporting periods for any certificate holder if he or she deems it necessary in order to insure collection of the tax and he or she may require further information in the return. Returns and payments are due immediately upon cessation of business for any reason. All taxes collected by operators pursuant to this chapter shall be held in trust for the account of the city until payment thereof is made to the assessor-collector. Each such return shall contain a declaration under penalty of perjury, executed by the operator or his or her authorized agent, that to the best of the signator’s knowledge, the statements in the return are true, correct and complete. Amounts claimed on the return as exempt from the tax pursuant to Sections 3.24.020(G), 3.24.040 and 3.24.150 shall be fully itemized and explained on the return or supporting schedule. In determining the amount of “taxable receipts” on the tax return, “rent” as defined in Section 3.24.020(E), may not be reduced by any business expenses including but not limited to the amount of service charges deducted by credit card companies or commissions paid to travel agencies. At the time the return is filed, the tax fixed at the prevailing transient occupancy tax rate for the amount of rentals charged or chargeable, which are not exempt from the tax pursuant to this chapter shall be remitted to the tax administrator. The tax administrator may establish other reporting periods and may require a cash deposit or bond or a separate trust fund bank account for any permit holder if he or she deems it necessary in order to insure collection of the tax and he or she may require further information in the return. All taxes collected by operators pursuant to this chapter shall be held in trust for the account of the city until remittance thereof is made to the tax administrator. (Ord. 696 §1, 2016; Ord. 531 §2, 1990)

 

3.24.090 Cessation of business.
Each operator shall notify the tax administrator no less than fifteen days prior to the sale or cessation of business for any reason, and, returns and remittances are due immediately upon the sale or cessation of business. (Ord. 531 §2, 1990)

 

3.24.100 Delinquency.
Any operator who fails to remit any required tax to the city by the due date stated on the remittance shall become delinquent on the next day and must include a penalty of ten percent of the tax with payment. Any operator who fails to pay any penalty imposed under this section by the tenth day after the due date on the remittance shall pay interest at the rate of two percent per month, or fraction thereof from the date on which the penalty becomes due and payable to the city until the date of the payment. (Ord. 696 §1, 2016; Ord. 531 §2, 1990)

 

3.24.110 Fraud.
If the tax administrator determines that the failure to make any remittance or payment due under this chapter is due to fraud, a penalty of one hundred percent of the amount of the tax and penalties shall be added thereto in addition to the penalties stated in Section 3.24.100. (Ord. 531 §2, 1990)

 

3.24.120 Failure to collect and report tax—Determination of tax by tax administrator.
If any operator fails or refuses to collect the tax and to make, within the time provided in this chapter, any report and remittance of the tax or any portion thereof required by this chapter, the tax administrator shall proceed in such manner as he or she may deem best to obtain facts and information on which to base his or her estimate of the tax due. As soon as the tax administrator procures such facts and information as he or she is able to obtain upon which to base the assessment of any tax imposed by this chapter payable by any operator who has failed or refused to collect the tax and make such report and remittance, he or she shall proceed to determine and assess against the operator the tax, interest and penalties provided for by this chapter. When such determination is made, the tax administrator shall give a notice of the amount so assessed by serving it personally or by depositing it in the United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the operator so assessed at his or her last known address. The operator may within ten days after serving or mailing of the notice make application in writing to the tax administrator for a hearing on the amount assessed. If application by the operator for a hearing is not made within the time prescribed, the tax, interest and penalties, if any, determined by the tax administrator shall become final and conclusive and immediately due and payable. If the application is made, the tax administrator shall give not less than five days’ written notice in the manner prescribed in this section to the operator to show cause at a time and place fixed in the notice why the amount specified therein should not be fixed for the tax, interest and penalties. At the hearing, the operator may appear and offer evidence why the specified tax, interest and penalties should not be so fixed. After the hearing the tax administrator shall determine the proper tax to be remitted and shall thereafter give written notice to the person in the manner prescribed in this section of the determination and the amount of the tax, interest and penalties. The amount determined to be due shall be payable after fifteen days unless an appeal is taken as provided in Section 3.24.130. (Ord. 531 §2, 1990)

 

3.24.130 Appeal.
Any operator aggrieved by any decision of the tax administrator pursuant to a hearing in accord with the provisions of Section 3.24.120, with respect to the amount of any tax, interest and penalties, if any, may appeal to the city council by filing a notice of appeal with the city clerk within fifteen days of service of the assessment or determination of tax and penalties, if any due. The city council shall fix a time and place for hearing the appeal, and the city clerk shall give notice in writing to the operator at his or her last known address. The findings of the city council shall be final and conclusive and shall be served upon the appellant in the manner prescribed in this chapter for service of notice of hearing. Any amount found to be due shall be immediately due and payable upon the service of the notice. (Ord. 531 §2, 1990)

 

3.24.140 Records.
It shall be the duty of every operator liable for the collection and remittance to the city of any tax imposed by this chapter to keep and preserve, in the city, for a period of three years, records in such form as the tax administrator may require to determine the amount of the tax. The tax administrator shall have the right to inspect such records at all reasonable times and may subpoena the records of any operator who refuses to make them available for examination. The tax administrator shall have the authority to require such records be implemented through mandatory use of a mechanical or electronic cash register which will print a daily statement of income and a monthly total of income. (Ord. 531 §2, 1990)

 

3.24.150 Refunds.
A.    Whenever the amount of any tax, interest or penalty has been overpaid or paid more than once or has been erroneously collected or received by the city under this chapter, it may be refunded as provided in subsections B and C of this section, provided a claim in writing therefor, stating under penalty of perjury the specific grounds upon which the claim is founded, is filed with the tax administrator within three years of the date of payment. The claims shall be in such form determined by the tax administrator.

B.     An operator may claim a refund or take as credit against taxes collected and remitted the amount overpaid, paid more than once or erroneously collected or paid more than once or received when it is established in a manner prescribed by the tax administrator that the person from whom the tax has been collected was not a transient; provided, however, that neither a refund nor a credit shall be allowed unless the amount of the tax so collected has either been refunded to the person or credited to rent subsequently payable by the person to the operator.

C.     A transient may obtain a refund of taxes overpaid or paid more than once erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city by filing a claim in the manner provided in subsection A of this section, but only when the tax was paid by the transient directly to the tax administrator, or when the transient having paid the tax to the operator establishes to the satisfaction of the tax administrator that the transient has been unable to obtain a refund from the operator who collected the tax.

D.    No refund shall be paid under the provisions of this section unless the claimant establishes his or her right thereto by written records. (Ord. 531 §2, 1990)

 

3.24.160 Revocation of permit.
Whenever any operator fails to comply with any provision of this chapter relating to occupancy tax or any rule or regulation of the tax administrator relating to occupancy tax prescribed and adopted under this chapter, the tax administrator upon hearing, after giving the operator ten days’ notice in writing specifying the time and place of hearing and requiring him or her to show cause why his or her permit or permits should not be revoked, may suspend or revoke any one or more of the permits held by the operator. The. tax administrator shall give to the operator written notice of the suspension or revocation of any of his or her permits. The notices required in this section may be served personally or by mail in the manner prescribed for service of notice of a deficiency determination. The tax administrator shall not issue a new permit after the revocation of a permit unless he or she is satisfied that the former holder of the permit has complied and will comply with the provisions of this chapter relating to the occupancy tax and regulations of the tax administrator. (Ord. 531 §2  1990)

 

3.24.170 Closure of hotel without permit.
During any period of time during which a permit has not been issued, or is suspended, revoked or otherwise not validly in effect, the tax administrator may require that the hotel be closed. (Ord. 531 §2, 1990)

 

3.24.180 Recording certificate—Lien.
If any amount required to be remitted or paid to the city under this chapter is not remitted or paid when due, the tax administrator may, within three years after the amount is due, file for record in the office of the county recorder a certificate specifying the amount of tax, penalties and interest due, the name and address as it appears on the records of the tax administrator of the operator liable for the same and the fact that the tax administrator has complied with all provisions of this chapter in the determination of the amount required to be remitted and paid. From the time of the filing for record, the amount required to be remitted together with penalties and interest constitutes a lien upon all real property in the county owned by the operator or afterwards and before the lien expires acquired by him or her. The lien has the force, effect and priority of a judgment lien and shall continue for ten years from the time of filing of the certificate unless sooner released or otherwise discharged. (Ord. 531 §2, 1990)

 

3.24.190 Priorit and lien of tax.
A.    The amounts required to be remitted and or paid by any operator under this chapter with penalties and interest shall be satisfied first in any of the following cases:

1.     Whenever the person is insolvent;

2.     Whenever the person makes a voluntary assignment of his or her assets;

3.     Whenever the estate of the person in the hands of executors, administrators, or heirs is insufficient to pay all debts due from the deceased;

4.     Whenever the estate and effects of an absconding, concealed or absent person required to pay any amount under this chapter are levied upon by process law. This chapter does not give the city a preference over any recorded lien which attached prior to the date when the amounts required to be paid became a lien.

B.     The preference given to the city by this section shall be subordinate to the preferences given to claims for personal services by Sections 1204 and 1206 of the Code of Civil Procedure. (Ord. 531 §2, 1990)

 

3.24.200 Warrant for collection of tax.
At any time within three years after any operator is delinquent in the remittance or payment of any amount required in this chapter to be remitted or paid within three years after the last recording of a certificate under Section 3.24.160, the tax administrator may issue a warrant for the enforcement of any liens and for the collection of any amount required to be paid to the city under this chapter. The warrant shall be directed to any sheriff, marshal, or constable and shall have the same effect as a writ of execution. The warrant shall be levied and sale made pursuant to it in the same manner with the same effect as a writ of execution. The tax administrator may pay or advance to the sheriff, marshal, or constable the same fees, commissions and expenses for his or her services as are provided by law for similar services pursuant to a writ of execution. The tax administrator, and not the court, shall approve the fees for publication in a newspaper. (Ord. 531 §2, 1990)

 

3.24.210 Seizure and sale.
At any time within three years after any operator is delinquent in the remittance or payment of any amount, the tax administrator may forthwith collect the amount in the following manner.

The tax administrator shall seize any property, real or personal, of the operator and sell the property, or a sufficient part of it, at public auction to pay the amount due together with any penalties and interest imposed for the delinquency and any costs incurred on account of the seizure and sale. Any seizure made to collect occupancy taxes due shall be only of property of the operator not exempt from the execution under the provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure. (Ord. 531 §2, 1990)

 

3.24.220 Successor’s liability—Withholding by purchaser.
If any operator liable for any amount under this chapter sells out his or her business or quits the business, his or her successor assigns shall withhold sufficient of the purchase price to cover such amount until the former owner produces a receipt from the tax administrator showing that it has been paid or a certificate stating that no amount is due. (Ord. 531 §2, 1990)

 

3.24.230 Liability of purchaser—Release.
If the purchaser of a hotel fails to withhold purchase price as required, he or she shall become personally liable for the payment of the amount required to be withheld by him or her to the extent of the purchase price, valued in money. Within sixty days from the date of the former owner’s records are made available for audit, whichever period expires the later, but in any event not later than ninety days after the receiving the request, the tax administrator shall either issue the certificate or mail notice to the purchaser at his or her address as it appears on the records of the tax administrator of the amount that must be paid as a condition of issuing the certificate. Failure of the tax administrator to mail the notice will release the purchaser from any further obligation to withhold purchase price as provided in this section. The time within which the obligation of the successor may be enforced shall start to run at the time the operator sells his or her business or at the time that the determination against the operator becomes final, whichever occurs later. (Ord. 531 §2, 1990)

 

3.24.240 Responsibility for payments.
Any tax required to be paid by any transient under the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a debt owed to the city by the operator. Any such tax collected by an operator which has not been remitted to the city is a fiduciary obligation of the operator to the city and collectible in the same manner as a debt. Any person owing money to the city under the provisions of this chapter shall be liable to an action brought in the name of the city for the recovery of such amount. (Ord. 531 §2, 1990)

 

3.24.250 Withhold notice.
If any person or operator is delinquent in the remittance or payment of the amount required to be remitted or paid by him or her or in the event a determination has been made against him or her for the remittance of tax and payment of the penalty, the city may, within three years after the tax obligation became due, give notice thereof personally or by registered mail to all persons, including the state or any political subdivision thereof, having in their possession or under their control any credits or other personal property belonging to the taxpayer. After receiving the withholding notice, the person so notified shall make no disposition of the taxpayer’s credits, other personal property or debts until the city consents to a transfer or disposition or until sixty days elapse after the receipt of the notice, whichever expires earlier. All persons, upon receipt of the notice shall advise the city immediately of all such credits, other personal property or debts in their possession, under their control or owing by them. If the notice seeks to prevent the transfer or other disposition of a deposit in a bank or other credits or personal property in the possession or under the control of the bank, to be effective the notice shall be delivered or mailed to the branch or office of the bank at which the deposit is carried or at which the credits or personal property is held. If any person so notified makes transfer or disposition of the property or debts required to be held under this section during the effective period of the notice to withhold, he or she shall be liable to the city to the extent of the value of the release up to the amount of the indebtedness owed by the taxpayer to the city. (Ord. 531 §2, 1990)

 

3.24.260 Violations—Misdemeanor.
A.    Except for failure of an operator to pay to the tax administrator taxes collected under this chapter which is punishable as a felony pursuant to Section 424 of the Penal Code, every violation of this chapter is a misdemeanor and punishable by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars or imprisonment in the county jail for not more than six months or by both such fine and imprisonment.

B.     If the offense is not otherwise punishable as mentioned in subsection A of this section, any person willfully failing to comply with, or knowingly violating, any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.

C.     Any operator or other person who willfully fails or refuses to register as required in this chapter, or to furnish any return required to be made, or who fails or refuses to furnish a supplemental return or other data required by the tax administrator, or who renders a false or fraudulent return or claim is guilty of a misdemeanor. Any person required to make, render, sign or verify and report or claim who willfully makes any false or fraudulent report or claim with intent to defeat or evade the determination of any amount due required by this chapter to be made, is guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 531 §2, 1990)

3.24.270 Extension of time.
The tax administrator, for good cause, may extend for not to exceed one month the time for making any return or paying any amount required to be paid under this chapter. The extension may be granted at any time, provided a request therefor is filed with the tax administrator within or prior to the period for which the extension may be granted. Any person to whom an extension is granted shall pay, in addition to the tax, interest at the rate of two percent per month or fraction thereof, from the date on which the tax would have been due without the extension until the date of payment. (Ord. 531 §2, 1990)

 

3.24.280 Divulging of information forbidden.
It is unlawful for any person having an administrative duty under this chapter to make known in any manner whatever the business affairs, operations, or information obtained by the investigation of the records of any operator or any other person visited or examined in the discharge of official duty, or the amount or source of income, profits, losses, expenditures, or any particular thereof, set forth or disclosed in any return, or to knowingly permit any return or copy thereof or any abstract or particulars thereof to be seen or examined by any person. Successors, receivers, trustees, executors, administrators, assignees and guarantors, if directly interested, may be given information as to the items included in the amounts of any unpaid tax or amounts of tax, penalties and interest required to be collected. (Ord. 531 §2, 1990)

Chapter 3.28 INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY
3.28.010 Purpose.
The California Industrial Development Financing Act, Title 10, Section 91500, Government Code, has established an industrial development authority for the achievement of specified public purposes. The public purposes are to increase opportunities for useful employment and to contribute to private economic development. The need for the establishment of an industrial development authority to achieve such purposes is based upon finding that the private industry requires new and alternative methods of capital finance for the acquisition, construction, and rehabilitation of facilities. (Ord. 468 §1(A), 1982)

 

3.28.020 Findings and declarations.
There is a need in the city for the acquisition, construction or rehabilitation of facilities for use in industry, which will increase employment opportunities and contribute to economic development; and further, the alternative method of capital finance that an industrial development authority can provide will aid in satisfying that need. (Ord. 468 §1(B), 1982)

 

3.28.030 Organization.
There is established in the city an industrial development authority, hereby declared and organized, which shall function under the name industrial development authority of the city, and which is authorized to transact business and exercise all of the powers and other authority conferred upon industrial development authorities by the Act. The authority shall have the power to accept and act upon all applications from companies for financing by the issuance of bonds, and to execute any contracts or agreements with companies respecting a project, the agreement form to include leases, installment sales, loans, or guarantees. (Ord. 468 §1(C), 1982)

Title 4 RESERVED

Title 5 BUSINESS LICENSES AND REGULATIONS
Chapter 5.04 BUSINESS LICENSES
Chapter 5.08 BINGO GAMES
Chapter 5.16 SOLICITORS AND PEDDLERS
Chapter 5.24 CABLE COMMUNICATION FRANCHISES
Chapter 5.28 ROCK FESTIVALS
Chapter 5.32 TAXICABS
Chapter 5.36 CARDROOMS
Chapter 5.40 MECHANICAL OR ELECTRONIC AMUSEMENT DEVICES
Chapter 5.44 PAWNBROKERS AND SECONDHAND DEALERS
Chapter 5.50 FILMING RULES AND REGULATIONS
Chapter 5.60 MOBILE HOME RENT PROTECTION

Chapter 5.04 BUSINESS LICENSES
5.04.010 Definitions.
As used in this chapter:

A.    “Business” means professions, trades and occupations and all and every kind of calling whether or not carried on for profit.

B.     “City” means the City of Jackson, a municipal corporation of the state, in its present incorporated form or in any later reorganized, consolidated, enlarged or reincorporated form.

C.     “Collector” means the city tax collector, finance director or other city officer charged with the administration of this chapter.

D.    “Person” means all domestic and foreign corporations, associations, syndicates, joint stock companies, corporations, partnerships of every kind, clubs, businesses, or common law trusts, societies, and individuals transacting and carrying on any business in the city, other than as an employee.

E.     “Sale” means the transfer in any manner or by any means whatsoever of title to property for a consideration; the serving, supplying or furnishing for a consideration of any property; and a transaction whereby the possession of property is transferred and the seller retains the title as security for the payment of the price shall likewise be deemed a sale. This definition shall not be deemed to exclude any transaction which is or which, in effect, results in a sale within the contemplation of law.

F.     “Sworn statement” means an affidavit sworn to before a person authorized to take oaths, or in California a declaration or certification made under penalty of perjury. (Ord. 365 §1, 1975)

 

5.04.020 Purpose.
This chapter is enacted for both regulatory and revenue-raising purposes. (Ord. 703 §2, 2017; Ord. 365 §1, 1975)

 

5.04.030 Effect on other ordinances.
Persons required to pay a license tax or fee for transacting and carrying on any business under this chapter shall not be relieved from the payment of any license tax or fee for the privilege of doing such business required under any other ordinance of the city, and shall remain subject to the regulatory provisions of other ordinances. (Ord. 703 §3, 2017; Ord. 365 §1, 1975)

 

5.04.040 License and tax payment required.
A.    There are imposed upon the businesses, trades, professions, callings, and occupations specified in this chapter license taxes in the amounts hereinafter prescribed. It is unlawful for any person to transact and carry on any business, trade, profession, calling, or occupation in the city without first having procured a license from the city to do so and paying the tax hereinafter prescribed or without complying with any and all applicable provisions of this chapter.

B.     Subsection A of this section shall not be construed to require any person to obtain a license prior to doing business within the city if such requirement conflicts with applicable statutes of the United States or of the state. Persons not so required to obtain a license prior to doing business within the city nevertheless shall be liable for payment of the tax imposed by this chapter

C.     As a prerequisite to the issuance of any license herein, the applicant shall submit to the collector a copy of his or her sales tax permit or sellers permit (pursuant to the requirements of Revenue and Tax Code Section 6067) which clearly designates the city as his or her place of business. If requested by the applicant, the collector may provide forms for changing the address of the place of business, and upon the applicant’s execution thereof, the collector shall transmit said forms to the State Board of Equalization.

D.    Notwithstanding any provision of this section or chapter, no person shall transact, perform, engage in and carry on in the city any business, trade, profession, calling, use or occupation that cannot be, or is not, conducted or carried out without being in violation of state or federal law, or this code, and no license will be issued for any such business, trade, profession, calling, use, or occupation, including, but not limited to, a medical marijuana dispensary or any business engaged in commercial marijuana activity as defined in Section 17.220.020 of this code. In the event of any future amendments to this code, including amendments to allowable marijuana uses, the city hereby expressly reserves the right to develop, implement, and conduct local licensing of such marijuana uses.

E.     The city council may impose a reasonable fee or fees based on the cost of issuing business licenses for regulatory purposes and otherwise ensuring that businesses comply with the requirements of this chapter and code. No portion of such fee shall be imposed for costs related to collection of the license tax. Fees under this subsection may be adopted and amended by resolution. (Ord. 703 §4, 2017; Ord. 702 §3, 2017; Ord. 689, 2015; Ord. 494 §1, 1986; Ord. 365 §1, 1975)

 

5.04.050 Branch establishments.
A separate license must be obtained for each branch establishment or location of the business transacted and carried on, and for each separate type of business at the same location, and each license shall authorize the licensee to transact and carry on only the business licensed thereby at the location or in the manner designated in such license; provided that warehouses and distributing plants used in connection with and incidental to a business licensed under the provisions of this chapter shall not be deemed to be separate places of business or branch establishments. (Ord. 365 §1 1975)

 

5.04.060 Evidence of doing business.
When any person by use of sign, circulars, cards, telephone book, or newspapers, advertises, holds out or represents that he or she is in business in the city, or when any person holds an action license or permit issued by a governmental agency indicating that he or she is in business in the city, or when any person seeks to initiate or maintain a home business as described within Section 17.12.020 in any residential zone, any such person fails to deny by a sworn statement given to the collector that he or she is not conducting a business in the city, after being requested to do so by the collector, then these facts shall be considered prima facie evidence that he or she is conducting a business in the city. (Ord. 439 §2, 1980; Ord. 365 §1, 1975)

 

5.04.070 Constitutional apportionment.
A.    None of the license taxes provided for by this chapter shall be so applied as to occasion an undue burden upon interstate commerce or be violative of the equal protection and due process clauses of the constitutions of the United States and the State.

B.     In any case where a license tax is believed by a licensee or applicant for a license to place an undue burden upon interstate commerce or be violative of such constitutional clauses, he or she may apply to the collector for an adjustment of the tax. Such application may be made before, at, or within six months after payment of the prescribed license tax. The applicant shall, by sworn statement and supporting testimony, show this method of business and the gross volume or estimated gross volume of business and such other information as the collector may deem necessary in order to determine the extent, if any, of such undue burden or violation. The collector shall then conduct an investigation, and, after having first obtained the written approval of the city attorney, shall fix as the license tax for the applicant, an amount that is reasonable and nondiscriminatory; or if the license tax has already been paid, shall order a refund of the amount over and above the license tax so fixed. In fixing the license tax to be charged, the collector shall have the power to base the license tax upon a percentage of gross receipts or any other measure which will assure that the license tax assessed is uniform with that assessed on businesses of a like nature, so long as the amount assessed does not exceed the license tax as prescribed by this chapter.

C.     Should the collector determine the gross receipts measure of license tax to be the proper basis, he or she may require the applicant to submit, either at the time of termination of the applicant’s business in the city, or at the end of each three-month period, a sworn statement of the gross receipts and pay the amount of license tax therefor; provided that no additional license tax during any one calendar year shall be required after the licensee has paid an amount equal to the annual license tax as prescribed in this chapter. (Ord. 365 §1, 1975)

 

5.04.080 Exemptions.
A.    Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed or construed to apply to any person transacting and carrying on any business exempt by virtue of the constitution or applicable statutes of the United States or of the state from the payment of such taxes as are herein prescribed.

B.     Any person claiming an exemption pursuant to this section shall obtain a permit for charitable or religious solicitation or as a promoter pursuant to the regulations and requirements of Chapters 5.16 and 5.20.

C.     The collector, after giving notice and a reasonable opportunity for hearing to a licensee, may revoke any license granted pursuant to the provisions of this section upon information that the licensee is not entitled to the exemption as provided herein. (Ord. 418 §1, 1979; Ord. 365 §1, 1975)

 

5.04.090 Contents of license.
A.    Every person required to have a license under the provisions of this chapter shall make application as hereinafter prescribed for the same to the collector of the city, and upon the payment of the prescribed license fee and tax, the collector shall issue to such person a license which shall contain the following information:

1.     The name of the person to whom the license is issued;

2.     The business licenses;

3.     The place where such business is to be transacted and carried on;

4.     The date of the expiration of such license; and

5.     Such other information as may be necessary for the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter.

For a home business (as described in Section 17.12.020(C)) every application may contain special conditions regarding the conduct of such business as deemed necessary by the collector to maintain the peaceful and harmonious character of the residential neighborhood. Such conditions may extend to a prohibition of walk-in customers, placement of limits on the size of the clientele, limitation of the hours of operation or an imposition of other reasonable sanctions required to preserve the integrity of the area.

B.     Whenever the tax imposed under the provisions of this chapter is measured by the number of vehicles, devices, machines, or other pieces of equipment used by the licensee, the collector shall issue only one license; provided, that he or she may issue for each tax period for which the license tax has been paid one identification sticker, tag, plate, or symbol for each item included in the measure of the tax. (Ord. 703 §5, 2017; Ord. 439 §3, 1980; Ord. 365 §1, 1975)

 

5.04.100 Application—First license.
A.    Upon a person making application for the first license to be issued hereunder or for a newly established business, such person shall furnish to the collector a sworn statement, upon a form provided by the collector, setting forth the following information:

1.     The exact nature or kind of business for which a license is requested;

2.     The place where such business is to be carried on, and if the same is not to be carried on at any permanent place of business, the places of residence of the owners of the same;

3.     In the event that application is made for the issuance of a license to a person doing business under a fictitious name, the application shall set forth the names and places of residence of those owning said business;

4.     In the event that the application is made for the issuance to a corporation or a partnership, the application shall set forth the names and places of residence of the officers and partners thereof;

5.     A certification by the applicant that, to the best of the applicant’s knowledge, the operation of the business for which the application is sought will not constitute a violation of any state or federal law, or of this code; and

6.     Any further information which the collector may require to enable him or her to issue the type of license applied for.

B.     The collector shall not issue to any person another license for the same or any other business, until such person has furnished to him or her the sworn statement and paid the license fee and tax as herein required. (Ord. 703 §6, 2017; Ord. 365 §1, 1975)

 

5.04.110 Renewal license.
A.    In all cases, the applicant for the renewal of a license shall submit to the collector for his or her guidance in ascertaining the amount of the license tax to be paid by the applicant, a sworn statement, upon a form to be provided by the collector, setting forth such information concerning the applicant’s business during the preceding year as may be required by the collector to enable him or her to ascertain the amount of the license tax to be paid by said applicant pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.

B.     No statements shall be conclusive as to the matters set forth herein nor shall the filing of the same preclude the city from collecting by appropriate action such sum as is actually due and payable hereunder. (Ord. 365 §1, 1975)

 

5.04.120 Information confidential.
It is unlawful for the collector or any person having an administrative duty under the provisions of this chapter to make known in any manner whatever the business affairs, operations, or information furnished or secured pursuant to the provisions of this chapter; provided that nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent:

A.    The disclosure to, or the examination of records and equipment by, another city official, employee, or agent for collection of taxes for the sole purpose of administering or enforcing any provisions of this chapter, or collecting taxes imposed hereunder;

B.     The disclosure of information to, or the examination of records by, federal or state officials;

C.     The disclosure of information to a court of law in a proceeding brought to determine the existence or amount of any license tax liability of the particular taxpayers to the city;

D.    The disclosure, after the filing of a written request to that effect, to the taxpayer, or to his or her successors, receivers, trustees, executors, administrators, assignees, and guarantors, if directly interested, of information as to the items in the measure of any paid tax, any unpaid tax or amounts of tax required to be collected, interest and penalties; provided further, however, that the city attorney approves each such disclosure and that the collector may refuse to make any disclosure referred to in this paragraph when in his or her opinion the public interest would suffer thereby;

E.     The disclosure of the names and addresses of persons to whom licenses have been issued, and the general type or nature of their business;

F.     The disclosure by way of public meeting or otherwise of such information as may be necessary to the city council in order to permit it to be fully advised as to the facts when a taxpayer files a claim for refund of license taxes, or submits an offer of compromise with regard to a claim asserted against him or her by the city for license taxes, or when acting upon any other matter;

G.    The disclosure of general statistics regarding taxes collected or business done in the city. (Ord. 365 §1, 1975)

 

5.04.130 Failure to file statement or corrected statement.
A.    If any person fails to file any required statement within the time prescribed, or if after demand therefor made by the collector he or she fails to file a corrected statement, or if any person subject to the tax imposed by this chapter fails to apply for a license, the collector may determine the amount of license tax due from such person by means of such information as he or she may be able to obtain.

B.     If the collector is not satisfied with the information supplied in statements or applications filed, he or she may determine the amount of any license tax due by means of any information he or she may be able to obtain.

C.     If such a determination is made, the collector shall give notice of the amount so assessed by serving it personally or by depositing it in the United States Post Office at Jackson, California, postage prepaid, addressed to the person so assessed at his or her last known address. Such person may, within fifteen days after the mailing or serving of such notice, make application in writing to the collector for a hearing on the amount of the license tax. If such application is made, the collector shall cause the matter to be set for hearing within fifteen days before the city council. The collector shall give at least ten days’ notice to such person of the time and place of hearing in the manner prescribed above for serving notices of assessment. The council shall consider all evidence produced, and shall make findings thereon, which shall be final. Notice of such findings shall be served upon the applicant in the manner prescribed above for serving notices of assessment. (Ord. 365 §1, 1975)

 

5.04.140 Appeal.
Any person aggrieved by any decision of the collector with respect to the issuance or refusal to issue such license may appeal to the council by filing a notice of appeal with the clerk of the council. The council shall thereupon fix a time and place for hearing such appeal. The clerk of the council shall give notice to such person of the time and place of hearing by serving it personally or by depositing it in the United States Post Office at Jackson, California, postage prepaid, addressed to such person at his or her last known address. The council shall have authority to determine all questions raised on such appeal. No such determination shall conflict with any substantive provision of this chapter. (Ord. 365 §1, 1975)

 

5.04.150 Additional power of collector.
In addition to all other power conferred upon him or her, the collector shall have the power, for good cause shown, to extend the time for filing any required sworn statement or application for a period of not exceeding thirty days, and in such case to waive any penalty that would otherwise have accrued, except that simple ten percent interest shall be added to any tax determined to be payable. (Ord. 365 §1, 1975)

 

5.04.160 License nontransferable—Changed location and ownership.
No license issued pursuant to this chapter shall be transferable; provided that where a license is issued authorizing a person to transact and carry on a business at a particular place, such licensee may, upon application therefor and paying a transfer fee, have the license amended to authorize the transacting and carrying on of such business under said license at some other location to which the business is or is to be moved; provided, further, that transfer, whether by sale or otherwise, to another person, under such circumstances that the real or ultimate ownership after the transfer is substantially similar to the ownership existing before the transfer, shall not be prohibited by this section. For the purpose of this section, stockholders, bondholders, partnerships, or other persons holding an interest in a corporation or other entity herein defined to be a person are regarded as having the real or ultimate ownership of such corporation or other entity. (Ord. 703 §7, 2017; Ord. 365 §1, 1975)

 

5.04.170 Duplicate license.
A duplicate license may be issued by the collector to replace any license previously issued hereunder which has been lost or destroyed upon the licensee filing statement of such fact, and at the time of filing such statement, paying to the collector a duplicate license fee. (Ord. 703 §8, 2017; Ord. 365 §1, 1975)

 

5.04.180 Posting and keeping licenses.
A.    Any licensee transacting and carrying on business at a fixed place of business in the city shall keep the license posted in a conspicuous place upon the premises where such business is carried on.

B.     Any licensee transacting and carrying on business but not operating at a fixed place of business in the city shall keep the license upon his or her person at all times while transacting and carrying on the business for which it is issued.

C.     Whenever identifying stickers, tags, plates, or symbols have been issued for each vehicle, device, machine, or other piece of equipment included in the measure of a license tax, the person to whom such stickers, tags, plates, or symbols have been issued shall keep firmly affixed upon each vehicle, device, machine, or piece of equipment the identifying sticker, tag, plate, or symbol which has been issued therefor at such locations as are designated by the collector. Such sticker, tag, plate, or symbol shall not be removed from any vehicle, device, machine, or piece of equipment kept in use during the period for which the sticker, tax, plate, or symbol is issued.

D.    No person shall fail to affix as required herein any identifying sticker, tag, plate, or symbol to the vehicle, device, machine, or piece of equipment for which it has been issued at the location designated by the collector, or shall give away, sell, or transfer such identifying sticker, tag, plate, or symbol to another person, or to permit its use by another person. (Ord. 365 §1, 1975)

5.04.190 License tax—How and when payable.
A.    Unless otherwise specifically provided, all annual license taxes, under the provisions of this chapter, shall be due and payable in advance on the first day of July of each year; provided that license taxes covering new operations, commenced after the first day of July, may be prorated for the balance of the license period.

B.     Except as otherwise herein provided, license taxes, other than annual, required hereunder shall be due and payable as follows:

1.     Semiannual license taxes, on the first day of January and the first day of July of each year;

2.     Quarterly license taxes, on the first day of January, April, July, and October of each year;

3.     Monthly license taxes, on the first day of each and every month;

4.     Weekly license taxes, on Monday of each week in advance;

5.     Daily flat-rate license taxes, each day in advance;

6.     Other flat-rate license taxes are payable in advance on the first day of business and thereafter on the first day of any applicable period. (Ord. 365 §1, 1975)

 

5.04.200 Delinquent taxes—Penalties—Installment payment.
A.    For failure to pay a license tax when due, the collector shall add a penalty of fifteen percent.

B.     No license or sticker, tag; plate, or symbol shall be issued, nor one which has been suspended or revoked shall be reinstated or reissued to any person who, at the time of applying therefor, is indebted to the city for any delinquent license taxes, unless such person, with the consent of the collector, enters into a written agreement with the city, through the collector, to pay such delinquent taxes plus eight percent simple annual interest upon the unpaid balance, in monthly installments or more often, extending over a period of not to exceed one year.

C.     In any agreement so entered into, such person shall acknowledge the obligation owed to the city and agree that, in the event of failure to make timely payment of any installment, the whole amount unpaid shall become immediately due and payable, and that his or her current license shall be revocable by the collector upon thirty days notice. In the event legal action is brought by the city to enforce collection of any amount included in the agreement, such person shall pay any amount included in the agreement, such person shall pay all costs of suit incurred by the city or its assignee, including a reasonable attorney’s fee. The execution of such an agreement shall not prevent the prior accrual of penalties on unpaid balances at the rate provided hereinabove, but no penalties shall accrue on account of taxes included in the agreement after the execution of the agreement, and the payment of the first installment and during such time as such person shall not be in breach of the agreement. (Ord. 365 §1, 1975)

 

5.04.210 Refunds of overpayments.
No refund of an overpayment of taxes imposed by this chapter shall be allowed in whole or in part unless a claim for refund is filed with the collector within a period of three years from the last day of the calendar month following the period for which the overpayment was made, and all such claims for refund of the amount of overpayment must be filed with the collector on forms furnished by him or her and in the manner prescribed by him or her. Upon the filing of such a claim and when he or she determines that an overpayment has been made, the collector may refund the amount overpaid. (Ord. 365 §1, 1975)

5.04.220 Business license charges.
A.    Business License Charge—Fixed Place of Business. Every person engaged at a fixed place of business in the city in any trade, calling, occupation, vocation or other means of livelihood, as an independent contractor and not as an employee of another, and not specifically licensed by other provisions of this chapter, shall pay an annual license tax, based upon the average number of regular employees employed in such business as set from time to time by resolution of the city council.

All professionals, including but not limited to: accountants, architects, attorneys, bookkeepers, chiropodists, chiropractors, dentists, doctors, engineers, land surveyors, oculists, physicians and surgeons, who are engaged at a fixed place of business in the city shall pay a yearly license charge.

B.     License Charge—No Fixed Place of Business. Every person engaged at other than a fixed place of business within the city in any trade, calling, occupation, vocation, profession or other means of livelihood, as an independent contractor and not as an employee of another, and not specifically licensed by other provisions of this chapter, shall pay an annual license charge.

C.     License Charge—Flat Amount. Every person commencing, transacting and carrying on any business herein enumerated, similar or closely related, shall pay a license charge based upon a flat rate for the periods as set forth herein:

 

BUSINESS

PERIOD

Advertising material distribution

Daily

Advertising vehicles

Daily

Advertising - outdoor

Quarterly

Amusement concessions

Daily

Animal shows

Daily

Athletic events and exhibitions, excepting those for charitable purposes

Daily

Carnivals

Daily

Circuses

Daily

Fortune-tellers

Monthly

Pawnbrokers

Quarterly

Photographers - transient

Daily

Flea markets (to be paid by promoters)

Daily

Junk dealers and wreckers

Yearly

Apartment houses

Yearly

Mobile home parks (based on rented spaces)

Yearly

Private patrol

Yearly

 

D.    Coin Machines—Outside Owner. Every person commencing, transacting and carrying on at other than a fixed place of business in the city the business of lending, renting, leasing or otherwise distributing any coin-operated machine while retaining title thereto, shall pay a semiannual license charge for each machine. (Ord. 543 §1, 1991; Ord. 407 §§1 and 3, 1978; Ord. 365 §1, 1975)

 

5.04.230 Grounds for revocation or suspension.
Except as otherwise prohibited by law, a business license may be suspended or revoked by the collector on grounds that the licensee has violated a term or condition of his license, engages in an unlawful business, or engages in a lawful business in an unlawful manner or at an unlawful location. (Ord. 705 §2, 2018; Ord. 703 §9, 2017)

 

5.04.240 Notice and hearing required.
A.    The collector shall give the licensee written notice of the terms for revocation or suspension. The notice also shall specify a time and place of hearing, and shall be given at least ten calendar days before the time of the hearing. The licensee shall show cause why his or her license should not be revoked or suspended.

B.     The licensee may appeal the decision of the collector to the council. If the licensee does not appeal, the decision of the collector is final and conclusive on expiration of the time fixed for appeal. (Ord. 705 §3, 2018; Ord. 703 §10, 2017)

 

5.04.250 Appeal.
A.    A person aggrieved by a decision of the collector or of any other officer of the city made under this article may appeal from the decision to the city council. A person appealing a decision shall file written notice of the appeal with the city clerk within ten calendar days after written or oral notice of the decision. The written notice of appeal shall state the grounds relied upon for appeal.

B.     The city clerk shall cause the matter to be sent for hearing before the city council within thirty calendar days from the date of receipt of the notice of appeal, giving the appellant not less than ten calendar days’ notice in writing of the time and place for hearing. Within ten calendar days after the findings and determinations are made, the city clerk shall give notice of them to the appellant.

C.     The city council’s decision at the conclusion of the hearing shall be final. The city council may adopt procedural rules for the conduct of the hearing, and formal rules of evidence shall not be required. (Ord. 705 §4, 2018; Ord. 703 §11, 2017)

Chapter 5.08 BINGO GAMES
5.08.010 Bingo defined.
As used in this chapter, “bingo” means a game of chance in which prizes are awarded on the basis of designated numbers or symbols on a card which conform to numbers or symbols selected at random. (Ord. 383 §8, 1976)

 

5.08.020 Eligible organizations.
Eligible organizations are corporations, community chests or trusts, organized exclusively for religious, charitable, scientific, testing for public safety, literary, or educational purposes, or for the prevention of cruelty to children or animals, or those which are exempted from the payment of the bank and corporation tax by Section 23701d of the Revenue and Taxation Code and a contribution or gift to which would be exempt under Section 170(c)(2) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954. Such organizations are eligible to apply to the city for a license to conduct bingo games in the city under the provisions of Section 326.5 of the California Penal Code and the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 383 §1, 1976)

 

5.08.030 License—Application—Procedure.
Eligible organizations desiring to obtain such license from the city shall meet the following requirements:

A.    Each eligible organization shall file an application in writing for a license to conduct bingo games in the office of the city clerk on a form provided by the city clerk. The issuing authority shall be the city council. The license shall be issued for a term of one year from the date of issuance, subject to renewal and annual fee.

B.     No license shall be issued to any organization unless such applicant is an eligible organization under Section 5.08.020 and its application conforms to the requirement, terms and conditions of this chapter. (Ord. 383 §2, 1976)

 

5.08.040 License—Application—Contents.
The license application shall contain the following:

A.    The name of the applicant organization and a statement that applicant is eligible under Section 5.08.020. Such statement shall be accompanied by and submitted with a Certificate or Determination of Exemption under Section 23701d of the Revenue and Taxation Code, or a letter of good standing from the Exemption Division of the Franchise Tax Board in Sacramento, showing exemption under Section 23701d;

B.     The name and signature of at least two officers, including the presiding officer of the corporation or community chest, and the trustee of any trust;

C.     The address of the specific property within the city, including the street number, which is owned or leased by the applicant and used by such applicant for an office or for performance of the purposes for which the applicant is organized, on which property bingo games will be conducted, together with the occupancy capacity of such place;

D.    Proposed days of the week and hours of the day for conduct of bingo games;

E.     Statement that applicant agrees to conduct bingo games in strict accordance with the provisions of Section 326.5 of the Penal Code and this chapter as they may be amended from time to time, and agrees that the license to conduct the games may be revoked by the city council upon violation of any of such provisions;

F.     Application shall be signed by applicant under penalty of perjury;

G.    The annual license fee, fixed by the city council by resolution, shall accompany the application. (Ord. 383 §3, 1976)

 

5.08.050 License—Application—Investigation.
Upon receipt of the completed application and the fee, the city clerk shall refer the same to interested departments of the city including but not limited to the mayor, city attorney, police department and fire department for investigation as to whether or not all the statements in the application are true and whether or not the property of the applicant qualifies and the extent to which it qualifies as property on which bingo games may lawfully be conducted as to fire, occupancy and other applicable restrictions. (Ord. 383 §4, 1976)

 

5.08.060 License—Issuance—Contents.
Upon being satisfied that applicant is fully qualified under law to conduct bingo games in the city, the city council shall issue a license to the applicant containing the following:

A.    The name and nature of organization to whom license is issued;

B.     The address where bingo games are to be held;

C.     The occupancy capacity of the room in which bingo games are to be conducted;

D.    The date of expiration of the license;

E.     Such other information as may be necessary or desirable for the enforcement of this chapter. (Ord. 383 §5, 1976)

 

5.08.070 License—Revocation conditions.
A.    Whenever it appears to the city clerk that the licensee is conducting bingo games in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, or that the license was obtained by fraudulent representation, the license may be revoked; provided, however, the licensee may appear before the city clerk at the time fixed by the city clerk, for the purpose of presenting evidence why the license should not be revoked. No license shall be revoked under this section unless written notice shall have first been given at least five days before the hearing thereof, by depositing in the mail a notice directed to the licensee at the address given in the application. The notice shall set forth a summary of the ground advanced as the basis of the revocation.

B.     Any organization whose license is revoked under this section shall not conduct any bingo game in the city until such time as the city council, on appeal, determines to overrule the recommendation of the city clerk. (Ord. 383 §6, 1976)

 

5.08.080 Revocation—Appeal.
Any holder of a license which is recommended for revocation shall have the right, within ten days after receiving notice in writing of the recommendation, to file a written appeal to the city council setting forth the specific grounds on which it is based. The city council shall hold a hearing on the appeal within thirty days after its receipt by the city, or at a time thereafter agreed upon and shall cause the appellant to be given at least ten days’ written notice of such hearing. At the hearing, the appellant or its authorized representative shall have the right to present evidence and a written or oral argument, or both, in support of his or her appeal. The determination of the city council on the appeal shall be final. (Ord. 383 §7(1), 1976)

 

5.08.090 Revocation—Reapplication.
Any organization whose license is finally revoked may not again apply for a license to conduct bingo games for a period of one year from the date of such revocation; provided, however, that if the ground for revocation is cancellation of the exemption granted under Section 23701d of the Revenue and Taxation Code, such organization may apply for a license again upon proof of reinstatement of the exemption. (Ord. 383 §7(2), 1976)

 

5.08.100 Maximum amount of prizes.
The total value of prizes awarded during the conduct of any bingo games shall not exceed two hundred and fifty dollars in cash or kind, or both, for each separate game which is held. (Ord. 383 §9, 1976)

 

5.08.110 Placement of profits and recordkeeping.
All profits derived from a bingo game shall be kept in a special fund or account and shall not be commingled with any other fund or account. The licensee shall keep a full and accurate record of the income and expenses received and disbursed in connection with its operation, conduct, promotion, supervision and any other phase of its bingo games. The city, by and through its authorized officers, shall have the right to examine and audit such record at any reasonable time, and the licensee shall fully cooperate with the city by making such record available. (Ord. 383 §10, 1976)

5.08.120 Financial interest and operation.
A.    No individual, corporation or any other entity except the licensee shall hold a financial interest in the conduct of such bingo games.

B.     A bingo game shall be operated and staffed only by members of the licensee organization. Such members shall receive no profit, wage, or salary of any kind. Only the licensee shall operate the game or participate in the promotion, supervision, or any other phase of such game. (Ord. 383 §11, 1976)

 

5.08.130 Location designated.
The licensee shall conduct bingo games only on property owned or leased by it, and which property is used by such organization for an office or for performance of the purposes for which it is organized. If the described property ceases to be used as an office and as a place for performance of the organization’s purposes, the license shall have no further force or effect. A new license may be obtained, upon eligibility and application under this chapter, when it again owns or leases property used by it for an office or for performance of the purposes for which it was organized. (Ord. 383 §13, 1976)

 

5.08.140 Participation—Open to public.
All bingo games shall be open to the public, not just to members of the licensee organization. Licensee shall not reserve seats or space for any person. Occupancy capacity shall be limited by the determination made by the fire department and building department in accordance with applicable laws and regulations. (Ord. 383 §12, 1976)

 

5.08.150 Participation—Excluded persons.
A.    No person under the age of eighteen years of age shall be allowed to participate in any bingo game.

B.     No person who is obviously intoxicated shall be allowed to participate in a bingo game.

C.     No person shall be allowed to participate in a bingo game unless the person is physically present at the time and place in which the bingo game is being conducted. (Ord. 383 §14, 1976)

 

5.08.160 Violation—Penalty.
A.    It is a misdemeanor under Section 326.5(b) of the Penal Code for any person to receive a profit, wage, or salary from any bingo game authorized under this chapter, a violation of which is punishable by a fine not to exceed ten thousand dollars, which fine shall be deposited in the general fund of the city.

B.     The city may bring an action in a court of competent jurisdiction to enjoin a violation of Section 326.5 of the Penal Code or of this chapter. (Ord. 383 §15, 1976)

Chapter 5.16 SOLICITORS AND PEDDLERS
5.16.010 Disturbance of occupant prohibited where no peddlers or solicitors sign posted.
No peddler or solicitor shall, nor shall any business employing or contracting with a peddler or solicitor allow any peddler or solicitor to, in any way disturb or contact any occupant of private residential property where a sign has been posted on such property containing the words “NO PEDDLERS OR SOLICITORS ALLOWED” or words of similar import and meaning. Violations of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor, punishable by up to six months imprisonment and a five hundred dollar fine. Violations shall be subject to any and all civil remedies provided by law, including injunctive or other equitable relief in a court of competent jurisdiction. (Ord. 611 §1, 2000)

Chapter 5.24 CABLE COMMUNICATION FRANCHISES
Division I. Definitions
5.24.010 Definitions and interpretation of language.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words, terms, phrases, and their derivations, shall have the meanings given in this division. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future tense, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural number. The word “shall” is always mandatory and not merely directory. (Ord. 483 §1, 1984)

 

5.24.015 Additional subscriber service.
“Additional subscriber service” means any service not included in basic service or institutional service, including, but not limited to, pay cable. (Ord. 483 §1, 1984)

 

5.24.020 Agency subscriber.
“Agency subscriber” means a subscriber who received a service in a government or public agency, school, or nonprofit corporation. (Ord. 483 §1, 1984)

 

5.24.025 Basic subscriber radio service.
“Basic subscriber radio service” means the provisions to all subscribers of such audio services and broadcast channels as permitted by the FCC. (Ord. 483 §1, 1984)

 

5.24.030 Basic subscriber television service.
“Basic subscriber television service” means the total of all of the following:

A.    The transmission to all subscribers of all broadcast television channel signals authorized by the FCC and provided for in franchise agreement;

B.     The provision to all subscribers of nonbroadcast open-channel signals, originating from sources outside the cable communications system;

C.     The transmission to all subscribers of all cablecast open-channel signals.

Basic subscriber television service may be offered to subscribers in one or more tiers or combination of programs. (Ord. 483 §1, 1984)

 

5.24.035 Broadcast signal.
“Broadcast signal” means a television or radio signal that is transmitted over the air to a wide geographic audience and is received by a cable communications system off-the-air or by microwave link. (Ord. 483 §1, 1984)

 

5.24.040 Cable communications system or system.
“Cable communications system” or “system”, sometimes referred to as “cable TV system,” “CATV system,” or “broadband communications network,” means a system of antennas, cables, amplifiers, towers, microwave links, cablecasting studios, and any other conductors, converters, equipment or facilities designed and constructed for the primary purpose of producing, receiving, amplifying, storing, processing or distributing audio, video, digital or other forms of electronic or electrical signals. (Ord. 483 §1, 1984)

 

5.24.050 Channel.
“Channel” means a six-Megahertz (MHz) frequency band, which is capable of carrying either one standard video signal, number of audio, digital or other nonvideo signals, or some combination of such signals. (Ord. 483 §1, 1984)

5.24.055 City.
“City” means the City of Jackson, California, and all of the territory within its present and future corporate boundaries. (Urban services area). (Ord. 483 §1, 1984)

 

5.24.060 City council.
“City council” means the council of the City of Jackson, or such representative person or entity as may be designated initially or at some future date to act on cable communications matters. (Ord. 483 §1, 1984)

 

5.24.065 Closed-circuit or institutional service.
“Closed-circuit” or “institutional service” means such video, audio, data and other services provided to institutional users on an individual application, private-channel basis. These may include, but not be limited to, audio or digital signals among institutions, or from institutions to residential subscribers. (Ord. 483 §1, 1984)

 

5.24.070 Commercial subscriber.
“Commercial subscriber” means a subscriber who receives a service in a place of business, where the service may be utilized in connection with a business, trade or profession. (Ord. 483 §1, 1984)

 

5.24.075 Converter.
“Converter” means an electronic device which converts signal carriers from one form to another. (Ord. 483 §1, 1984)

 

5.24.080 Easements.
“Easements” means any public facilities right-of-way, public way or easement which has been dedicated to the city. The rights included in this definition are broad and shall permit the passage of all transmission lines for CATV cables, and the sharing of the trench with all other utility and public or private facilities where practicable. (Ord. 483 §1, 1984)

 

5.24.085 Educational channel.
“Educational channel” means any channel where educational institutions are the only designated programmers. (Ord. 483 §1, 1984)

 

5.24.090 FCC.
“FCC” means the Federal Communications Commission, or a designated representative. (Ord. 483 §1, 1984)

 

5.24.095 Franchise agreement.
“Franchise agreement” means a signed and notarized contract on the part of both grantor and grantee accepting and agreeing to all of the provisions of a franchise granted pursuant to this chapter, and other related material. The franchise agreement may modify terms of this chapter by mutual agreement, with any such modification requiring confirmation by appropriate ordinance amendment. (Ord. 483 §1, 1984)

 

5.24.100 Government channel.
“Government channel” means any channel where local government agencies are the only designated programmers. (Ord. 483 §1, 1984)

 

5.24.105 Grantee.
“Grantee” means the person or entity to which a franchise henceforth is granted for the construction, operation, maintenance and reconstruction of a cable communications system, and the lawful successors, transferees or assignees of said corporation or entity. (Ord. 483 §1, 1984)

 

5.24.110 Grantor.
“Grantor” means the City of Jackson as represented by the city council and/or its authorized executive officer acting within the scope of its jurisdiction. (Ord. 483 §1, 1984)

 

5.24.115 Gross annual revenues.
“Gross annual revenues” means the annual gross revenues received by the grantee from all sources of operations of the cable communications system except that any sales, excise or other taxes collected for direct pass-through to local, state or federal government shall not be included. (Ord. 483 §1, 1984)

 

5.24.120 Leased channel or leased access channel.
“Leased channel” or “leased access channel” means any channel available for lease and programming by persons and entities other than the grantee, including those portions of the other access channels not in use by their designated programmers. (Ord. 483 §1, 1984)

 

5.24.125 Local origination channel.
“Local origination channel” means any channel where the grantee is the only designated programmer, and provides video programs to subscribers. (Ord. 483 §1, 1984)

 

5.24.130 Monitoring.
“Monitoring” means observing a one-way communications signal, or the absence of a signal, where the observer is neither the subscriber nor the programmer, whether the signal is observed by visual or electronic means, for any purpose whatsoever. (Ord. 483 §1, 1984)

 

5.24.135 Nonbroadcast signals.
“Nonbroadcast signals” means a signal that is transmitted by a cable communications system and that is not involved in an over-the-air broadcast transmission path. (Ord. 483 §1, 1984)

 

5.24.140 Open channel.
“Open channel” means any channel that can be received by all subscribers, without the necessity for special equipment. (Ord. 483 §1, 1984)

 

5.24.145 Pay-cable or pay-television.
“Pay-cable” or “pay-television” means the delivery to subscribers, over the cable communications system, of television signals for a fee or charge to subscribers over and above the charge for basic subscriber service, on a per-program, per-channel, or other subscription basis. (Ord. 483 §1, 1984)

 

5.24.150 Person.
“Person” means any corporation, partnership, proprietorship, individual or organization authorized to do business in the State of California, or any natural person. (Ord. 483 §1, 1984)

 

5.24.155 Private channel or closed-circuit channel.
“Private channel,” or “closed-circuit channel” means any channel which is available only to subscribers who are provided with special converter or terminal equipment to receive signals on that channel. (Ord. 483 §1, 1984)

 

5.24.160 Public access channel, community service channel or community channel.
“Public access channel,” “community service channel” or “community channel” means any channel where any member of the general public or any noncommercial organization may be a programmer, on a first-come, first-serve, nondiscriminatory basis, subject to meet industry standards and materials for programming and context control. (Ord. 483 §1, 1984)

 

5.24.165 Programmer.
“Programmer” means any person or entity who or which produces or otherwise provides program material or information for transmission by video, audio, digital or other signals, either live or from recorded tapes or other storage media, to subscribers, by means of the cable communications system. (Ord. 483 §1, 1984)

 

5.24.170 Resident.
“Resident” means any person residing in the city or its service area as otherwise defined by applicable law. (Ord. 483 §1, 1984)

 

5.24.175 Residential subscriber.
“Residential subscriber” means a subscriber who received a service in an individual dwelling unit, where the service is not to be utilized in connection with a business, trade or profession. (Ord. 483 §1, 1984)

 

5.24.180 School.
“School” means any educational institution including primary and secondary schools, colleges and universities, both public and private. (Ord. 483 §1, 1984)

 

5.24.190 Subscriber.
“Subscriber” means any person, firm, corporation or other entity who or which elects to subscribe to, for any purpose, a service provided by the grantee by means of or in connection with the cable communications system. (Ord. 483 §1, 1984)

 

5.24.195 Tapping.
“Tapping” means observing a two-way communications signal exchange, where the observer is neither of the communicating parties, whether the exchange is observed by visual or electronic means, for any purpose whatsoever. (Ord. 483 §1, 1984)

 

Division II. General Provisions
5.24.200 Compliance with laws.
The grantee shall comply with all federal and State of California laws, as well as all city ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations heretofore or hereafter adopted or established during the entire term of the franchise. (Ord. 483 §1, 1984)

 

5.24.205 Subsequent action by state or federal agencies.
Should the State of California, the FCC, or any other agency of the federal government subsequently require the grantee to perform or cease to perform any act which is inconsistent with any provisions of the franchise, the grantee shall so notify the grantor. Upon receipt of such notifications, the grantor shall determine if a material provision of the franchise is affected. Upon such determination, the grantor shall have the right to modify or amend any of the sections of the franchise to such reasonable extent as may be necessary to carry out the full intent and purpose of the franchise. (Ord. 483 §1, 1984)

 

5.24.210 Separability of franchise provisions preempted by other laws.
If any section of the franchise is held to be invalid or preempted by federal or state regulations or laws, finding or preemption shall not affect the remaining sections of the franchise except as provided above. (Ord. 483 §1, 1984)

 

5.24.215 Liability—No recourse against the grantor.
The grantee shall have no recourse whatsoever against the grantor or its officials, boards, commissions, agents or employees for any loss, costs, expense or damage arising out of any provisions or requirement of the franchise or because of the enforcement of the franchise. (Ord. 483 §1, 1984)

 

5.24.220 Enforcement—Obligation to comply.
The grantee shall not be relieved of its obligation to comply with any of the provisions of this permit by reason of any failure of the grantor to enforce prompt compliance. (Ord. 483 §1, 1984)

 

Division III. Franchise Applications and Grant Conditions
5.24.225 Application—Procedure generally.
Applicants for a franchise shall submit to the grantor at least eighteen months prior to franchise expiration, written application utilizing the format provided by the grantor, at the time and place designated by the grantor for accepting applications, and including the designated application fee or deposit. (Ord. 483 §1, 1984)

 

5.24.230 Grants of franchise—Conditions generally.
A.    In the event that grantor shall grant to the grantee a nonexclusive, revocable franchise to construct, operate, maintain and reconstruct a cable communications system within the city, said franchise shall constitute both a right and an obligation to provide the services of a cable communications system as required by the provisions of this chapter and the franchise agreement. The franchise shall include those provisions of the grantee’s “proposal for franchise” that are finally negotiated and accepted by the grantor and grantee in writing.

B.     The franchise shall be granted under the terms and conditions contained herein. In the event of conflict between the terms and conditions of the franchise and the terms and conditions on which the grantor can grant a franchise, the statutory requirements shall control.

C.     The franchise shall be subject to the general ordinance provisions now in effect or hereafter made effective. Nothing in the franchise shall be deemed to waive the requirements of the various codes and ordinances of the city regarding permits, fees to be paid, or manner of construction. (Ord. 483 §1, 1984)

 

5.24.235 Use of public streets and ways.
For the purpose of operating and maintaining a cable communications system in the city, the grantee may erect, install, construct, repair, replace, reconstruct and retain in, on, over, under, upon, across and along the public streets and ways within the city such wires, pedestals, attachments and other property and equipment as are necessary and appurtenant to the operation of the cable communications system. Prior to construction or alteration, however, the grantee shall in each case file plans with the appropriate city department and utility companies, and receive written approval before proceeding. (Ord. 483 §1, 1984)

 

5.24.240 Duration of franchise.
The term of the franchise, and all rights, privileges, obligations and restrictions pertaining thereto, shall be twenty years from the effective date of the franchise unless terminated sooner as hereinafter provided. (Ord. 483 §1, 1984)

 

5.24.245 Franchise nonexclusive.
The franchise granted shall be nonexclusive. The grantor specifically reserves the right to grant, at any time, such additional franchises for a cable communications system as it deems appropriate. (Ord. 483 §1, 1984)

 

5.24.250 Franchise nontransferable.
A.    The franchise shall not be sublet or assigned; nor shall any of the rights be assigned, sold or transferred, either in whole or in part; nor shall title thereto, either legal or equitable, or any rights, interest or property therein, pass to or vest in any person, except the grantee, either by act of the grantee or by operations of law, without the prior consent of the city expressed by resolution, and such consent shall not be unreasonably withheld.

B.     If the grantee shall, in violation of this section, transfer the franchise, prior to obtaining city consent, any such transfer shall be deemed void and of no effect.

C.     The grantee, upon an approved transfer as heretofore described shall, within thirty days thereafter, file with the city a copy of the deed, agreement, mortgage, lease or other written instrument evidencing such sale, transfer or lease certified and sworn to as correct by the grantee. (Ord. 483 §1, 1984)

 

5.24.255 Proposed change in control—Notification required.
The grantee shall promptly notify the grantor of any proposed change in, or transfer of, or acquisition by, any other party of control of the grantee with respect to which the consent of the grantor is required, pursuant to Section 5.24.250 of this chapter, entitled “franchise nontransferable.” Such change in control shall make the franchise subject to revocation unless and until the grantor shall have consented thereto. For the purpose of determining whether it will consent to such change, transfer or acquisition of control, the grantor may inquire into the qualifications of the prospective controlling party, and the grantee shall assist the grantor in any such inquiry. The city may condition said transfer pursuant to the terms and conditions of the franchise agreement. (Ord. 483 §1, 1984)

 

Division IV. Deposits, Insurance, Payments
5.24.260 Faithful performance bond.
Upon the start of any construction or system replacement program, the grantee shall furnish proof of the posting of a faithful performance bond running to the grantor, with good and sufficient surety approved by the grantor, for one hundred percent of the labor and materials, conditioned that the grantee shall well and truly observe, fulfill and perform each term and condition of said construction program. Such bond shall be maintained by the grantee throughout the duration of this work. Written evidence of payment of required premiums shall be filed and maintained with the grantor. (Ord. 483 §1, 1984)

 

5.24.265 Liability insurance and indemnification.
A.    The grantee shall maintain, throughout the term of the franchise, liability insurance expressly insuring both the grantee and the grantor with regard to all damages including “damages and defense costs,” in the minimum amounts of:

1.     One million dollars for bodily injury or death to any person;

2.     Three million dollars for bodily injury or death resulting from any one accident;

3.     Five hundred thousand dollars for property damage resulting from any one accident;

4.     Five hundred thousand dollars for all other types of liability.

B.     Upon the effective date of the franchise, the grantee shall furnish a certificate of insurance to the grantor that a satisfactory insurance policy has been obtained. Said insurance certificate shall be approved by the grantor, and written evidence of payment of required premiums, shall be filed and maintained with the grantor. (Ord. 483 §1, 1984)

 

5.24.270 Security fund.
A.    Within thirty days after the effective date of the franchise, the grantee shall deposit into an interest bearing account established by the city, and maintain on deposit through the term of the franchise, a sum of four thousand dollars as a maintenance and operating surety for the franchise, and compliance with all orders, permits and directions of any agency of the grantor having jurisdiction over its acts or defaults under the ordinance codified in this chapter, and the payment by the grantee of any claims, liens and taxes due the grantor, which arise by reason of the operation or maintenance of the system.

B.     Within thirty days after notice to it that any amount has been withdrawn by the city from the security fund described herein, the grantee shall deposit a sum of money sufficient to restore such security fund to the original amount.

C.     If the grantee fails, after ten days’ notice to pay to the city any taxes or fees due; or fails to repay to the city, within such ten days, any damages, costs or expenses which the city shall be compelled to pay by reason of any act or default of the company in connection with the franchise; or fails, after thirty days’ notice of such failure by the city, to comply with any provision of the franchise which the city reasonably determined can be remedied by an expenditure of the security, the city may immediately withdraw the amount thereof, with any penalties, from the security fund. Upon such withdrawal, the grantor shall notify the grantee of the amount and date thereof.

D.    The security fund deposited pursuant to this section shall become the property of the grantor in the event that the franchise is cancelled by reason of the default of the grantee or revocation for cause. The grantee, however, shall be entitled to all interest earned, and the return of such security fund, or portion thereof, as remains on deposit at the expiration of the term of the franchise, or upon termination of the franchise at an earlier date, provided that there is then no outstanding default on the part of the grantee.

E.     The rights reserved to the grantor with respect to the security fund are in addition to all other rights of the grantor. (Ord. 483 §1, 1984)

 

5.24.275 Franchise fees.
For the use of the street and for the purposes of providing revenue with which to defray the costs of regulation arising out of issuance of franchises under this chapter and promoting, assisting and financing community use programming and other cable services of a public character, each franchisee shall pay franchise fees in the amount prescribed in Section 5.24.280. (Ord. 483 §1, 1984)

 

5.24.280 Amount and payment of franchise fees.
During the term of each franchise, each franchisee shall pay to the grantor an amount equal to three percent per year of the franchisee’s annual gross revenues, or an amount up to five percent as may be determined by council resolution.

Said fees shall be paid semi-annually not later than August 1st, and February 1st for the preceding six-month period. Not later than the date of each payment, each franchisee shall file with the city, a written financial statement signed under penalty of perjury by an officer of the franchisee which identifies the sources and amount of gross revenues received by a franchisee during the period for which payment is made. (Ord. 483 §1, 1984)

 

Division V. Design and Construction
5.24.285 System design concept.
The cable communications system shall be constructed in accordance with the provisions of the franchise agreement. (Ord. 483 §1, 1984)

 

5.24.290 Initial geographical coverage.
The grantee shall design and construct the cable communications system or expansion thereof in such a manner as to have the eventual capability to service by every single-family dwelling unit, multiple-family dwelling unit, agency and business establishment within the area of the franchise. Service shall be provided to subscribers in accordance with the initial route of cables serving institutional subscribers shall be approved by grantor, and confirmed in the franchise agreement. (Ord. 483 §1, 1984)

 

5.24.295 Cablecasting facilities.
The grantee shall provide cablecasting facilities in accordance with the provisions of the franchise proposal and agreement. (Ord. 483 §1, 1984)

 

5.24.300 Interconnection capability.
A.    The grantee shall provide the interconnection capability specified in the franchise proposal and agreement. The grantor may, if feasible in the future, require the grantee to participate in interconnecting the cable communications system to other cable systems in other metropolitan areas. Such interconnection may be required only when both the grantor and the franchising authority for the other cable system(s) agree that such interconnections is desirable.

B.     When such interconnection is required, the design and cost shall be approved by grantor pursuant to a proposal submitted by grantee. (Ord. 483 §1, 1984)

 

5.24.305 System specifications and requirements.
The system shall adhere to the following minimum specifications and requirements at the time of installation or rebuild:

A.    The main and subscriber truck system shall provide a four hundred MHZ forward system. Initial sweep testing and proof of performance shall insure the entire four hundred MHZ system meets required FCC specifications.

B.     The following capabilities should be able to be provided in the initial main amplifier housing with only the addition of internal modules and the necessary cables. Any future additions to be negotiated between the grantor and the grantee.

1.     Five channel return system for the initial four hundred MHZ forward CATV system;

2.     System status monitoring;

3.     Four hundred MHZ activated B cable system with five channel return system. (Ord. 487 §1, 1984; Ord. 483 §1, 1984)

 

5.24.310 Basic service and construction schedule.
A.    The grantee shall begin to offer basic subscriber television, and radio service in accordance with the schedule contained in the franchise proposal and agreement, or sooner.

B.     Service need not be provided where power and telephone utilities are not available.

C.     When necessary in order to begin basic service, the grantee shall provide a detailed construction plan, indicating progress schedule, area construction maps, test plan, and projected dates for offering service.

D.    Failure to begin such necessary construction within one hundred fifty days or a reasonable time after award of the franchise may be grounds for franchise revocation, at the option of the grantor. (Ord. 483 §1, 1984)

 

5.24.315 Delay in construction—Penalties.
For any necessary construction the grantor may, at its sole option, apply any or all of the following penalties in connection with delays in system construction:

A.    Reduction in the duration of the franchise on a month-for-month basis for each month of delay exceeding six months;

B.     Forfeiture of performance bonds for delays exceeding one year;

C.     Termination of the franchise for delays exceeding eighteen months;

D.    Inclement weather and acts of God. (Ord. 483 §1, 1984)

 

5.24.320 Construction codes applicable.
The grantee shall adhere to all building and zoning codes currently or hereafter in force. The grantee shall arrange its lines, cables and other appurtenances, on both public and private property, in such a manner as to cause no unreasonable interference with the use of said public or private property by any person. (Ord. 483 §1, 1984)

 

5.24.325 Construction components and techniques.
Construction components and techniques shall be in accordance with the franchise proposal and agreement. (Ord. 483 §1, 1984)

 

5.24.330 Erection of poles prohibited.
To prevent the further proliferation of poles, the grantee shall not erect any pole on or along any street or public way in an existing aerial utility system. If additional poles in an existing aerial route are required, grantee shall negotiate joint pole agreements for the installation of the needed poles. Any such addition shall require the advance approval of the grantor. The grantee shall negotiate the lease of pole space and facilities from the existing pole owners for all aerial construction, under mutually acceptable terms and conditions. (Ord. 483 §1, 1984)

 

5.24.335 Undergrounding of cable.
The undergrounding of cables is encouraged. In the event of new construction, cables shall be installed underground at grantee’s cost where existing utilities are already underground, or otherwise at developer’s expense for new development wherever required by city. Previously installed aerial cable shall be undergrounded in concert with other utilities, when such other utilities may convert from aerial to underground construction. (Ord. 483 §1, 1984)

 

5.24.340 Repair of streets and public ways.
Any and all streets and public ways which are disturbed or damaged during the construction, operation, maintenance or reconstruction of the cable communications system shall be promptly repaired by the grantee, at its expense, and to the satisfaction of the grantor. The work hereby required shall be done in strict compliance with the rules, regulations and ordinances of the grantor as now or hereafter provided. (Ord. 483 §1, 1984)

 

5.24.345 Emergency requirements.
The grantee shall construct and maintain an emergency audio override capability. (Ord. 487 §2, 1984; Ord. 483 §1, 1984)

 

5.24.350 Technical and performance standards.
System technical and performance standards shall be in accordance with the Federal Communications Commission requirements. (Ord. 483 §1, 1984)

 

5.24.355 Provision of service—Time restriction.
After service has been established by activating trunk cables for any area, the grantee shall provide service to any requesting subscriber within that area within sixty days from the date of request, Part 76, Subpart K of FCC Rules and Regulations. (Ord. 483 §1, 1984)

 

5.24.360 Test requirements and compliance procedure.
The grantee shall follow the test plan, methods and schedules for testing the cable communications system on an ongoing basis as required by the FCC, and records of the same shall be maintained for inspection. (Ord. 483 §1, 1984)

 

Division VI. Service
5.24.365 Services to be provided.
The cable communications system shall provide, as a minimum, the services listed in the franchise agreement. Such basic subscriber service shall not be reduced without prior approval of grantor. (Ord. 483 §1, 1984)

 

5.24.370 Basic subscriber radio service (BSRS).
The basic subscriber FM service shall include the provisions of all designated audio services, including broadcast FM. This service shall be made available to all subscribers at the established monthly subscription rates. (Ord. 483 §1, 1984)

 

5.24.375 Basic subscriber television service (BSTS).
The basic subscriber television service shall include all FCC-required services. This service shall be provided to all subscribers at the established monthly subscription rates. Tiers of additional service may be provided at different rates, to offer residents a broader choice. (Ord. 483 §1, 1984)

 

5.24.380 Additional subscriber services.
Additional subscriber services not included in the BSTS and BSRS services specified above may be provided, either within the basic subscription rates, or on a premium basis. (Ord. 483 §1, 1984)

 

5.24.385 Institutional service (IS).
One or more channel spaces shall be reserved for institutional service to provide transmission and/or reception services to institutional users, as designated in the proposal and franchise agreement. (Ord. 483 §1, 1984)

 

5.24.390 Closed-circuit community services channel.
The grantee shall make at least one channel available to community and public access at no charge, subject to the terms described in the franchise proposal and franchise agreement. The grantee shall participate with government and community organizations to plan and organize programming for said channel. (Ord. 483 §1, 1984)

 

5.24.395 Educational channel.
The grantee shall reserve two or more channels for the use of the local educational institutions at no charge. The grantee shall make every effort to provide advice and technical expertise to aid in the utilization of the channel(s). (Ord. 483 §1, 1984)

 

5.24.400 Government access channel.
The grantee shall reserve one or more channels for the use of the grantor at no charge to the grantor. The grantee shall make every effort to provide advice and technical expertise to aid in the effective utilization of the channel(s), for the advancement of educational opportunities in the city. (Ord. 483 §1, 1984)

 

Division VII. Operation and Maintenance
5.24.405 Administration and enforcement authority.
The grantor, at its sole option, may provide for the day-to-day administration and enforcement of the provisions of the franchise. (Ord. 483 §1, 1984)

 

5.24.410 Areas of regulation.
The grantor shall have responsibility for regulation in the following areas:

A.    Administering and enforcing the provisions of the cable communications system franchise(s);

B.     Coordination of the operation of government and educational channels;

C.     Establishing general procedures and standards for institutional operations and services, use of dedicated channels, and sharing of public facilities;

D.    Analyzing the possibility of integrating cable communications with other city, state or regional telecommunications networks;

E.     Formulating and recommending long-range cable policy for the city;

F.     Collecting the designated franchise fee. (Ord. 483 §1, 1984)

 

5.24.415 Open books and records.
The grantee shall maintain an office, or payment station within the franchise territory and manage all of its operations in accordance with a policy of totally open books and records. The grantor, upon reasonable notice, shall have the right to inspect, at any time during normal business hours, all books, records, maps, plans, income tax returns, financial statements, service complaint logs, performance test results, and other like material of the grantee which relate to the operation of the franchise. Access to the aforementioned records shall not be denied by the grantee on the basis that said records contain “proprietary” information. (Ord. 483 §1, 1984)

 

5.24.420 Communications with regulatory agencies.
Upon request by city, copies of all petitions, applications, communications and reports submitted by the grantee to the Federal Communications Commission, Securities and Exchange Commission, or any other federal or state regulatory commission or agency having jurisdiction in respect to any matters affecting cable communications operations authorized pursuant to the franchise, shall also be submitted simultaneously to the grantor. Copies of responses from the regulatory agencies to the grantee shall likewise be furnished. (Ord. 483 §1, 1984)

 

5.24.425 Report requirements.
City retains the option and right to request and receive any of the following; subject to retaining and protecting the confidentiality and privacy thereof:

A.    Annual report, which shall include:

1.     A fully audited and certified financial report for the previous calendar year, including gross revenues from all sources, gross subscriber revenues from each category of service, net income, and end-of-year balance sheet;

2.     A summary of the previous year’s activities, including but not limited to subscriber totals and new services;

3.     A summary of complaints received and handled; and

4.     Projected plans for the future.

B.     Monitoring and compliance reports, which shall include reports of the FCC performance tests for the home subscriber network required in Part 76, Section 76.601 of FCC Rules and Regulations.

C.     Additions reports, which shall be furnished to the grantor, at the times and in the form prescribed, such additional data with respect to grantee’s operation, affairs, transactions or property as may be reasonably necessary and appropriate to the performance of any of the rights, functions or duties of the grantor in connection with this franchise. (Ord. 483 §1, 1984)

 

5.24.430 Maintenance services—Office required—Complaints.
A.    The grantee shall maintain an office in or near the franchise territory which shall be open during all usual business hours, have a publicly listed toll-free telephone, and be so operated to receive subscriber complaints and requests for repairs or adjustments on a twenty-four hour basis. A written log shall be maintained listing all complaints and their disposition.

B.     The grantee shall render efficient service, make repairs promptly, and interrupt service only for good cause and for the shortest time possible. Such interruptions, insofar as possible, shall be preceded by notice, and shall occur during periods of minimum use of the system.

C.     The grantee shall maintain a repair force of technicians capable of responding to subscriber complaints or request for service within twenty-four hours after receipt of the complaint or request.

D.    The grantor shall ensure that all subscribers, programmers and members of the general public have recourse to a satisfactory hearing of any complaints, where there is evidence that the grantee has not settled the complaint to the satisfaction of the person initiating the complaint. The grantee shall establish procedures for handling and settling complaints. (Ord. 483 §1, 1984)

 

5.24.435 Safety of installations.
A.    The grantee shall, at all times, employ the standard of care attendant to the risks involved, and shall install and maintain in use industry-accepted methods and devices for preventing failures and accidents which are likely to cause damage, injury or nuisance to the public or to employees of the grantee, pursuant to PUC-G.0.95 and G.0.128 or other similar state or federal standards.

B.     The grantee shall install and maintain its wires, cables, fixtures and other equipment in accordance with the requirements of the National Electric Safety Code, and in such manner that they will not interfere with any installations of the grantor or any public utility.

C.     All lines, equipment and connections in, over, under, and upon the streets and public ways and private property in the city, wherever situated or located, shall at all times be kept and maintained in a safe suitable condition, and in good order and repair. (Ord. 483 §1, 1984)

 

5.24.440 Sale of subscriber list prohibited.
The grantee shall not sell, or otherwise make available, lists of the names and addresses of its subscribers, or any list which identifies, by name, subscriber viewing habits, to any person, agency or entity, or any purpose whatsoever, without the specific authorization of the grantor, expressed by resolution. (Ord. 483 §1, 1984)

 

5.24.445 Privacy.
The grantee and the grantor shall maintain constant vigilance with regard to possible abuse of the right of privacy of any subscriber, programmer or general citizen resulting from any device or signal, excepting, however, legitimate law enforcement function. (Ord. 483 §1, 1984)

 

Division VIII. Rates
5.24.450 Charges permitted and regulated.
The grantee may make such charges for services provided to subscribers as are permitted by the franchise agreement or by subsequent approval of the grantor. The grantee shall receive no remuneration whatsoever from its subscribers for or in connection with any service provided to subscribers without approval of the grantor. New services are encouraged, and reasonable charges for such new services shall not be unreasonable, limited or denied by grantor. (Ord. 483 §1, 1984)

 

5.24.455 Schedule of rates.
The initial schedule of rates to be utilized by the grantee shall be those in the grantee’s franchise, and shall be firm for a period of at least one year after commencement of service within the city. The schedule of rates shall include installation and monthly charges for providing all basic services in conformity with state or federal regulations. No additional charge shall be made for the provision of any converter without prior approval of the grantor. All rates shall be published, and be uniform to all persons and organizations of like classes, under similar circumstances and conditions.

Nothing in this provision shall be construed to prohibit the reduction or waiving of charges in conjunction with promotional campaigns for the purpose of attracting subscribers, nor the granting of reduced rates to nonprofit institutions, or for special medical or aging categories nor shall this provision be interpreted to prohibit the establishment of a graduated scale of charges and rate schedules which vary with volume of usage, to which any subscriber or programmer included within a particular classification shall be entitled. (Ord. 483 §1, 1984)

 

5.24.460 Change in rates—Procedure.
Basic service rates and charges may be increased, upon approval of the city council in accordance with the provisions of this section.

A.    Upon any application by the grantee for a rate increase, grantor may require that it be accompanied, and supported by the following information:

1.     Copies of audited financial reports and income statements for at least the preceding three fiscal years. If the grantee is a subsidiary of another firm, similar financial data shall be furnished for the parent corporation;

2.     An itemization of capital assets, (a profit and loss statement) both tangible and intangible, including purchase dates and costs, the accounting basis for depreciation and the depreciation schedule. If intangible assets such as goodwill are being amortized, the amortization period shall be stated;

3.     A detailed breakdown of operating, marketing and general and administrative costs by category for each of the three preceding years;

4.     The number of subscribers for basic service and pay TV services for each of the three preceding years;

5.     A statement as to any allocation of funds to parent company overhead or operating costs, and the basis for such allocation.

B.     Upon receipt of a rate increase request, accompanied by all of the required information of subsection A above, it shall be the obligation of the city council to act upon this request within a period of ninety days from the date upon which all supporting material has been made available in adequate form. Prior to taking action on the request, at least one noticed public hearing shall be held upon the rate request.

The council may approve, partially approve or disapprove any increase of rates for additional services on the basis of its findings related to the application and supporting data received.

C.     In the event a rate increase is granted as requested, the grantee shall refrain from applying for further increases for a period of twelve months from the date of the prior filing. If the rate request is denied, or a lesser increase than requested is approved, the grantee shall refrain from applying for further increases for a period of nine months from the date of the prior filing. (Ord. 483 §1, 1984)

 

5.24.465 Advance charges and deposits.
The grantee may require subscribers to pay for each month of service in advance each month, or for special equipment or additional services in accordance with its customer service contract approved by the grantor. Nothing in this provision shall be construed to prohibit charges for initial installation and reconnection. (Ord. 483 §1, 1984)

 

5.24.470 Installation and reconnection charges.
Except as otherwise provided in the franchise agreement, the grantee may make a charge to subscribers for the installation of service outlets and for the reconnection of service outlets. The rates for such connection or reconnection shall be authorized by the grantor as provided in the franchise proposal and agreement. The grantee may waive all or a portion of such charges for connection or reconnection, as provided in Section 5.24.450. (Ord. 483 §1, 1984)

 

5.24.475 Disconnection.
There shall be no charge for disconnection of service. If any subscriber fails to pay a properly due monthly subscriber fee, or any other properly due fee or charge, the grantee may disconnect the subscriber’s service outlet. Such disconnection policies and procedures shall be stated in the approved cable contract customer form. (Ord. 483 §1, 1984)

 

5.24.480 Refunds to subscribers and programmers.
A.    If the grantee fails to provide any service requested by a subscriber or programmer, the grantee shall, after adequate notification and being afforded the opportunity to provide the service, promptly refund all deposits or advance charges paid for the service in question by said subscriber or programmer.

B.     If any subscriber terminates any monthly service during the first twelve months of said service because of the failure of the grantee to render the service in accordance with the standards set forth in this permit, the grantee shall make an appropriate refund to such subscriber, in accordance with the policies stated in the approved customer contract. (Ord. 483 §1, 1984)

 

Division IX. Termination and Renewal
5.24.485 Continuity of service mandatory.
It shall be the right of all subscribers to receive all available services insofar as their financial and other obligations to the grantee are honored. In the event that the grantee elects to overbuild, rebuild, modify or sell the system, or the grantor revokes or fails to renew the franchise, the grantee shall do everything in its power to ensure that all subscribers receive continuous, uninterrupted service regardless of the circumstances during the lifetime of the franchise. In the event of a change of grantee, the current grantee shall cooperate with the grantor to operate the system for a temporary period, in maintaining continuity of service to all subscribers. (Ord. 483 §1, 1984)

 

5.24.490 Expiration.
A.    Upon expiration of the initial term of the franchise, the grantor shall have the right, at its election to:

1.     Renew or extend the franchise;

2.     Invite additional franchise applications or proposals;

3.     Terminate the franchise without further action.

B.     The grantee shall make it a condition of each contract entered into by it that the grantor shall have the right to exercise these options. (Ord. 483 §1, 1984)

 

5.24.495 Renewal or extension.
The franchise may be renewed or extended by the grantor, upon application of the grantee. Nothing in the provision shall be construed to require such renewal or extension. (Ord. 483 §1, 1984)

 

5.24.500 Revocation conditions.
A.    In addition to any rights set out elsewhere in this document, the grantor reserves the right to revoke the franchise, and all rights and privileges pertaining thereto, in the event that:

1.     The grantee violates any material provision of the franchise;

2.     The grantee’s construction schedule is unreasonably delayed by grantee for over eighteen months;

3.     The grantee becomes insolvent, unable or unwilling to pay its debts, or is adjudged bankrupt; or

4.     The grantee is found to have practiced any fraud or deceit upon the grantor.

B.     Upon failure of the grantee to comply with the terms of the franchise, the city council may by resolution declare a forfeiture, whereupon all rights of the holders of the franchise shall immediately be divested without a further act upon the part of the grantor, and the grantee shall forthwith remove its structures or property from the streets and restore the streets to such condition as the grantor may require, or grantor may take possession thereof. The grantor may perform the service and collect the cost thereof from the grantee or its customers. Additional costs thereof shall be a lien upon all plant and property of the grantee. (Ord. 483 §1, 1984)

 

5.24.505 Receivership.
The grantor shall have the right to revoke the franchise one hundred twenty days after the appointment of a receiver, or trustee, to conduct the business of the grantee, where receivership, reorganization, bankruptcy or other action or proceeding, unless such receivership or trusteeship shall have been vacated prior to the expiration of said one hundred twenty days, or unless:

A.    Within one hundred twenty days after his or her selection or appointment, such receiver or trustee shall have fully complied with all of the provisions of the franchise and remedied all defaults thereunder;

B.     Such receiver or trustee, within said one hundred twenty days, shall have executed an agreement, approved by the court having jurisdiction in the premises, whereby such receiver or trustee assumes and agrees to be bound by each and every provision of the franchise;

C.     City may take over possession and operate the system until a new suitable franchise award can be made. (Ord. 483 §1, 1984)

 

Division X. Rights Reserved to Grantor
5.24.510 Performance evaluation sessions.
A.    The city may hold scheduled performance evaluations sessions within thirty days of the third, sixth, ninth, and twelfth anniversary dates of the company’s award of the franchise or as may be required by federal and state law. All such evaluation sessions shall be open to the public.

B.     Special evaluation sessions may be held at any time during the term of the franchise at the request of the city or the company.

C.     Company performance to be evaluated at any schedule or special evaluation session shall include, but not be limited to, service rate structures; franchise fee; penalties; free or discounted services; application of new technologies; system performance; services provided; programming offered; customer complaints; privacy; amendments to the ordinance codified in this chapter; judicial and FCC rulings; line extension policies; and company or city rules.

D.    During a review and evaluation by city, company shall fully cooperate with city and shall provide such information and documents as city may need to reasonably perform the review. (Ord. 483 §1, 1984)

 

5.24.515 Immaterial breaches.
Notwithstanding any other provision herein, the grantor reserves the right to establish and implement by resolution of the city council, a schedule of penalties and/or fines for any immaterial breaches of the franchise or franchise agreement by grantee. Any grantor shall have the right to enforce any such penalties or fines against grantee, subject to prior written notice thereof, and the terms of the franchise proposal and agreement. (Ord. 483 §1, 1984)

 

5.24.520 Requirement of local purchasing.
Grantor reserves the right to establish and encourage a policy of employing local residents within its operations, and of utilizing city-based firms for purchases and construction sub-contracts to the maximum possible extent, at such time as the city deems reasonable. (Ord. 483 §1, 1984)

 

5.24.525 Right of intervention.
The grantor shall have the right of intervention in any suit or proceeding to which the grantee is party, and the grantee shall not oppose such intervention by the grantor. (Ord. 483 §1, 1984)

 

5.24.530 Right of inspection of construction.
The grantor shall have the right to inspect all construction or installation work performed subject to the provisions of the franchise and to make such tests as it shall find necessary to ensure compliance with the terms of this franchise chapter and other pertinent provisions of law. (Ord. 483 §1, 1984)

 

5.24.535 Right to require removal of property.
At the expiration of the term for which the franchise is granted, or upon its revocations or expiration, as provided for herein, the grantor shall have the right to require the grantee to remove, at its own expense, all portions of the cable communications system from all streets and public ways within the city. (Ord. 483 §1, 1984)

Chapter 5.28 ROCK FESTIVALS
5.28.010 Purpose.
The city council finds and declares that it is necessary for the protection of the health and welfare of the general public and the inhabitants of the city, that rules and regulations be established for the purpose of regulating music festivals, games, shows, exhibitions, activities, amusements, entertainments and gatherings within the city; that to insure the public health and safety, proper sanitary, police, health, and safety measures be provided to regulate music festivals, games, shows, exhibitions, activities, amusements, gatherings and assemblies within the city. (Ord. 298 §1, 1970)

 

5.28.020 Permit—Required.
It is unlawful for any person, persons, corporations, organizations, landowner, tenant or lessee to allow, permit, encourage, organize, promote, conduct or advertise any entertainment, game, show, exhibition, activity, amusement, gathering, or assembly of persons wherein the primary purpose will be the presentation of outdoor live or recorded musical entertainment which the person, persons, corporation, organization, landowner, tenant, or lessee believes or has reason to believe will attract seven hundred fifty or more persons unless a valid city permit is first obtained for the conducting and operating of the outdoor public amusement, game, show, exhibition, activity, assembly, entertainment or gathering. A permit shall be required for each outdoor public entertainment, festival, game, show, exhibition, activity, amusement, assembly or gathering where live or recorded music is presented. (Ord. 298 §2, 1970)

 

5.28.030 Permit—Application—Approval—Denial.
Written application for permit to conduct and operate outdoor public amusement, game, show, exhibition, activity, festival, entertainment or assembly, where music, live or recorded, is presented, shall be made to the city council; this application shall be submitted thirty days or more prior to the date upon which the public festival, game, show, exhibition, activity, amusement, entertainment, or assembly is to be or may be held. Application for the permits herein provided shall be approved or denied within forty-five days after the application has been filed. Failure by the city council to act within this period constitutes approval of the application. If the application for the permit is not approved and the permit is denied, the denial shall be in writing setting forth the reasons for the denial. (Ord. 298 §3, 1970)

 

5.28.040 Approval—Procedure.
Whenever approval by a city or county government department, office or other agency is a condition for the issuance of a permit pursuant to application made therefor as set forth herein, request to such department, office or other agency for such approval shall be made simultaneously with the filing of the application for the permit with the city council, and approval or denial by the government department, officer or agency, shall be made within thirty days after request for permission has been filed with the government department, office or agency. Failure to act within the period by the government department, office or agency constitutes its approval. (Ord. 298 §4, 1970)

 

5.28.050 Approval—Conditional.
When a physical facility is required or subject to approval hereunder, conditional approval may be granted upon the basis of specific plans and specifications proposed and submitted by the applicant for permit. Any and all facilities required under the terms of any permit issued shall be in existence and in place at the location for which permit is granted, five days or more before the date when the event is scheduled to take place and shall be subject to inspection and approval of the agencies, departments or offices whose approval is required. Inspection of any and all facilities referred to herein shall be approved or disapproved on or before the five day period preceding the event. Failure by the department or agency to act as herein required constitutes an approval. If the facilities fail to meet the standards set forth in the plans and specifications therefor which have been conditionally approved, such conditional approval shall be withdrawn and any and all permits granted subject to such approval shall be cancelled and withdrawn. (Ord. 298 §5, 1970)

 

5.28.060 Sanitation facility requirements.
No permits for a music festival, game, show, exhibition, activity, gathering, assembly, rock festival, amusement or entertainment shall be granted unless the application is approved by the Amador County health department and no permit shall be granted unless the following minimum facilities are supplied:

A.    Every location for which a permit is required under this chapter shall provide adequate drinking facilities approved by the Amador County health department and supplying drinking water of a quality which shall meet the standards of the department of public health of the State of California for human consumption.

B.     Every location for which a permit is required under the terms of this chapter shall be provided with toilets, urinals and handwashing facilities in the number and constructed as required by the Amador County health department; these facilities shall be conveniently located for the use of persons at the permit location.

C.     Separate toilet facilities shall be provided for each sex and shall be so marked. Toilets shall be of the type approved by the Amador County health officer. (Ord. 298 §6, 1970)

 

5.28.070 Public food service facilities.
If any public food service is to be provided on the premises, the applicant shall submit with his or her application for permit, the type of facilities to be provided for such service. Such facilities shall meet the specifications required by the public health department of the county of Amador and the State of California for the type of facility proposed to be used. (Ord. 298 §7, 1970)

 

5.28.080 Fire protection.
No permit shall be granted hereunder unless applicant provides fire protection as shall be required by the city fire commissioner for the location set forth in the permit. No permit shall be granted hereunder unless applicant furnishes, within ten days after filing his or her application, approval in writing of the furnishing of such fire protection services and equipment as may be required by the city fire commissioner to protect the persons attending the entertainment for which the permit is granted. (Ord. 298 §8, 1970)

 

5.28.090 Police protection and traffic control.
No permit shall be granted hereunder unless the applicant files written approval of the chief of police indicating that police protection and traffic control have been contracted for or otherwise provided by the applicant to the extent and in the manner required by the sheriff; provided, however, that not less than one traffic control person shall be required for each three hundred persons expected, or reasonably expected, to be in attendance during the time the event for which the permit is granted is scheduled to be held. There shall be one crowd control person for each one hundred persons expected, or reasonably expected, to be in attendance at such event during the time the event is scheduled. Qualifications for such traffic control and crowd control persons shall be determined and approved by the chief of police. Proof that adequate traffic control and crowd control, protection and policing has been contracted for shall be provided to the sheriff of the county of Amador within ten days after filing application for permit. (Ord. 298 §9, 1970)

 

5.28.100 Parking facilities.
Application for permit under this chapter shall be accompanied by a scale drawing showing parking facilities at or adjacent to the location for which the permit is required. The location of these facilities shall be shown in relation to the area for which the permit is requested and the distance therefrom. The parking area shall be sufficient in size to provide parking at the rate of one vehicle for each four persons anticipated to be in attendance at the premises for which the permit is sought. The drawing of the parking facilities shall show the methods of ingress and egress from the parking area and the methods of ingress and egress shall be sufficient to provide reasonably easy access and prompt disbursal of traffic. The drawing shall be accompanied by written authorization from the owner or the agent of the owner permitting parking on the area shown for parking facilities. (Ord. 298 §10, 1970)

 

5.28.110 Permit—Enforcement.
The application for permit shall include a provision authorizing law enforcement and other public officers, including fire control and health officers, to enter upon the premises for which the permit is sought for the purpose of inspection and enforcement of the terms and conditions of the permit and the granting of such permit shall be conditioned upon the permitting of this access for such purposes by these persons. (Ord. 298 §11, 1970)

 

5.28.120 Buildings, structures or improvements.
The applicant shall set forth in each application for permit, the buildings, structures or improvements that will be used by the applicant for the purposes set forth in the permit. No existing building, structure or improvement on the premises shall be used until it has been inspected and approved by the department of plans and inspections of the county of Amador, and written approval shall be provided for the city council within ten days after the application for permit is filed, by the department of plans and inspections. In the event applicant desires to construct a building, structure or improvement on the premises, the design thereof shall be submitted to the department of plans and inspections may grant conditional approval on the basis of plans, specifications and designs submitted. Any such proposed structure shall be constructed and placed in position, at location, five days or more before the date the event is scheduled to take place; shall be inspected by the department of plans and inspections of Amador County, and such structure shall be approved or disapproved on or before the fifth day prior to the date the event for which the permit is sought is scheduled. Failure of the department of plans and inspections to inspect the structure within the time set forth herein constitutes an approval thereof. If, on inspection, the facilities fail to meet the standards set forth in the plans and specifications submitted therefor and which have been conditionally approved, such conditional approval shall be withdrawn and cancelled and all permits granted subject to such approval shall be cancelled and withdrawn; if a permit has not been issued, it shall not be granted. (Ord. 298 §12, 1970)

 

5.28.130 Permit—Fee—Designated.
Any application for permit hereunder shall be accompanied by a permit fee of one thousand dollars. (Ord. 298 §13, 1970)

 

5.28.140 Bond requirements.
No permit shall be issued hereunder until the applicant has deposited with the city clerk a surety bond, issued by a duly licensed surety company doing business in the State of California, conditioned to indemnify the city for damage to any of its property and any expense necessarily incurred by reason of the conducting of the event for which a permit is issued hereunder and to indemnify any person, firm or corporation for damage caused by vehicles, operators, employees or participants in such music festival, gathering, event, game, show, activity, exhibition, or assembly. The principal amount of bond required hereby shall be ten thousand dollars. Any permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter limits the use of any premises licensed hereunder to such hours as are prescribed by the city council, in not to exceed two consecutive days; this permit expires not later than two a.m. on the second day. (Ord. 298 §14, 1970)

 

5.28.150 Permit—Fee—Waived when.
Notwithstanding any of the provisions of this chapter if any gathering, festival, assembly, game, show, exhibition, event or activity, as herein referred to, is to be conducted by a bonafide charitable organization for the purpose of raising funds for charitable uses and from which no part of the gross receipts herefrom shall inure to the private benefit of any individual, corporation, partnership or association, excepting so far as these gross receipts may be expended for the purpose of necessary materials and supplies for such enterprise, the city council may waive the permit fee for which provision is made in this chapter and, in lieu thereof, may impose such requirements as it deems necessary and proper to insure the proper inspection and policing of the enterprise. And further, notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, if such festival, game, show, exhibition, activity, amusement, event, or other enterprise is to be conducted by a bonafide charitable organization for the purpose of raising funds for charitable use, the city council may waive the permit fee provided for herein and, in lieu thereof, impose such requirements, if any, as it deems necessary and proper to insure the proper inspection and policing of the premises. And, further, also excepted from the provisions of this chapter are local traditional events, as of April 20, 1970. (Ord. 298 §15, 1970)

 

5.28.160 Permit—Refusal when.
No permit shall be issued for the operation of any festival, game, exhibition, show, event, activity, gathering, or assembly, to any person, firm or corporation when, in the judgment of the city council, the conducting thereof will be inconsistent with the best public interests. (Ord. 298 §16, 1970)

 

5.28.170 Permit—Issuance—Age restrictions—Revocation.
No permit shall be issued to any person under the age of twenty-one years. Every permit issued hereunder shall reserve for the city council the right to revoke such permit without notice. or formal hearing and such rights to revoke is a consideration for the issuance of such permit. Revocation without notice or formal hearing shall be only upon a finding by the city council that the provisions of this chapter, or the requirements set forth in the conditions under which the permit is granted, or any law has been violated by a permittee and the action of the city council in revoking such permit shall be final. (Ord. 298 §17, 1970)

 

5.28.180 Location restrictions.
No activity for which a permit is sought under the provisions of this chapter shall be operated or conducted or carried out at any location which is closer than one thousand three hundred twenty feet from any school-house, church or residence; provided, however, that the provisions of this section shall not apply if the owner of each residence or the governing body of each school and/or church within the one thousand three hundred twenty feet shall waive the requirements of this section in writing. (Ord. 298 §18, 1970)

 

5.28.190 Permit—Transfer.
Any permit issued hereunder shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises for which it is issued and shall not be transferrable or assignable without the consent of the city council and no rebate or refund of the money, or any portion thereof, paid for such permit hereunder shall be made. (Ord. 298 §19, 1970)

 

5.28.200 Permit—Application—Data.
The application for permit to be issued hereunder shall be made in writing and shall be accompanied by a deposit of the fee required hereby. It shall be signed by the person to whom such permit shall be issued or his or her manager or agent. The full name and address of the applicant shall be given and if the applicant is a partnership the names of all the partners and their respective addresses shall be set forth in full, together with the location of the principal office or place of business of such partnership. If the application is by a corporation the names and addresses of the president, vice-president and secretary shall be given together with the address and location of the principal office or place of business of such corporation. The application shall state the location of the premises to be occupied and for which the permit is sought and shall state the applicant will abide by all the rules and regulations of this chapter and the city rules and regulations and ordinances applicable to the event being staged at the location, and all laws in effect for the protection, health, morals and safety of the persons in attendance at the event, the persons employed at such event, the participants thereof and the general public. Application for permit shall be filed with the city clerk. (Ord. 298 §20, 1970)

 

5.28.210 Nuisances designated.
Any use, occupation, building or structure maintained contrary to the provisions of this chapter constitutes a public nuisance. (Ord. 298 §21, 1970)

 

5.28.220 Violation—Penalty.
The penalty for violations of this chapter shall be as prescribed in Section 1.20.010. (Ord. 334 §2, 1973; Ord. 298 §23, 1970)

Chapter 5.32 TAXICABS
5.32.010 Definition.
“Taxicab” as used in this chapter means and includes any vehicle used to carry passenger for hire but not operating on a fixed route. (Ord. 474 §1 Art. 1(A), 1982)

 

5.32.020 Operator’s license—Required.
It is unlawful to engage in the business of operating a taxicab in the city without first securing a license therefor. (Ord. 474 §1 Art. 1(B), 1982)

 

5.32.030 Operator’s license—Application.
Application for operator’s business license shall be made in writing to the chief of police, and shall state thereon:

A.    The name and address of the applicant, and if a corporation, the names of the principal officers, or if a partnership, association or fictitious company, the names of the partners or persons comprising the association or company with the address of each;

B.     The intended place for the conduct of the financial affairs and service of the taxicabs in the business;

C.     The street number and exact location of the place or places where the applicant proposes to stand each taxicab;

D.    A description of each taxicab which the applicant proposes to use giving:

1.     Trade name,

2.     Make and style,

3.     Year,

4.     Motor and serial number,

5.     Seating capacity,

6.     Distinctive color scheme, name, monogram, insignia which shall be used on each taxicab,

7.     Such other information required by the chief of police which is reasonably related to the operation of a taxicab business;

E.     Filing of Rate Structure. The rates to be charged for use of taxicabs shall be filed with the police chief at the time of application for operator’s license. (Ord. 594 §1, 1997; Ord. 474 §1 Art. 1(C), 1982)

 

5.32.040 Operator’s license—Grounds for denying issuance.
The chief of police and city administrator shall deny an application for an operator’s license when:

A.    The application is not in the form and does not contain the information required.

B.     The taxicab or taxicabs described are inadequate or unsafe for the purpose for which they are to be used.

C.     The color scheme, name or monogram or insignia identifying such taxicab or taxicabs conflicts with or imitates any color scheme, name, monogram or insignia used by any person in such manner as to be misleading or tend to deceive or defraud the public.

D.    The location of the stand is such as to congest or interfere with travel on any public street, or that the proposed stand is within three hundred feet of any other stand theretofore fixed on the same street.

E.     The applicant presently is under suspension or has, at some prior time, had an operator’s business license revoked for cause.

F.     The applicant has been convicted of a felony or misdemeanor on charges of fraud, embezzlement, or such other offense constituting a dishonest business practice; nor shall such license be issued to or be held by any corporation if any officer thereof would be ineligible for a license under the foregoing conditions of this section.

G.    The city council, after notice to the applicant, and a hearing, if such hearing is requested by applicant, by resolution determines that there are a sufficient number of taxicabs in this city to fully serve the public, and that the public interest, convenience, and necessity do not require issuance of an operator’s business license to the applicant. (Ord. 474 §1 Art. 1(D), 1982)

 

5.32.050 Operator’s license—Fee.
A.    The annual flat fee, payable in advance, for an operator’s business license shall be sixty dollars plus twenty-five dollars for each taxicab operated, providing that said fees are subject to change as may hereafter be established by council resolution. Whenever the number of taxicabs so operated shall be increased during the license year, the licensee shall notify the chief of police and administrator of such change and shall pay the additional fee. The license year shall begin July 1st of each year.

B.     The chief of police shall issue suitable tags or stickers for the number of taxicabs covered by each license. Such tag or sticker shall be displayed in a prominent place on each taxicab while it is in use, and may be transferred to any taxicab put into service to replace one permanently withdrawn from service.

C.     The licensee shall notify the chief of police of the motor number and state license number of each cab operated and of the corresponding city tag or sticker number. (Ord. 474 §1 Art. 1(E), 1982)

 

5.32.060 Operator’s license—Nontransferability.
No operator’s business license issued under the terms of this chapter shall be transferable, either by contract or operation of law, without the permission of the chief of police having first been obtained, and any attempted transfer shall be null and void, and further shall be sufficient cause for revocation thereof. (Ord. 474 §1 Art. 2(F), 1982)

 

5.32.070 Operator’s license—Revocation or refusal to renew—Initial determination.
The chief of police, in his or her sole discretion, shall make the initial determination as to whether revocation or nonrenewal of an operator’s business license is appropriate. (Ord. 474 §1 Art. 2(G)(1), 1982)

 

5.32.080 Operator’s license—Revocation or refusal to renew—Notice.
The licensee shall be given a written statement of the initial determination of the chief of police to revoke or not to renew the operator’s business license, including supporting facts and reasons therefor, and the licensee thereafter shall have ten days to either respond orally or in writing to the chief of police before such determination, if not earlier withdrawn or modified, becomes effective. (Ord. 474 §1 Art. 2(G)(2), 1982)

 

5.32.090 Operator’s license—Revocation or refusal to renew—Hearing.
A.    Within thirty days after notice has been given to the licensee by personal delivery or within thirty-three days after notice has been given to the licensee by certified mail, as applicable, the licensee may make a written request for a hearing. After at least five days’ notice to the licensee of the date and time of the hearing, a hearing shall be held at which the licensee may present evidence and dispute the validity of any charge made by the city.

B.     Failure of the licensee to make a written request for a hearing within the prescribed time limit shall mean that the initial determination made by the chief of police remains in full force and effect and shall be final. (Ord. 474 §1 Art. 2(G)(3), 1982)

 

5.32.100 Operator’s license—Revocation or refusal to renew—Determination.
Revocation or nonrenewal of an operator’s business license by the chief of police or the city council must be supported by substantial evidence which establishes one or more of the following grounds:

A.    The licensee knowingly gave a false answer or knowingly omitted an answer material to his or her application for an operator’s business license.

B.     The taxicab or taxicabs operated by the licensee are inadequate or unsafe for the purposes for which they are to be used.

C.     The licensee wilfully permitted a driver who is not qualified; as defined in this chapter, to drive a taxicab.

D.    The licensee knowingly made false representations for the purpose of securing patronage.

E.     Since the date of issuance of his or her operator’s business license, the licensee has been convicted of a misdemeanor or felony on charges of fraud, embezzlement, or other such dishonest business practice.

F.     The licensee has failed to pay the fees required under this chapter. (Ord. 474 §1 Art. 2(G)(4), 1982)

 

5.32.110 Driver’s permit—Required.
It is unlawful for any driver to drive a taxicab in the city unless such driver is validly licensed by the state and as required by this chapter. (Ord. 474 §1 Art. 3(A), 1982)

 

5.32.120 Driver’s permit—Application—Qualifications.
Application for a driver’s permit shall be made in writing to the chief of police, upon verification by the applicant, and shall set forth the following:

A.    The name, address, description of applicant, and proof that the applicant is at least twenty-one years of age;

B.     The name of the applicant’s employer or proposed employer in the taxicab business;

C.     A photograph of the applicant taken within sixty days immediately prior to the date of filing such application, which picture shall be two inches by two inches, showing the head and shoulders of the applicant in a clear and distinguishing manner;

D.    A statement of any physical or mental infirmity, disease, or condition which may affect or impair the applicant’s ability to drive a taxicab;

E.     A statement of any felony conviction which by its nature would expose taxi customers to an increased risk of harm, including, but not limited to, assault, theft, fraud or a sex offense;

F.     A statement of any misdemeanor conviction involving an incident arising from or related to his or her operation of a taxicab;

G.    A statement of any misdemeanor conviction for driving a vehicle under the influence of alcohol or narcotics;

H.    Driver’s Drug and Alcohol Testing. No person shall be issued a driver’s permit until they have presented certification to the police chief that they have tested negative for alcohol (breath alcohol concentration of less than 0.02 percent) and each of the controlled substances specified in Part 40 (commencing with Section 40.1) of the Title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations. The date of testing shall be within ten days of the date of issuance of a driver’s permit. Test results are confidential and shall not be released without the consent of the applicant, except as authorized or required by law. Cost for such testing is the obligation of the applicant or employee of the applicant;

I.      Testing Procedures. Applicant shall show a valid California driver’s license at the time and place of testing. Testing procedures shall be substantially as set forth in Part 40 (commencing with Section 40.1) of Title 49 of the Code of Federal regulations. The city may at random require a permitted driver to be retested. If such a test is required by city, city shall pay the cost for such testing;

J.      Other Information Required. Such other information required by the chief of police which is reasonably related to the safe, efficient, or honest operation of a taxicab by the driver. (Ord. 594 §1, 1997; Ord. 474 §1 Art. 3(C), 1982)

 

5.32.130 Driver’s permit—Application—Grounds for denial—Lack of qualifications.
The chief of police shall deny an application for a driver’s license when:

A.    The application is not in the form and does not contain the information required by this chapter.

B.     The applicant has a physical or mental infirmity, disease, or condition which, in the sole discretion of the chief of police materially affects the applicant’s ability to drive a taxicab.

C.     Within three years immediately prior to application for a driver’s permit, the applicant has been convicted of a felony which by its nature would expose taxi customers to an increased risk of harm or financial loss, including, but not limited to, assault, theft, fraud or a sex offense.

D.    Within three years immediately prior to application for a driver’s permit, the applicant has been convicted of two or more misdemeanors, involving driving a vehicle while under the influence of alcohol or narcotics.

E.     Within three years immediately prior to application for a driver’s permit, the applicant has been convicted of a misdemeanor directly related to his or her operation of a taxicab which subjected a taxi customer or bystander to physical violence by the applicant by assault, or the like, or which subjected a taxi customer or prospective taxi customer to fraudulent misrepresentations by the taxi driver or the like.

F.     The applicant has knowingly given false answer or knowingly omitted an answer material to his or her application for a driver’s permit.

G.    The applicant presently is under suspension or has, at some prior time, had his or her driver’s permit revoked for reason. (Ord. 474 §1 Art. 3(D), 1982)

 

5.32.140 Driver’s permit—Fee.
The annual flat fee for a driver’s permit valid for a period of one year, beginning July 1st of each year and ending June 30th of each following year, shall be five dollars, plus actual costs of processing fingerprints and making a check of the driver’s criminal record. (Ord. 474 §1 Art. 3(B), 1982)

 

5.32.150 Driver’s permit—Suspension—Initial determination.
The chief of police, in his or her sole discretion, shall make the initial determination as to whether suspension of a driver’s permit is appropriate. (Ord. 474 §1 Art. 3(E)(1), 1982)

 

5.32.160 Driver’s permit—Suspension—Notice.
The permittee shall be given a written statement of the initial determination of the chief of police to suspend the driver’s permit, including supporting facts and reasons therefor, and the permittee thereafter shall have ten days to either respond orally or in writing to the chief of police before such determination, if not withdrawn, becomes effective. (Ord. 474 §1 Art. 3(E)(2), 1982)

 

5.32.170 Driver’s permit—Suspension—Hearing.
A.    Within thirty days after notice has been given to the permittee by personal delivery or within thirty-three days after notice has been given to the permittee by certified mail, as applicable, the permittee may make written request for a hearing. After at least five days’ notice to the permittee of the date and time of the hearing, a hearing shall be held at which the permittee may present evidence and dispute the validity of any charge made by the city.

B.     Failure of the permittee to make written request for a hearing within the prescribed time limit shall mean that the initial determination made by the chief of police shall remain in full force and effect and shall be final. (Ord. 474 §1 Art. 3(E)(3), 1982)

 

5.32.180 Driver’s permit—Suspension—Determination.
Suspension of a driver’s permit by the chief of police or the city council must be supported by a preponderance of the evidence and the burden of proof shall be on the city to establish one or more of the following grounds:

A.    The permittee repeatedly has used profane or obscene language while operating a taxicab in the city.

B.     The permittee repeatedly has shouted or called to prospective customers on the city streets.

C.     The permittee has been convicted of two or more moving violations within a period of six months.

D.    The permittee has committed acts or omissions sufficient to establish grounds for revocation of his or her driver’s permit as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 474 §1 Art. 3 (E)(4), 1982)

 

5.32.190 Driver’s permit—Length of suspension.
No suspension for any one of the provisions set forth in Section 5.32.180 shall be longer than six months. For the following specific offenses, the length of suspension shall be as follows:

A.    A permittee who repeatedly has used profane or obscene language while operating a taxicab in the city or who repeatedly has shouted or called to prospective customers on the city streets shall be suspended for up to five calendar days.

B.     Any permittee twice convicted of moving traffic violations within a period of six months shall have his or her driver’s permit suspended for fourteen calendar days.

C.     Any permittee convicted three times of moving traffic violations within a period of six months shall have his or her driver’s permit suspended for thirty calendar days.

D.    Any permittee who has committed acts or omissions sufficient to establish grounds for revocation of his or her driver’s permit may, in the alternative, have his or her driver’s permit suspended for up to six months. (Ord. 474 §1 Art. 3(E)(5), 1982)

 

5.32.200 Driver’s permit—Revocation or refusal to renew—Initial determination.
The chief of police, in his or her sole discretion, shall make the initial determination as to whether revocation or nonrenewal of a driver’s permit is appropriate. (Ord. 474 §1 Art. 3(F)(1), 1982)

 

5.32.210 Driver’s permit—Revocation or refusal to renew—Notice.
The permittee shall be given a written statement of the initial determination of the chief of police to revoke or not to renew the driver’s permit, including supporting facts and reasons therefor, and the permittee thereafter shall have ten days to either respond orally or-in writing to the chief of police before such determination, if not withdrawn or modified, becomes effective. (Ord. 474 §1 Art. 3(F)(2), 1982)

 

5.32.220 Driver’s permit—Revocation or refusal to renew—Hearing.
A.    Within thirty days after notice has been given to the permittee by personal delivery or within thirty-three days after notice has been given to the permittee by certified mail, the permittee may make written request for a hearing. After at least five days’ notice to the permittee of the date and time of the hearing, a hearing shall be held at which the permittee may present evidence and dispute the validity of any charge made by the city.

B.     Failure of the permittee to make written request for a hearing within the prescribed time limit shall mean that the initial determination made by the chief of police shall remain in full force and effect and shall be final. (Ord. 474 §1 Art. 3(F)(3), 1982)

 

5.32.230 Driver’s permit—Revocation or refusal to renew—Determination.
Revocation or nonrenewal of a driver’s permit by the chief of police or the city council must be supported by a preponderance of the evidence and the burden of proof shall be on the city to establish one or more of the following grounds:

A.    The permittee knowingly gave a false answer or knowingly omitted an answer material to his or her application for a driver’s permit.

B.     Since the date of issuance of his or her driver’s permit, the permittee has been convicted of a felony which by its nature would expose taxi customers to an increased risk of harm including, but not limited to, assault, theft, fraud, or a sex offense.

C.     Since the date of issuance of his or her driver’s permit, the permittee has had his or her state driver’s license suspended or revoked.

D.    Since the date of issuance of his or her driver’s permit, the permittee has been convicted of driving a taxicab while under the influence of alcohol or narcotics.

E.     Since the date of issuance of his or her driver’s permit, the permittee has been convicted of a misdemeanor directly related to his or her operation of a taxicab which subjected a taxi customer or bystander to physical violence by the permittee’s assault, or the like, or which subjected a taxi customer or prospective taxi customer to fraudulent misrepresentation by the permittee, or the like.

F.     Since the date of issuance of his or her driver’s permit, the permittee has shown a physical or mental infirmity, disease, or condition which materially affects his or her ability to drive a taxicab safely and efficiently.

G.    The permittee has operated a taxicab for business purposes during a time when his or her driver’s permit has been suspended. (Ord. 474 §1 Art. 3(F)(4), 1982)

5.32.240 Operation—Vehicles.
The chief of police or his or her authorized agent may inspect any taxicab so often as he or she deems necessary to enforce the provisions of this section. No taxicab shall be operated unless:

A.    It bears a state license duly issued;

B.     It is equipped with proper brakes, lights, tires, horn, muffler, rear vision mirrors, adequate windshield wipers and is in good running condition as determined by a city police officer;

C.     It bears a distinguishing color scheme, or design as set forth in the licensee’s application, except when the chief of police has granted temporary use of automobiles not so marked;

D.    Each taxicab, while operated, shall have on each side, in letters not less than two inches high, the name of the licensee operating it; and if more than one taxicab is operated by a licensee, each taxicab shall be designated by a different number, which number, shall also so appear on the side of such taxicab;

E.     Information is displayed in the taxicab so as to be noticeable and readable by passengers, which information shall include the operator’s business license number, name of licensee, date of issuance, the state license plate number and engine number of the taxicab, and further, the driver’s license shall be clearly displayed. (Ord. 474 §1 Art. 2(A), 1982)

 

5.32.250 Operation—Illegal or improper activity.
The licensee shall be responsible for hiring qualified drivers, as provided in this chapter, assuring that drivers who are hired remain qualified. (Ord. 474 §1 Art. 2(B), 1982)

 

5.32.260 Operation—Insurance.
A.    No taxicab shall be operated unless it provides insurance which meets the requirements of California Vehicle Code Sections 16500 and 16502, as amended from time to time, and which makes the city an “additional insured,” requires ten days’ notice prior to cancellation, and which meets the satisfaction of the city attorney. If at any time in the judgement of the city attorney, the licensee’s insurance is not sufficient for any cause, new or different insurance shall be obtained by the licensee. In addition, the licensee shall give proof of adequate worker’s compensation insurance coverage for all employees entitled thereto.

B.     As an alternative, in whole or in part, to the requirements of subsection A of this section, and in accordance with the financial responsibility laws of this state, any person may satisfy the city’s insurance requirements as qualifying under state law as a self-insurer and by obtaining a certificate of self-insurance issued by the State Department of Motor Vehicles. Such self-insurance may be in amounts which satisfy the above city requirements in whole or in part. In addition, any person who is self-insuring shall execute a hold harmless agreement, including agreement to defend against all claims and actions arising from the operation of vehicles authorized in this chapter, to the benefit of the city and its elected and appointed officers and employees. (Ord. 474 §1 Art. 2(C), 1982)

 

5.32.270 Operation—Rates.
No taxicab shall be operated unless it is equipped with a meter in good condition to record the amount to be charged on each trip, which amount shall be shown in figures visible to the passenger. It is unlawful for a passenger to fail or refuse to pay the lawful fare at the termination of a trip. No extra charge shall be made for baggage or parcels the size of which permits them to be carried in the cab. (Ord. 474 §1 Art. 2(D), 1982)

5.32.280 Taxicab stands.
Taxicab stand locations shall be kept on a list available to the public in the police department. Each taxicab stand shall be appropriately marked by signs. It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle, other than a licensed taxicab, in a taxicab stand. A licensed taxicab may be parked in any taxicab stand while such taxicab is in the charge of its driver on duty awaiting a fare. (Ord. 474 §1 Art. 2(E), 1982)

Chapter 5.36 CARDROOMS
5.36.010 License—Required.
It is unlawful for any person to commence or conduct within the city any business or enterprise for the playing of cards or card games and for the use of which a fee or commission is directly or indirectly charged, accepted or received from players or participants in any such playing of games, until such person shall have first obtained a license to do so in compliance with this chapter. (Ord. 478 §1(1), 1983)

 

5.36.020 License—Applications.
Any person desiring to commence or continue by renewal any business or enterprise for any such card games shall file with the city chief of police a written application. Each such application shall contain clearly and truthfully under oath or affirmation the following information on the form provided by the city:

A.    The data of the application;

B.     The true name of the applicant;

C.     The status of the applicant as being an individual, firm, association, copartnership, joint venture, or corporation;

D.    If the applicant is an individual, the residence and business address of such applicant;

E.     If the applicant is other than an individual, the name, residence, and business address of each of the copartners or members of the firm, copartnership or joint venture and the name, residence and business addresses of each of the principal officers and directors of the association or corporation applicant;

F.     The proposed location of the business for which the license is sought;

G.    The type and nature of the game proposed to be played;

H.    The number of tables or other units to be placed, employed or used; subject to a minimum of two and a maximum of six, unless a use permit is sought and obtained under the provisions of Chapter 17.36;

I.      A description of any other business conducted or proposed to be conducted at the same location;

J.      A statement that the applicant understands that the application shall be considered by the council only after a full investigation and report, including a criminal records investigation, have been made by the city chief of police;

K.    A statement that the applicant understands and agrees that any business or activity conducted or operated under any license issued under such application shall be operated in full conformity with all the laws of the state and the laws and regulations of the city applicable thereto, enforced by frequent inspections or investigations by the city police department, and that any violation of any such laws or regulations in such place of business or in connection therewith brought to the attention of the chief of police shall render any license therefor subject to immediate suspension and revocation;

L.     A statement that the applicant has read the provisions of this chapter and particularly the provisions of this section and understands the same; and

M.    A full and complete financial statement of the applicant, whether he or she is an individual, corporation, partnership, or other entity; provided, the financial statement required by this subsection shall be a confidential qualified document and shall not be open to public inspection but shall be available only to the city director and his or her staff. (Ord. 478 §1(2), 1983)

 

5.36.030 License fees and deposits.
The license fees set forth in this chapter are for both regulation and revenue purposes and are levied pursuant to the authority of applicable state laws. Each such application for any license shall be accompanied by fees and deposits, payable to the city as follows:

A.    An application fee of two hundred dollars which shall be retained by the city as a deposit for the payment of the costs of investigation, including a criminal records investigation by the chief of police. In the event that the costs of the investigation are more than said deposit, then the applicant shall be required to pay the same regardless of whether or not a license is finally issued. Similarly, in the event that the costs of the investigation are less than the required deposit, then the clerk shall refund the difference to the applicant.

B.     Quarterly license fees payable in advance for the quarters beginning on January 1st, April 1st, July 1st, and October 1st of each calendar year in the following amounts:

 

First two tables

Fifty dollars per table per quarter

Additional tables to maximum of four

Twenty-five dollars per table per quarter

 

The quarterly license fees shall become the absolute property of the city and shall not be refunded in the event of any cessation of business for any reason. All such fees, including the initial application fee, may be changed at any time by city council resolution. (Ord. 478 §1(3), 1983)

 

5.36.040 Investigations and reports.
A.    Investigations Required. Whenever an application has been filed with the city chief of police for a license pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, the chief of police and city director and his or her staff shall immediately and diligently make an investigation as follows:

1.     A full and complete investigation, including a criminal records investigation, of the applicant (including its officers and members, if any, whose name and addresses are shown upon the application);

2.     A full and complete investigation of the building and location where the applicant proposes to conduct such business or activity; and

3.     A full and complete investigation as to the type of tables or units to be used at, or in connection with, the proposed business and the type of games proposed to be played, which investigation shall also include the proposed locations of the tables or other units in, within, or about the proposed place of business.

B.     Reports Required. The city director and chief of police shall make such investigations with reasonable promptness and shall report to the council with reference thereto in due time, and shall make investigations with reasonable promptness as to all matters within his or her jurisdiction concerning the public health, welfare, and safety as may be concerned with such application.

C.     Reports Prerequisite to Council Considerations. The council shall not consider any application for a license until such time as the city director has filed his or her reports with the council.

D.    Time of Filing Reports. All such reports shall be filed with the council within a period of thirty days after the applications have been referred to the city director and his or her staff. (Ord. 478 §1(4), 1983)

 

5.36.050 Granting or denial of application.
A.    Council Consideration. The city council shall consider an application for a license under these provisions only after all fees have been paid and the chief of police and city director have completed a full investigation and report on the applicant.

B.     Decision of Council. The council may, in its discretion, either approve the application and grant the license on any terms or conditions as it deems prudent, or deny the application and refuse to grant the license. Any such decision shall be final and conclusive, and the applicant shall agree to abide by the same.

C.     Grounds for Denial of Application. The city council shall not authorize the issuance of any license under the provisions of this chapter in any of the following cases:

1.     If the proposed business is to be operated in violation of any state or city law or regulation;

2.     If the game for which a license is applied for is unlawful;

3.     If the building premises will not conform to the city zoning regulations requiring minimum C-2 zoning classification;

4.     If the applicant or any of his or her agents or employees have any misdemeanor or felony convictions related to drugs, acts of moral turpitude or violence. (Ord. 478 §1(5), 1983)

 

5.36.060 Transfer—Expiration of license.
A.    Transfer. Any transfer or assignment of any license or expansion of an existing facility shall be considered for all purposes as a new application for a cardroom, and all the provisions of the chapter shall apply.

B.     Every license issued pursuant to these provisions shall be held continuously by and in the possession of the approved individual licensee at all times while he or she is on the premises and during all games.

C.     Expiration. Every license issued pursuant to these provisions shall stay in effect until the license is either surrendered, suspended or revoked. (Ord. 478 §1(6), 1983)

 

5.36.070 Revocation of license.
A.    Grounds. Any license issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be revoked if it is found, in the time and manner hereinafter described:

1.     That a licensee or any agent or employee thereof has violated or permitted or caused any violation of any provision of this chapter or state or local laws; or

2.     That a licensee, or any agent or employee thereof, has permitted or caused any violation of any condition of approval imposed upon the issuance of such license; or

3.     That any licensee has made any fraudulent statement as to a material fact on an application form or as to any other information presented as part of the application process.

B.     Action of City Director. Whenever the city director has information that a violation constituting a ground for revocation has occurred he or she shall authorize an investigation and report on the same. If he or she determines that a cause for revocation of license occurred he or she shall set the matter for consideration by the city council at its next most convenient meeting. He or she shall give notice of the time and the place of the hearing before the city council to the licensee not less than five days in advance of the date set by him or her for such hearing.

C.     Hearings. At the time set for such hearing, the city council shall hear the evidence presented by the chief of police and the city director, purporting to show grounds exist for revocation; thereafter, the city council shall permit the licensee and any other interested person to present such evidence as may be relevant to dispute the existence of such facts.

D.    Decision of City Council. If based upon the evidence presented the city council finds that facts are presented which constitute grounds for revocation it shall revoke the license. If it finds that such facts are not present it shall dismiss the proceedings. The decision of the city council shall be final and conclusive. (Ord. 478 §1(7), 1983)

 

5.36.080 Rules and regulations established.
The following rules and regulations are established by the city council and shall govern all card games for which licenses are issued under the provisions of this chapter, and shall be conditions of each license issued:

A.    Rule No. 1. No licensee shall use, operate or permit the use or operation of more tables than those for which such licensee holds then current and valid licenses to operate in the city and for which the prescribed license fee has been paid to the city.

B.     Rule No. 2.

1.     No licensee shall permit any person to play in any game licensed by the provisions of this chapter at any time while such person appears to be or is drunk or under the influence of a drug and no person under or who appears to be drunk or under the influence of a drug shall play in any such game.

2.     No licensee shall permit any person to enter the premises while such person appears to be, or, in the opinion of the licensee or duly authorized agents or employees, is drunk or under the influence of a drug.

C.     Rule No. 3. No licensee shall operate or use any table or unit or manage, conduct or carry on any business or activity licensed by this chapter after the time that such license issued by the city has been or is revoked pursuant to this chapter.

D.    Rule No. 4. Each and all of the games conducted or operated in the city pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be conducted and operated in full conformity with and subject to all of the provisions of applicable laws.

E.     Rule No. 5. No licensee shall permit or allow any person under the age of twenty-one years to play any game licensed hereunder at any time in a cardroom covered by or referred to in any such license.

F.     Rule No. 6. A card club shall be open for inspection during all hours to the city director, chief of police or his or her duly authorized representative, without a search warrant.

G.    Rule No. 7. It has been noted and substantially determined by the city council that said card clubs shall have a minimum of two and a maximum of six tables including its subordinate and accessory uses thereto, and shall be located in a C-2 zone.

H.    Rule No. 8. It is unlawful for a card club holding a permit under the provisions of this chapter to employ any person without such person having been registered and issued a cardroom work permit by the chief of police.

1.     Each and every prospective cardroom employee shall present himself/herself at the office of the chief of police during normal business hours, at least ten days prior to the beginning or commencement of any such employment to apply for a cardroom work permit. Each prospective employee will complete an application, be fingerprinted, photographed, provide any other information that the chief of police may require, and certify the contents of the application under penalty of perjury.

2.     The chief of police shall establish procedures to implement and administer the provisions of this section.

3.     The chief of police is hereby authorized to obtain criminal history information for each employee seeking registration.

4.     A fee, as set forth by resolution of the city council, will be charged to cover the cost of background investigation, registration, and an annual fee for the cardroom work permit. This fee shall be payable to the City of Jackson at the time of application for the permit. In the event a permit is denied, the fee, minus actual costs incurred in investigating the application, will be refunded to the applicant.

5.     Within ten days after receipt of the registration information and fees, the chief of police shall either grant or deny a cardroom work permit to the applicant. If, in the opinion of the chief of police, the applicant is not a fit and proper person to engage in such work, he or she shall deny the applicant a cardroom work permit.

6.     Any aggrieved person wishing to appeal the decision of the chief of police in denying a cardroom work permit may seek a hearing under the same rules set out in Section 5.36.070 of this chapter.

7.     A registered cardroom employee will be provided a cardroom work permit identification card that shall be worn in sight, whenever that person is on duty in a cardroom. Only one such work permit shall be required each year even though the holder of such work permit may change their place of employment to any cardroom within the city.

8.     The information received by the chief of police pursuant to the provisions of this section shall be treated as confidential and shall be accessible only to the chief of police, the city director, their authorized representatives and the license holder for the card club.

I.      Rule No. 9. The provisions of this section shall not apply to cardrooms of fraternal organizations not open to the general public and whose membership is restricted to those persons regularly and formally elected to membership therein and paying regular dues to such organization. (Ord. 544 §§1, 2, 1991; Ord. 478 §1(8), 1983)

 

5.36.090 Enforcement.
Failure to comply with any provisions of this chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor, punishable by fine or imprisonment pursuant to Section 1.20.010, in addition to any other penalties or punitive remedies existing under state and local law. Each day of noncompliance shall constitute a separate and complete offense. (Ord. 478 §1(9), 1983)

Chapter 5.40 MECHANICAL OR ELECTRONIC AMUSEMENT DEVICES
5.40.010 Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter the words set out in this section shall have the following meanings:

A.    “Amusement center” means any building or portion thereof open to the public which has five or more mechanical or electronic amusement devices as defined in subsection B of this section located on the premises.

B.     “Mechanical or electronic amusement devices” means any machine, apparatus, contrivance, appliance or device which may be operated or played upon the placing or depositing therein of any coin, check, slug, ball, plate, disk or key or any other article or device, or by paying therefor either in advance of or after use, and as a result of the action or operation of such machine, apparatus, contrivance, appliance, or device, dependent upon skill and not dependent upon hazard or chance, a score or result of such play, action or operation is in any way recorded, exhibited or made known, including, but not limited to, tape machine, card machine, pinball machine, bowling game machine, shuffleboard machine, marble game machine, horse racing machine, basketball game machine, baseball game machine, football game machine, electronic video game or any other similar machine or device.

C.     “Person” means any corporation, association, partnership or any natural person.

D.    “School” is as defined in Section 17.04.500. (Ord. 528 §1, 1990)

 

5.40.020 License—Mechanical or electronic amusement devices.
It is unlawful for any person to install, operate or maintain any mechanical or electronic amusement device intended for use by the public in any business establishment without first having obtained a license for each device. (Ord. 528 §1, 1990)

 

5.40.030 License application fee.
Any application for any mechanical or electronic amusement device license shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee established by resolution of the city council. The application fee shall be used to defray the costs of investigation and report, and is not in lieu of any other fees or taxes required under this code. (Ord. 528 §1, 1990)

 

5.40.040 License term—Nontransferable.
Mechanical or electronic amusement device licenses required by this chapter shall be issued for one year, or portion thereof, commencing July 1, of each year, coinciding with the payment of the business license for the premises, and shall not be transferable. (Ord. 528 §1, 1990)

 

5.40.050 License—Posting.
Any license issued pursuant to this chapter shall be affixed in a conspicuous place on the mechanical or electronic amusement device licensed hereunder. Such license shall show the license number and the date of expiration of the same, in addition to whatever additional information is deemed necessary. (Ord. 528 §1, 1990)

 

5.40.060 Existing establishments.
Any business establishment containing mechanical or electronic amusement devices or which establishments would have qualified as amusement centers as of January 1, 1990, shall have until sixty days from the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter to conform to the provisions hereof. The person owning or operating said business establishment shall have the burden of establishing the precise number of devices located on the premises as of January 1, 1990. (Ord. 528 §1, 1990)

 

5.40.070 Minors—When allowed.
During the academic year for public schools within the city corporate limits, no person under eighteen years of age shall play or use any mechanical or electronic amusement device in any business establishment between the hours of seven a.m. and three p.m., except during school holidays or vacations or on Saturday and Sunday, nor at any time between the hours of ten p.m. and seven a.m. of the day preceding a school day, unless accompanied by a parent or legal guardian. Any person owning, operating or employed in any business establishment where a mechanical or electronic amusement device is kept or used shall refuse to allow any person under eighteen years of age unaccompanied by a parent or legal guardian to play or use such devices between the above stated hours. A sign specifying the above hours and age restrictions shall be conspicuously posted at the location of the devices in the business establishment. (Ord. 528 §1, 1990)

 

5.40.080 View from street.
Every business establishment where a mechanical or electronic amusement device is kept or used shall be located and designed and lighted so that a complete view of the interior portion thereof devoted to such devices is available at all times from an adjacent street or exterior walkway area; provided, that no structural alteration of any public place where a mechanical or electronic amusement device is kept or used in existence and operation on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall be required. (Ord. 528 §1, 1990)

 

5.40.090 Proximity to schools.
No person shall place, allow, keep, maintain, permit or locate any mechanical or electronic amusement device within three hundred feet of the nearest boundary of the grounds of any school in the city. (Ord. 528 §1, 1990)

 

5.40.100 Free games.
No person shall keep or use in any public place any mechanical or electronic amusement device equipped with any device which records free games won and is equipped to allow cancellation of free games won without the actual playing of said free games by the player. (Ord. 528 §1, 1990)

 

5.40.110 Illegal machines.
No person shall keep or use in any public place any game or device commonly known as a “claw,” “scoop,” or “grab” machine or any automatic pay-off machine the operation, use, or play of which is controlled by placing therein any coin, plate, disk, plug, key, or other device, by the payment of fee. (Ord. 528 §1, 1990)

 

5.40.120 Prohibited in liquor store.
Notwithstanding any provisions of this chapter to the contrary, it is unlawful for any person to install, operate or maintain any mechanical or electronic amusement device in any public place wherein the principal business being conducted is the sale of alcoholic beverages for off-sale consumption. (Ord. 528 §1, 1990)

 

5.40.130 Denial, revocation or suspension.
Any application for a license may be denied and any license issued pursuant to this chapter may be revoked or suspended upon the recommendation of the chief of police to the city manager, for violation of any provisions of this chapter, or for any other reason specifically provided in this chapter. An applicant or permittee may appeal the decision of the police chief concerning the denial, revocation, or suspension of a license to the city manager pursuant to the provisions of this code. (Ord. 528 §1, 1990)

 

5.40.140 Violation—Penalty.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor; and, upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine, by imprisonment in the county jail, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 528 §1, 1990)

Chapter 5.44 PAWNBROKERS AND SECONDHAND DEALERS
5.44.010 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:

Pawnbroker. As used in this title, “pawnbroker” means and includes any person engaged in the business of receiving goods in pledge as security for a loan.

“Secondhand dealer” shall have the meaning ascribed to it by Business and Professions Code Section 21626.

“Tangible personal property” shall have the meaning ascribed to it by Business and Professions Code Section 21627. (Ord. 586 §1, 1996)

 

5.44.020 Application.
A.    Prior to the granting of any license to engage in any business defined in Business and Professions Code Section 21626, the applicant shall file with the chief of police a written, completed and signed application setting forth all of the information required by the State of California and such other information as the chief of police may reasonably require to enforce this chapter.

B.     Every application for a license shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee in the sum of seventy-five dollars.

C.     This application fee shall be in addition to any other business license fee or permit fee imposed by the Jackson Municipal Code.

D.    Renewal of a license is required yearly and must be accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee of twenty-five dollars. A renewal application fee is in addition to any other business license fee imposed by the Jackson Municipal Code. (Ord. 586 §1, 1996)

 

5.44.030 Location of business.
A.    It is unlawful for a person to conduct or operate a business such as that mentioned in this chapter except in the location specified in the permit. A business for which a permit must be obtained and maintained pursuant to this title may only be established and conducted at a location for which such use is authorized under the comprehensive zoning ordinance of the city.

B.     Nothing in this title is intended to allow an applicant to operate a business for which a permit is required under this title in a location, building or structure that does not comply with the requirements of the zoning ordinance, building code, or other local, state or federal regulations or laws. (Ord. 586 §1, 1996)

 

5.44.040 Fingerprinting and investigation of applicant and employees.
A.    In addition to the information required by Section 5.44.020, the applicant and any proposed employees at the time of filing his or her application shall be fingerprinted by and his or her record filed in the police department. Upon the receipt of the application, the chief of police shall cause an investigation to be made of the criminal record, if any, and business practices of the applicant and any proposed employees. In the event the applicant or any proposed employee fails such background investigation a license shall be denied by the chief of police, subject to appeal as set forth in Section 5.44.120.

B.     The duties and responsibilities imposed by this title upon the chief of police may be assigned or delegated by the chief to such employees or representatives of the police department as the chief deems necessary and appropriate. (Ord. 586 §1, 1996)

 

5.44.050 Record of pawned, etc., articles to be kept in bound book.
Every secondhand dealer shall keep or cause to be kept at the place of business a well-bound book containing the secondhand dealer’s copy of all completed forms upon which daily reports of transactions involving tangible personal property have been made pursuant to Business and Professions Code Section 21628 and Financial Code Section 21208. (Ord. 586 §1, 1996)

 

5.44.060 Numbering and tagging of articles.
The reporting forms required to be bound by Section 5.44.050 shall be numbered, and a tag corresponding to the number must be firmly attached to all tangible personal property taken into possession. (Ord. 586 §1, 1996)

 

5.44.070 Disposition of pawned articles; holding period.
A.    All tangible personal property shall, during the thirty-day holding period required by the Business and Professions Code Section 21636, be maintained intact in a particular location in the place of business designated for that purpose.

B.     A federal licensed firearms dealer engaged as a pawnbroker or secondhand dealer is exempt from holding a firearm for the period of time stated in this section whenever the firearm is received for shipment to another person, as defined in Public Law 90-618; provided, that an accurate description of the firearm, the name and address of the person delivering the firearm to the pawnbroker or secondhand dealer, and the name and address of the person to whom the firearm is to be shipped is furnished to the police department five days prior to initiating shipment of the firearm. (Ord. 586 §1, 1996)

5.44.080 Investigation by police, etc.; articles not to be concealed.
All pawned articles and the records pertaining thereto shall, upon demand, be exhibited to any sheriff, police officer, constable or other peace officer, and shall not in any manner be concealed. (Ord. 586 §1, 1996)

 

5.44.090 Dealing with intoxicated persons and minors.
A.    No secondhand dealer or any agent or employee thereof shall receive in pawn, purchase, exchange, or otherwise take into possession any tangible personal property from any person who shall appear to be or who is known to be intoxicated, or from any minor under the age of eighteen years.

B.     Subject to the provisions of Penal Code Section 501(a) and Financial Code Section 21207, this prohibition shall not apply to a minor where the minor dealing with the secondhand dealer presents the written consent of his or her parent or guardian, duly signed, authorizing the particular transaction with the secondhand dealer. Such written consent shall be retained by the secondhand dealer dealing with such minor and shall be exhibited upon demand to any peace officer making inquiry. (Ord. 586 §1, 1996)

5.44.100 Checking of baggage prohibited.
No person doing business as a pawnbroker or secondhand dealer shall engage in, permit or allow any other person to engage in or permit the checking of baggage in the immediate premises occupied as the place of business of such pawnbroker or secondhand dealer. The term “immediate premises,” as used in this section, shall mean and include all rooms, hallways, closets, stairways or basements having the same street number or common entrance and exit with the licensed premises. (Ord. 586 §1, 1996)

 

5.44.110 Redemption of property sold without authorization.
A.    Whenever it shall appear by the oath of the person claiming to be the owner that certain of his or her property has been sold by another without any authority to any person conducting any business provided for in this chapter, it shall be the duty of the chief of police to make an investigation concerning the ownership of the property and to determine that no collusion exists between the claimant and the persons who pawned or sold the article in dispute.

B.     In the event the police department finds that the person who makes the claim to the property described in the complaint is the lawful owner of such property and entitled to its possession, they shall notify the person of this finding and it shall be the duty of such person to return to the owner, without charge or expense of any kind, any property received from a person not authorized to sell the property. Failure to return such property as ordered will be sufficient grounds upon which to cancel the license and revoke the permit to do business.

C.     Before any license shall be canceled for the failure to return property claimed by a third person, written charges shall be preferred against the holder of the license and the matter shall be heard and determined by the city council, at which hearing all parties interested may appear and present testimony in support of their respective contentions. (Ord. 586 §1, 1996)

 

5.44.120 Provisions for forfeiture of license.
A.    The license of any pawnbroker or secondhand dealer shall be subject to forfeiture as provided in Business and Professions Code Section 21642. Such revocation shall become effective upon service of written notification by the chief of police that the license for such pawnbroker or secondhand dealer has been forfeited.

B.     Any person aggrieved by such revocation may appeal the matter. Any such appeal shall be before a qualified neutral hearing officer appointed by the city manager under rules of procedure established by the hearing officer. The decision of the hearing officer on any such appeal shall be final. (Ord. 586 §1, 1996)

 

5.44.130 Violation and penalty.
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of an infraction. (Ord. 586 §1, 1996)

Chapter 5.50 FILMING RULES AND REGULATIONS
5.50.010 Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms are defined:

“Charitable films” means commercials, motion pictures, television, video tapes, or still photography produced by a nonprofit organization, which qualifies under Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code as a charitable organization. No person, directly or indirectly, shall receive a profit from the marketing and production of the film or from showing the films, tapes or photos.

“Motion picture, television, still photography” means and includes all activity attendant to staging or shooting commercial motion pictures, television shows or programs, videos, and commercials.

“News media” means the filming or video taping for the purpose of television news broadcast by reporters, photographers or camera personnel. (Ord. 591 §1, 1996)

 

5.50.020 Permits and exemptions.
A.    Permit Required. No person shall use any public or private property, facility or residence for the purpose of taking commercial motion pictures, television pictures or commercial still photography without first applying for and receiving a permit from the officer designated by the city.

B.     Exemptions.

1.     News Media. This provisions of the chapter shall not apply to or affect reporter photographers or cameramen in the employ of a newspaper, news service, or similar entity engaged in on the spot broadcasting of news events concerning those persons, scenes or occurrences which are in the news and of general public interest;

2.     The filming or video taping of motion pictures solely for private/family use;

3.     Charitable Films. Projects which qualify under Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code;

4.     If the crew does not exceed five persons and there is no extensive use of props, equipment, cast or other participants. The following guidelines apply to this exemption:

a.     Pedestrian and vehicular traffic can not be altered. The company must work with the conditions that exist. Intermittent traffic control is not permitted under this exemption.

b.     If the company is covering a parade, demonstration or other special event, the exemption merely allows them to operate on the same basis as a citizen with a camera. The company must obtain all permission that may be required.

c.     Camera tripods may be used if they do not interfere with pedestrian traffic and do not block doors, passage ways, etc.

d.     This exemption does not allow the use of a cast in the normal sense of the word in the industry. Host(s) moderator(s) or performer(s) may interact with people. An additional person may be used and not be considered part of the five person crew. The key element is that it must not interfere with normal street activities.

e.     No special parking provisions can be included with this exception.

f.      Stunt work is not allowed under this exemption.

g.     Special effects are not allowed under this exemption.

h.     City of Jackson property, other than sidewalks and streets, can be used only with permission of the controlling authority. Park directors, for example, must agree to the activity.

i.      Private property requires approval by the owner. (Ord. 591 §1, 1996)

 

5.50.030 Rules and regulations.
A.    Change of Date. Upon request of the applicant, the issuing authority shall have the power, upon showing good cause, to change the date for which the permit has been issued, provided established limitations are complied with in respect to time and location.

B.     Rules. The designated city officer is authorized and directed to promulgate rules and regulations, subject to approval by resolution of the council, governing the form, time, and location of any filming activity set forth within the city. He/she shall also provide for the issuance of permits.

The rules and regulations shall be based upon the following criteria:

1.     The health and safety of all persons;

2.     Avoidance of undue disruption of all persons within the affected areas;

3.     The safety of property within the city; and

4.     Traffic congestion at particular locations within the city.

C.     Notification to Affected Property Owners. All business and property owners will be notified in writing, in person, or by public notice of any activity that would impact their property, business or person (i.e. road closures-public notice, private property activity: written permission from the property owner). (Ord. 591 §1, 1996)

 

5.50.040 Applicants and issuance.
A.    Issuing Authority. The issuing authority shall be the city designee.

B.     Applications. The following information shall be included in the application:

1.     The applicant’s name, address and telephone number of place of business;

2.     A general statement of the character or nature of the proposed filming activity;

3.     The inclusive hours and dates such activity will transpire;

4.     The specific location of each activity scheduled;

5.     The type of activity scheduled for that day and time;

6.     The exact number of personnel to be involved;

7.     Use of any animal or pyrotechnics; and

8.     The exact amount and type of vehicles and equipment to be involved.

C.     Reimbursement for Personnel. The production company shall reimburse the city for any personnel provided to the company (i.e., police, fire, traffic control, medical personnel) for the purpose of assisting the production. Any cost shall be negotiated, and approved of, prior to shoot date. A fee for issuance of the permit shall be set by resolution consistent with that set by the board of supervisors. (Ord. 591 §1, 1996)

 

5.50.050 Liability provisions.
A.    Liability Insurance. Before a permit is issued, a certificate of insurance will be required in an amount no less than one million dollars naming the City of Jackson as co-insured for protection against claims of third persons for personal injuries, wrongful deaths, and property damage. The city officers and employees shall be named as additional insureds. The certificate shall not be subject to cancellation or modification until after thirty days written notice to the city. A copy of the certificate will remain on file.

B.     Worker’s Compensation Insurance. An applicant shall conform to all applicable federal and state requirements for worker’s compensation insurance for all persons operating under a permit.

C.     Hold Harmless Agreement. An applicant shall execute a hold harmless agreement as provided by the city and incorporated within the permit issued under this chapter.

D.    Faithful Performance Bond. To ensure cleanup and restoration of the site, an applicant may be required to post a refundable faithful performance bond (amount to be determined) at the time application is submitted. Upon completion of filming and a satisfactory inspection of the site by city designee, the bond may be returned to the applicant. (Ord. 591 §1, 1996)

 

5.50.060 Violation.
If the applicant violates any provision of this chapter or a permit issued pursuant thereto, the city may cancel the permit. Violation of the terms and conditions of the film permit is considered an infraction. (Ord. 591 §1, 1996)

 

5.50.070 Revocation.
In instances where the general public’s health and safety is endangered, the city may revoke any permit immediately. All other revocations will be preceded by fourteen days written notice. (Ord. 591 §1, 1996)

Chapter 5.60 MOBILE HOME RENT PROTECTION
Note
*       Prior ordinance history: Ord. No. 563.

 

5.60.010 Findings and declaration of intent.
A.    There is presently within the city an extreme shortage of developed spaces for the placement of mobile homes and because of this shortage, the vacancy rate for such spaces is nearly zero, if not nonexistent, among most parks. With the widespread shortage of available spaces, rental increases within the last several years have been rapidly rising within a select number of parks.

B.     After studying the city’s mobile home rental situation thoroughly and then considering what type of mobile home rent control ordinance is needed in the city, this city council finds and declares it necessary, in the public interest, to facilitate and encourage fair bargaining between mobile home owners and park owners in order to achieve a mutually satisfactory agreement regarding space rental rates in mobile home parks.

C.     The intent of the city council in enacting the ordinance codified in this chapter is to curb excessive and unreasonable rent increases on mobile home owners, to prevent an exploitation of the current widespread shortage of mobile home spaces within the city, to counteract the ill effects of rapidly rising and exorbitant rents exploiting the housing shortage, to permit mobile home park owners to receive a just and fair return, and to establish a process for resolution of rental disputes between park owners and homeowners. (Ord. 662, 2009; Ord. 598, 1997)

 

5.60.020 Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall be defined as follows:

“Capital improvements” means the installation of new improvements and facilities and/or replacement or reconstruction of existing improvements and facilities which consist of more than ordinary maintenance and/or repairs.

“Homeowner” shall have the meaning set forth in California Civil Code Section 798.9, as it may be amended in the future.

“Increase increment” means any rental increase approved either automatically, through negotiation between park owners and home owners, or by the arbitrator.

“Mobile home” shall have the meaning set forth in California Civil Code Section 798.3, as it may be amended in the future.

“Mobile home park” shall have the meaning set forth in California Civil Code Section 798.4, as it may be amended in the future.

“New Construction” shall have the meaning set forth in California Civil Code Section 798.7, as it may be amended in the future.

“Park owner” shall have the same meaning as the term “Management” as defined by California Civil Code Section 798.2, as it may be amended in the future.

“Rehabilitation work” means any renovation or repair work completed on or in a mobile home park which was performed in order to comply with the direct order of a public agency, or to repair damage resulting from fire, earthquake or other casualty.

“Rent” means the maximum monthly consideration which may be charged for the use or occupancy of a mobile home space, excluding separate fees, assessments, or charges permitted to be imposed pursuant to California Civil Code Section 798.49 and utilities separately billed in accordance with California Civil Code Section 798.41.

“Rental Agreement” shall have the meaning set forth in California Civil Code Section 798.8, as it may be amended in the future

“Rent increase” means any approved increase in rent, including, but not limited to, lease offers and lease renewal offers.

“Resident” shall have the meaning set forth in California Civil Code Section 798.11, as it may be amended in the future.

“Tenancy” shall have the meaning set forth in California Civil Code Section 798.12, as it may be amended in the future. (Ord. 662, 2009; Ord. 598, 1997)

 

5.60.040 Base rent and rent increase.
A.    Except as hereinafter provided, an owner shall not demand, accept or retain rent for a mobile home space exceeding the rent authorized by this chapter. Any rent increase approved for any mobile home park pursuant to this chapter for any or all levels in the mobile home park shall be effective on the date of approval.

B.     Base rents shall be those in effect as of August 25, 1997. (Ord. 662, 2009; Ord. 598, 1997)

 

5.60.045 Exemptions.
The following exemptions from this chapter shall apply:

A.    New construction shall be exempt from application of this chapter in accordance with California Civil Code Section 798.45.

B.     Except in any of the circumstances set forth in California Civil Code Section 798.21(f), this chapter shall not apply to a mobile home space within a mobile home park which is not the principal residence of the homeowner, as long as the homeowner has not rented the mobile home to another party. A mobile home shall be deemed to be the principal residence of the homeowner, unless a review of state or county records demonstrates that the homeowner is receiving a homeowner’s exemption for another property or mobile home in this state, or unless a review of public records reasonably demonstrates that the principal residence of the homeowner is out of state.

C.     Agreements in excess of twelve months involving the actual and personal residence of the homeowner are exempt from this chapter in accordance with California Civil Code Section 798.17. The terms of such a rental agreement prevail over conflicting provisions of this chapter only during the term of the rental agreement or one or more uninterrupted, continuous extensions thereof. If the rental agreement is not extended and no new rental agreement in excess of twelve months’ duration is entered into, the last rental rate charged for the space under the rental agreement is the base rent for that space for purposes of this chapter. (Ord. 662, 2009; Ord. 598, 1997)

 

5.60.050 Mobile home rent limitations.
A.    Except as herein provided, a park owner shall not demand, accept or retain rent exceeding the rent established under the provisions of this chapter.

B.     Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, rent may be increased no more than once a year. Any proposed rent increase within a twelve-month period which exceeds the maximum permitted under Section 5.60.055 shall be subject to the negotiation process under the provisions of Section 5.60.060 of this chapter. When agreement cannot be reached between park owners and homeowners by negotiations, any proposed increase exceeding the maximum permitted shall be subject to formal review hearing under the provisions of Section 5.60.060 and 5.60.065.

C.     No rent which is in excess of an amount approved may be collected by the park owner until such time as the increase is approved under the provisions of Section 5.60.055 or 5.60.060 of this chapter.

D.    A sale or lease or change in occupancy shall not cause or initiate an increase in the rent of any mobile home space. (Ord. 662, 2009; Ord. 598, 1997)

 

5.60.055 Permitted rent increases.
The permitted annual rent increase rent shall be calculated by the city, which shall notify each park owner of the amount of the permitted annual rent increase once a year. For purposes of this chapter, CPI shall mean the San Francisco/Oakland/San Jose All Urban Consumers Index. The permitted annual rent increase shall be calculated as follows:

A.    The rent shall be increased at a rate equal to one hundred percent of the CPI up to five percent and seventy-five percent of the CPI in excess of five percent calculated as follows:

1.     The change in rent shall be calculated by dividing the ending CPI index by the beginning CPI index.

2.     If the resulting quotient is equal to or less than 1.05, then it shall be multiplied by the rent. The resulting product shall be the new rent.

3.     If the resulting quotient is greater than 1.05, then the difference between the resulting product and 1.05 shall be multiplied by seventy-five percent. The resulting product shall be multiplied by the rent and that product shall be added to the sum derived from subdivision 2 of this subsection.

4.     The beginning CPI index shall be the index for the month used as the ending index for the last CPI adjustment.

5.     The ending CPI index shall be the index for the month twelve months after the beginning index.

B.     It is the intention of this section to allow for automatic increases in rent based on changes in the cost of living as measured by the CPI. The limitations on such increases are intended to minimize the immediate impact drastic changes in the CPI might have on residents. The limitations are not intended to prevent ultimate adjustments to allow park owners to receive a fair return on their investment in their property, as further addressed in Section 5.60.060 of this chapter. (Ord. 662, 2009; Ord. 598, 1997)

 

5.60.060 Application for rent adjustment by park owner or homeowner.
A.    In addition to the permitted annual rent increases under Section 5.60.055, a park owner or homeowner may file with the city clerk an application for a rent adjustment. The application shall be submitted in writing and shall state the amount of the adjustment for each space affected and the reasons for the adjustment. Only one rent adjustment may be approved for any mobile home park in any year, whether initiated by application of the park owner or homeowner.

1.     An application shall be accompanied by the payment of a fee as may be established (not to exceed the cost of processing the application) from time to time by resolution duly adopted by the city council.

2.     An application filed by a park owner shall be accompanied by a statement that the homeowner for each space affected has been served either personally or by mail with a notice describing the application and the change in rent or services.

3.     An application filed by a homeowner shall be accompanied by: (i) a statement stating that the park owner has been either personally or by mail served with the application and (ii) a statement designating not more than three persons to act as representatives for the spaces affected and containing the signatures, names and addresses of homeowners representing no less than fifty-one percent of the spaces affected by the application and supporting the application.

4.     A statement shall accompany the application and shall notify the receiving party that he or she has fourteen days to file an objection and if one is not filed within the time allowed, then the application will be automatically granted.

B.     An objection to the application may be filed with the city clerk within fourteen days after the notice of application has been served. The objection shall identify the portions of the application objected to and shall state the grounds of the objection.

1.     A copy of an objection filed by a park owner shall be mailed to each of the designated homeowner representatives.

2.     A copy of an objection filed by a homeowner shall be mailed to the park owner. The homeowner’s objection shall designate not more than three persons to act as representatives for the objecting homeowners. The objection must be accompanied by a statement containing the signatures, names and addresses of homeowners representing no less than fifty-one percent of the spaces affected by the park owner’s application and verifying that they object to the application.

C.     If no objection is filed to an application within the time allowed, or if less than fifty-one percent of the homeowners support an objection to an application, the application will be automatically granted.

D.    If an objection is filed within the time provided, then the park owner and the homeowner representatives shall meet and confer to negotiate in good faith an agreement regarding the application. Either party may request a mediator of their choice to assist in the negotiations, but this is not required. If an agreement is reached within twenty-one days, then the homeowner representatives shall notify all homeowners affected by the agreement. The homeowners shall have seven days to approve or disapprove the agreement. If homeowners representing no less than fifty-one percent of the spaces affected fail to disapprove of the agreement, then the agreement shall be binding on the park owner and all homeowners affected. The city clerk shall be notified that an agreement has been reached. The statements made in negotiations and any agreement reached but not approved shall be admissible in any subsequent hearings regarding the application.

E.     If the park owner and the homeowner representatives fail to reach an agreement within the time provided, or if a majority of the homeowners disapprove of an agreement reached, then the applicant shall within seven days of such determination notify the city manager that an agreement has not been reached. The city shall have on retainer as an independent consultant hearing officer(s) to provide arbitration services. Upon notification to the city manager that an agreement has not been reached, the city manager shall notify its hearing officer of the need for arbitration services. The consultant shall, through its usual means, assign a hearing officer to arbitrate the matter. Assignment of the hearing officer shall be completed no later than twenty-one days after filing of the notice that an agreement has not been reached. (Ord. 662, 2009; Ord. 598, 1997)

 

5.60.065 Hearing procedures.
A.    After the city manager has been notified that an agreement has not been reached and its consultant has assigned a hearing officer in accordance with Section 5.60.060(E), the hearing officer shall set a hearing on the application complying with the requirements of this section no less than ten days and no more than twenty-one days after his or her appointment. The hearing officer shall notify the park owners and homeowner representatives, in writing, of the time, place and date set for the hearing. No hearing or any part thereof may be continued beyond thirty days after the initial hearing date, without the applicant’s written consent.

B.     All review hearings conducted by the hearing officer shall be conducted in accordance with the Ralph M. Brown Act at Section 54950 et seq. of the California Government Code.

C.     All interested parties to a hearing may have assistance from an attorney or such other person as may be designated by the parties in presenting evidence or in setting forth by argument their position. All witnesses shall be sworn in and all testimony shall be under penalty of perjury.

D.    In the event that either the park owner or the homeowner(s) should fail to appear at the hearing at the specified time and place after receipt of written notice thereof, the hearing officer may hear and review such evidence as may be presented and make such decisions as if all parties had been present.

E.     After the hearing, the hearing officer may:

1.     Permit the requested adjustment to become effective, in whole or in part; or

2.     Deny the requested adjustment; or

3.     Permit or deny, in whole or in part, requested reductions of, or charges for, facilities or services.

F.     The hearing officer’s decision shall be based on the applicable criteria set forth in Section 5.60.068 below. The hearing officer’s decision shall contain express findings and shall be made in writing no later than ten days after the conclusion of the hearing. The hearing officer’s decision shall be based on the preponderance of the evidence submitted at the hearing. All parties to the hearing shall be advised by mail of the hearing officer’s decision and findings.

G.    Any decision of the hearing officer shall be final unless, within ten days after mailing of the decision and findings, the owner or any affected homeowner appeals the decision to a court of competent jurisdiction.

H.    The hearing officer’s actual charges shall be paid by the city and charged back to the original applicant. (Ord. 662, 2009; Ord. 598, 1997)

 

5.60.068 Basis for rent adjustment.
A.    Substantive Grounds for Rent Adjustment Applied for by Park Owner. A park owner’s application for a rent adjustment shall be approved when it is determined necessary in order to provide a just and reasonable return on a park owner’s investment. Such a determination is appropriate when the adjustment is necessary to maintain the park owner’s net operating income at the same level as the base year in accordance with the following:

1.     Net operating income (NOI).

a.     Net operating income equals gross income minus operating expenses.

b.     Gross income equals the following:

i.      Gross rents, computed as gross rental income at one hundred percent occupancy; plus

ii.     Interest from security and cleaning deposits (except to the extent that such interest is payable to the homeowners/residents); plus

iii.    Income from services, garage and parking fees; plus

iv.    All other income or consideration received or receivable for or in connection with the use or occupancy of rental spaces and housing services; minus

v.     Uncollected rents due to vacancy and bad debts to the extent the same are beyond the landlord’s control. Uncollected rents in excess of three percent of gross rents shall be presumed to be unreasonable unless established otherwise.

c.     Operating Expenses—Inclusions.

i.      Operating expenses shall include the following: license fees, real property taxes, utility costs, insurance, maintenance, and management expenses (contracted or owner performed), including necessary and reasonable advertising, accounting, other managerial expenses, normal repair and maintenance expenses, allowable legal expenses, and the amortized cost of capital improvements. Unless established otherwise, management expenses are presumed to be six percent of gross income.

ii.     Owner-performed labor shall be counted at reasonable rates as established by city council regulation.

iii.    Building improvements, major repairs, replacement and maintenance subject to the condition that said expenses shall be amortized in accordance with city council regulations, except to the extent such costs are compensated by insurance proceeds.

d.     Excluded from Operating Expenses.

i.      Operating expenses shall not include: avoidable and unnecessary expense increases since the base year, mortgage interest and principal payments, fees, penalties and interest awarded for violation of this or any other law, or legal fees except as provided in this subsection and depreciation of the property.

ii.     Allowable legal expense shall include attorney’s fees and costs only to the extent permitted by law incurred in connection with successful good faith attempts to recover rents owing and successful good faith unlawful detainer actions not in violation of applicable law, to the extent the same are not recovered from homeowners/residents. attorney’s fees and costs incurred in proceedings before the hearing officer, or in connection with civil actions against the hearing officer, are not allowed as operating expenses, unless required by law.

e.     Base year for the purpose of this Section 5.60.068 shall be 1995.

f.      Presumption of Fair Base Year Net Operating Income. Except as provided in paragraph g of this subdivision, it shall be presumed that the net operating income produced by the property during the base year provided a fair return (fair net operating income). Landlords shall be entitled to earn a just and reasonable return and to maintain and increase their base year net operating income in accordance with paragraph h of this subdivision.

g.     Rebutting the Presumption. It may be determined that the base year net operating income yielded other than a fair return, in which case, the base year net operating income may be adjusted accordingly. In order to make such a determination, the hearing officer must make at least one of the following findings:

h.     The landlord’s operating and maintenance expenses in the base year were unusually high or low in comparison to other years. In such instances, adjustments may be made in calculating such expenses so that the base year operating expenses reflect average expenses for the property over a reasonable period of time. In considering whether the base year net operating income yielded more or less than a fair net operating income, the hearing officer shall consider the following factors:

(A)   The landlord made substantial capital improvements during the base year, which were not reflected in the base year rent levels;

(B)   Substantial repairs were made due to damage caused by uninsured disaster or vandalism;

(C)   Maintenance and repair were below accepted standards so as to cause significant deterioration of housing services;

(D)   Other expenses were unreasonably high or low notwithstanding prudent business practice.

The rent on the base date was disproportionately high or low due to the fact that it was not established in an arms-length transaction or other peculiar circumstances.

i.      Fair Net Operating Income. Approval by the hearing officer of a rent increase in the amount of sixty percent of the total percentage increase in the CPI over the base year shall be presumed to create a fair Net Operating Income unless this presumption is rebutted by a preponderance of the evidence presented at the hearing on the park owner’s application for a rent increase. (For example, if the CPI has increased by ten percent since the base year, the landlord shall be entitled to a net operating income which is six percent above the base year level.) A rent increase granted pursuant to this section shall not exceed the increase requested in the application. For the purposes of this Section 5.60.068, the current CPI shall be the CPI last reported as of the date of the application.

B.     Substantive Grounds for Rent Adjustment Applied for by Homeowner. A homeowner’s application for an adjustment of the rent shall be approved when it is determined that a reduction in rent will not cause the park owner to be unable to receive a just and reasonable return on its investment. Such a determination is appropriate when the adjustment may be made without reducing the park owner’s Net Operating Income from the base year level. This may occur in the event that the park owner’s operating expenses have been reduced, due to a decrease in costs or a reduction of services provided within the mobile home park. However, in no case shall an adjustment of the rent be approved such that the rent is lower than the base rent plus the current permissive rent increase pursuant to Section 5.60.055. Therefore, in most circumstances, a home owner’s application for adjustment to reduce rent may be approved only where a park owner’s application for a rent increase above the base rent and permissive rent increase was approved in a prior year. (Ord. 662, 2009; Ord. 598, 1997)

 

5.60.090 Refusal of homeowner to pay illegal rent.
A homeowner may refuse to pay any rent in excess of the rent approved under this chapter. The fact that such unpaid rent is in excess of the rent approved shall be a defense in any action brought to recover possession of a mobile home space for nonpayment or collection of rent. (Ord. 662, 2009; Ord. 598, 1997)

 

5.60.100 Remedies.
Any person who demands, accepts or retains any payment of rent in violation of the provisions of this chapter, shall be liable in civil action to the person from whom such payment is demanded, accepted or retained, for damages up to an amount equal to three times the payment(s) demanded, accepted or retained, together with reasonable attorney’s fees and costs, as determined by the court. (Ord. 662, 2009; Ord. 598, 1997)

 

5.60.110 Repealer.
The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be in effect until June 30, 2030. (Ord. 716, §2, 2020; Ord. 662, 2009; Ord. 598, 1997)

 

5.60.120 Preemption.
This chapter shall be subject to the Mobilehome Residency Law and all state laws pertaining to rent control, and any inconsistency shall be resolved against this chapter. (Ord. 662, 2009; Ord. 598, 1997)

Title 6 RESERVED

Title 7 ANIMALS
Chapter 7.04 ANIMALS

Chapter 7.04 ANIMALS
7.04.010 County code provisions adopted.
The city hereby adopts by reference Chapter 8.24 of Title 8 of the Amador County Code, as it may be amended from time to time, relating to animals, except for the definition of animal control officer, which shall be as follows:

“Animal control officer” means the person designated by the County or City as the person in charge of animal control in the County or City and his or her duly authorized representatives.

Insofar as Chapter 8.24 of Title 8 of the Amador County Code is inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter, this chapter shall govern. (Ord. 711 §1, 2019; Ord. 614 §1, 2000; Ord. 480 §2, 1983)

 

7.04.020 Dogs on leashes—Dog parks.
No owner of a dog, or person having charge of a stray dog, shall permit such dog to be within the limits of the city other than on private property with the consent of the property owner, unless the dog is restrained by a leash not exceeding eight feet in length; provided, however, that this section shall not apply: (1) if the dog is assisting a peace officer in law enforcement duties; (2) if the dog is participating in a dog training class, obedience class, exhibition, or competition that is being conducted at that location with the permission of the city; or (3) the dog is in a park designated as an “off-leash dog park” by the city council. No owner of a dog, or person having charge of a stray dog, shall leave such dog unattended on public property for longer than thirty minutes at a time. Any unattended dog must be restrained by a leash fastened securely to a stationary object fixed to the ground. (Ord. 711 §1, 2019; Ord. 617 §1, 2001)

 

7.04.030 Dogs prohibited on Aime Field in Detert Park.
It is unlawful for any person owning or having the charge of any dog, to cause, permit or allow such dogs, whether licensed or unlicensed, and whether leashed or unleashed, to be guided, stray, wander or otherwise be loose or at large on Aime Field, the baseball field at Detert Park. (Ord. 711 §1, 2019;Ord. 973, 2012)

 

7.04.040 Regulation of vicious dogs.
A.    “Vicious dog” as used in this chapter shall mean:

1.     Any dog which because of its training, behavior, physical nature or vicious propensity is capable of inflicting serious physical harm or death to human beings and which would constitute a danger to human life or property if it were not kept in the manner required by this chapter.

2.     Any dog which has previously attacked or bitten a human being, to the extent that medical treatment was required; unless such attack has been deemed to be excusable by the animal control officer, as defined in Section 7.04.010 of this chapter.

3.     Any dog which has behaved in such a manner that the owner or keeper thereof knows or should reasonably know that the dog is possessed of tendencies to attack or bite human beings.

4.     Any dog which has been trained as an attack dog, or for protection, except such dogs which are employed by any law enforcement agency.

B.     The keeping of vicious dogs shall be subject to the following conditions:

1.     Leash and Muzzle. No person shall permit a vicious dog to go outside its kennel or rear yard pen unless such dog is securely leashed with a leash no longer than four feet in length. No person shall permit a vicious dog to be kept on a chain, rope or other type of leash outside its kennel, pen or rear yard unless a person is in physical control of the leash. Such dogs may not be leashed to an inanimate object, including, but not limited to, trees, posts, and buildings. In addition, such dog on a leash outside the animal’s kennel must be muzzled by a muzzling device sufficient to prevent such dog from biting persons or other animals.

2.     Confinement. All vicious dogs shall be securely confined indoors or in a securely enclosed and locked pen, kennel or yard, except when leashed and muzzled as above provided. Such pen, kennel or structure must have secure sides and a secure top attached to the sides. All such structures must have a secure bottom or floor attached to the sides of the structure or the sides must be embedded in the ground no less than two feet. In the case of a rear yard, the yard must be entirely enclosed and the fencing must be of sufficient height, and sufficiently anchored at the bottom, that the dog will not be capable of going over or under the fence or enclosure. All such structures or yards must be locked with a key or combination lock when such animals are within the structure or yard. All such structures must comply with all zoning and building regulations of the city and must be adequately ventilated and kept in a clean and sanitary condition.

3.     Confinement Indoors. No vicious dog may be kept on a porch, patio or in any part of a house or structure that would allow the dog to exit such building of its own volition.

4.     Signs. All owners, keepers or custodians of vicious dogs within the city shall, within ten days of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, display in a prominent place on their premises a sign easily readable by the public using the words “Beware of Dog.” In addition, a similar sign is required to be posted on the pen or kennel of such dog.

C.     The regulations set forth in this chapter shall be in addition to the requirements and regulation of animals pursuant to Chapter 8.24 of Title 8 of the Amador County Code, which has been adopted by reference by the city pursuant to Section 7.04.010 of this chapter. Insofar as chapter 8.24 of Title 8 of the Amador County Code is inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter, this chapter shall govern. (Ord. 711 §1, 2019)

Title 8 HEALTH AND SANITATION
Chapter 8.04 SOLID WASTE
Chapter 8.08 INOPERATIVE VEHICLES
Chapter 8.12 WEED ABATEMENT
Chapter 8.16 NUISANCES GENERALLY
Chapter 8.24 TOBACCO SALES RESTRICTIONS
Chapter 8.28 CAMPING WITHIN CITY LIMITS
Chapter 8.32 PROTECTION OF CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURE AND WILDFIRE RISK AREAS

Chapter 8.04 SOLID WASTE
Note
*       Prior ordinance history: Ord. Nos. 442, 406, 358, 288, 249 and 221.

 

8.04.010 Findings.
The city council finds and declares:

A.    The accumulation of solid waste within the city is unhealthy and unsanitary.

B.     A continuing program of consistent solid waste collection and disposal is necessary for the public health, safety and welfare, and the city council has the sole and exclusive control and enforcement authority for said program.

C.     The benefit derived by each residence and business establishment from routine solid waste collection requires only those contractors who have entered into a franchise agreement with the city shall be permitted to perform solid waste collection services within the city. At the expiration of the term of any franchise agreement (including any extended term, if so authorized in a franchise agreement), the city council shall authorize and undertake a competitive bidding process prior to awarding any exclusive franchise for any succeeding terms. (Ord. 560 §2, 1993; Ord. 479, 1983)

 

8.04.020 Definitions.
Sections 8.04.010 through 8.04.080 are known and may be cited as the “city solid waste ordinance.” The following words and phrases, when used in Sections 8.04.010 through 8.04.080, shall for the purposes of Sections 8.04.010 through 8.04.080, have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:

A.    “Collection” means the act of collecting solid waste at the place of waste generation by an approved collection agent and is distinguished from “removal.”

B.     “Collection vehicle or equipment” includes any vehicle or equipment used in the collection of residential refuse or commercial solid waste.

C.     “Composting” includes a controlled microbial degradation of organic wastes yielding a safe and nuisance free product.

D.    “Garbage” includes all kitchen and table food waste, and animal or vegetable waste that attends or results from the storage, preparation, cooking or handling of, foodstuffs.

E.     “Health officer” includes the health officer or other agent of the health department of county, and shall include duly authorized personnel of the state Department of Health Services in the enforcement of applicable state law, city ordinance, or state or county rule or regulation in aid thereof.

F.     “Litter” includes any post-consumer solid waste which is not deposited in:

1.     An authorized solid waste disposal site;

2.     Appropriate and serviced storage containers; or

3.     In other areas designated for disposal of solid wastes.

G.    “Nuisance” includes anything which is injurious to human health or is indecent or offensive to the senses and interferes with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property, and affects at the same time an entire community or neighborhood or any considerable number of persons, although the extent of annoyance or damage inflicted upon the individual may be unequal, and which occurs as a result of the storage, removal, transport, processing or disposal of solid waste.

H.    “Person” includes an individual, firm, association, copartnership, political subdivision, governmental agency, municipality, industry, public or private corporation or any other entity whatsoever.

I.      “Putrescibles” includes wastes that are capable of being decomposed by microorganisms with sufficient rapidity as to cause nuisances because of odors, gases or other offensive conditions, and include materials such as food wastes, offal and dead animals.

J.      “Recyclable material” means solid waste subject to recycling, such as newspapers, cleansed bottles, cleansed bimetal and aluminum cans and foil.

K.    “Recycling” means the process by which salvaged materials become useable products.

L.     “Refuse” includes garbage and rubbish.

M.    “Removal” means the act of taking solid wastes from the place of waste generation either by an approved collection agent or by a person in control of the premises.

N.    “Resources recovery” means the reclamation or salvage of wastes for reuse, conversion to energy or recycling.

O.    “Rubbish” includes nonputrescible solid wastes such as ashes, paper, cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, wood, glass, bedding, crockery, plastics, rubber byproducts or litter.

P.     “Scavenging” means the uncontrolled or unauthorized removal of solid waste materials.

Q.    “Solid waste contractor” means a solid waste hauler franchised by contract with the city council to provide for the collection and disposal of all solid waste and refuse for all residence and business establishments who choose not to perform this duty for themselves.

R.     “Solid waste or wastes” includes all putrescible and nonputrescible solid and semisolid wastes, such as refuse, garbage, rubbish, paper, ashes, industrial wastes, demolition and construction wastes, abandoned vehicles and parts thereof, discarded home and industrial appliances, manure, vegetable or animal solid and semisolid wastes and other discarded solid and semisolid wastes, and also includes liquid wastes disposed of in conjunction with solid waste disposal sites but excludes:

1.     Raw sewage collected and treated in a municipal or regional sewerage system; or

2.     Materials or substances having commercial value which have been salvaged for refuse, recycling or resale.

S.     “Vector” includes any insect or other arthropod, rodent or other animal capable of transmitting the causative agents of human disease, or disrupting the normal enjoyment of life by adversely affecting the public health and wellbeing. (Ord. 479, 1983)

 

8.04.030 Franchise—Solid waste contractor.
A.    The city council may provide for solid waste collection and disposal by the granting of an exclusive or nonexclusive franchise for such purpose, subject to the terms and conditions which achieve the following objectives and purposes:

1.     To provide the most consistent and responsible level of customer service without interruption or cause of action for customer complaints;

2.     To offer and maintain the lowest and most cost-effective rates for minimum customer service.

B.     Only those contractors who have entered into a franchise agreement with the city shall be permitted to perform solid waste collection services within the city. At the expiration of the term of any franchise agreement (including any extended term, if so authorized in a franchise agreement), the city council shall authorize and undertake a competitive bidding process prior to awarding any exclusive franchise for any succeeding terms. (Ord. 560 §2, 1993; Ord. 479, 1983)

 

8.04.040 Compliance.
It is unlawful for any person, enterprise or solid waste contractor to deposit, store, collect or dispose of or fail to collect or dispose of solid waste within the city except as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 479, 1983)

 

8.04.050 Storage of waste—Containers.
A.    The owner, operator and/or occupant of any premises, business establishment, industry or other property, vacant or occupied, shall be responsible for the safe and sanitary storage of all solid waste accumulated on the property.

B.     In all cases in which garbage and rubbish are combined, the standards for garbage shall prevail. The property owner or occupant shall store solid waste on his or her premises or property and shall require it to be stored or handled in such a manner so as not to promote the propagation, harborage or attraction of vectors, or the creation of nuisances.

C.     The design of any new or expanded building or other facility shall provide for proper storage or handling which will accommodate the anticipated solid waste generation and which will allow for efficient and safe waste removal or collection. Such provision shall be a condition to the issuance of a building permit, and to the issuance of a use permit, when required, and determination of the adequacy by the city, unless otherwise exempted by planning officer.

D.    Where the solid waste contractor furnishes storage containers, he or she is responsible for maintaining the containers in good clean condition (ordinary wear and tear expected.) Contractor shall plan with the property owner and/or occupant as to placement of storage containers to minimize traffic, aesthetic and other problems both on the property and for the general public to the satisfaction of the city pursuant to this chapter. Dumpsters containing wet garbage shall be cleaned and kept free from putrescible residue after each dump, pursuant to Health and Safety Sections 17315 and 17341.

E.     Containers. Every property owner, tenant, lessee or occupant of any private dwelling house or premises, and every business or other person having refuse in the city, shall deposit all garbage and putrescible matter or mixed garbage and rubbish in containers which are nonabsorbent, watertight, vector-resistant, durable, easily cleanable and designed for safe handling and which are designed for the containment of refuse.

1.     Residences shall have metal or plastic containers not greater than thirty-two gallons in capacity with a filled weight not exceeding sixty pounds.

2.     Business establishments shall have metal or plastic containers of the type specified for residential use in a number, not to exceed six, or metal bins or roll-off containers (debris boxes) of a type approved by the city. The city may require that a bin, roll-off or other type of container be used (even though the number of cans which would otherwise be used is not over six), whenever necessary to prevent an unhealthy or unsightly condition.

F.     No person shall tamper with, modify, add to, remove from or deposit solid wastes in any container which is not provided for his or her use without the express permission of the containers owner. Violation of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor. (Ord. 479, 1983)

 

8.04.060 Schedule of waste removal.
A.    Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, all solid waste shall be collected and disposed of not less than once each week.

B.     Where a business establishment has a bin or roll-off container which, because of the amount and type of solid waste generated, does not require weekly service, the bin or roll-off container may be presented for collection on any reasonable periodic basis approved by the city, providing the same does not contain putrescible waste.

C.     All food establishments shall provide for solid waste collection not less than twice weekly.

D.    Where necessary to prevent an unsanitary or unsightly condition, the city may require that a resident or business establishment provide for solid waste collection more often than once per week.

E.     If any person or business does not use the solid waste contractor’s service, he or she must maintain his or her property and provide for removal and disposal in the same manner as though he or she subscribed to the service. (Ord. 479, 1983)

 

8.04.070 Transportation of waste.
A.    All equipment of the solid waste contractor used for collection and transportation of residential and commercial refuse shall be nonabsorbent, watertight, vector-resistant, easily cleanable and designed for safe handling. The equipment shall be maintained in excellent mechanical condition, supported by the submittal of quarterly vehicle inspection reports. The equipment shall also be cleaned in a frequency and in a manner determined by city to prevent the propagation or attraction of flies, rodents or other vectors and the creation of nuisances, and shall not be stored or parked on public streets.

B.     All equipment and vehicles used for the collection and transportation of refuse, whether owned and operated by the solid waste contractor or a private person providing his or her own service, shall be subject to and made available for city inspection at any time upon city request.

C.     Notwithstanding. other provisions in this chapter, all solid wastes which are subject to collection and transport by the solid waste contractor shall become the property of the city solely for purposes of beneficial use in possible resource recovery by the city, after such time as the contractor takes possession thereof. (Ord. 479, 1983)

8.04.080 Scavenging—Prohibition and enforcement.
A.    Scavenging. Scavenging as defined in Section 8.04.010 is prohibited on any premises, public or private.

B.     Rules and Regulations. Unless otherwise stipulated in this chapter, the health officer is authorized to make all necessary and reasonable rules and regulations covering refuse accumulation, collection, transportation and disposal, types of refuse containers and vehicles used for collection, for the operation and maintenance of sanitary methods of refuse disposal. All such rules and regulations shall be, consistent with the provisions of Sections 8.04.010 through 8.04.070 and all resolutions and policies of the city council.

C.     Violation—Penalty. A violation of provisions of Sections 8.04.010 through 8.04.080 constitutes a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof is punishable by imprisonment in the county jail not exceeding six months, or by fine not exceeding five hundred dollars or by both such imprisonment and fine.

D.    Enforcement. The city director is designated as the enforcement agency for provisions of Sections 8.04.010 through 8.04.070, and is authorized to provide for necessary inspections and enforce the provisions of this chapter.

E.     Abatement Proceedings—Option to Revoke Franchise. Violations of the provisions of this chapter constitute:

1.     A Public Nuisance. In the case of any person, business or the solid waste contractor allowing the accumulation, collection, transport or disposal of solid waste in violation of this chapter and/or in any manner which creates a condition inimical to the public health, safety and welfare a public nuisance is deemed to have occurred. The city director and/or the health officer shall immediately commence all appropriate actions for the abatement, removal and enjoinment of the nuisance and the conditions or activities creating it, and the city director shall deliver written notice of the nuisance with a request to immediately correct, together with a demand for payment of a penalty of three hundred dollars for each occurrence if the violator is the franchised waste hauler, or prosecution for misdemeanor, if the violator is a private individual. Upon the occurrences of three or more separate occurrences of a public nuisance by the waste hauler within a six-month period, the city council shall have the right to automatically revoke and terminate the franchise solid waste contract.

2.     Customer Complaint Procedure—Infraction and Penalty. Any customer or subscriber of the solid waste contractor’s service who is dissatisfied with or has a complaint regarding such service which may constitute a violation of the franchise contract or this chapter, shall bring his or her complaint to the immediate attention of the city director. The city director shall cause an investigation of the complaint, and may institute any reasonable sanctions he or she deems appropriate against the waste contractor upon finding an actual failure or violation. Such sanctions or fines shall not exceed the following:

a.     “Warning” to solid waste contractor, giving notice of infraction or violation, and demand to correct. Three warnings in six months shall result in the levy of a penalty of three hundred dollars for each violation thereafter.

b.     “Penalty” demanding payment of a fine of three hundred dollars for three or more warnings or a material violation which constitutes a public nuisance as defined in this section.

Appeal from any decision of the city director to the city council shall be available upon ten days written notice from the aggrieved party. Nothing in this chapter shall preclude the city, on its own initiative, from causing the investigation of any alleged or actual violation of either this chapter or the refuse collection contract, by the solid waste contractor and subsequently instituting these or any additional abatement proceedings.

3.     Material Breach. Upon the occurrence of any public nuisances or other violations which result in the imposition of three or more penalties against the solid waste contractor within one year or upon any material breach or default of the franchise contract by the contractor, the city director shall give the contractor written notice of such breach or default and the right of the city council to immediately terminate the contract and revoke the grant of the franchise privilege to the contractor within thirty days thereof. In such event, the city shall provide for the solid waste collection by any means available to it, including utilization of the defaulting contractor’s equipment and/or contracting with another solid waste hauler; and any and all costs incurred by the city in so doing shall be paid by the defaulting contractor. (Ord. 479, 1983)

Chapter 8.08 INOPERATIVE VEHICLES
8.08.010 Definitions.
As used in this chapter:

A.    “Highway” means a way or place of whatever nature, publicly maintained and open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. “Highway” includes “street.”

B.     “Owner of the land” means the owner of land on which the vehicle, or parts thereof, is located, as shown on the last equalized assessment roll.

C.     “Owner of the vehicle” means the last registered owner and legal owner of record.

D.    “Public property” does not include “highway.”

E.     “Vehicle” means a device by which any person or property may be propelled, moved or drawn upon a highway, except a device moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. (Ord. 313 §1, 1971; Ord. 293 §1(A—E), 1969)

 

8.08.020 Nuisance when.
In addition to and in accordance with the determination made and the authority granted by the State of California under Section 22660 of the Vehicle Code to remove abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles or parts thereof as public nuisances, the legislative body of the city makes the following findings and declarations:

The accumulation and storage of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative vehicles or parts thereof on private or public property not including highways is found to create a condition tending to reduce the value of private property, to promote blight and deterioration, to invite plundering, to create fire hazards, to constitute an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the health and safety of minors, to create a harborage for rodents and insects and to be injurious to the health, safety and general welfare. Therefore the presence of an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle or part thereof, on private or public property not including highways, except as expressly hereinafter permitted, constitutes a public nuisance which may be abated as such in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 293 §1, 1969)

 

8.08.030 Chapter exemptions.
A.    This chapter shall not apply to:

1.     A vehicle or part thereof which is completely enclosed within a building in a lawful manner where it is not visible from the street or other public or private property; or

2.     A vehicle or part thereof which is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed dismantler, licensed vehicle dealer, a junk dealer, or when such storage or parking is necessary to the operation of a lawfully conducted business or commercial enterprise.

B.     Nothing in this section shall authorize the maintenance of a public or private nuisance as defined under provisions of law other than Chapter 10 (commencing with Section 22650) of Division 11 of the Vehicle Code and this chapter. (Ord. 293 §2, 1969)

 

8.08.040 Chapter supplementary to other regulations.
This chapter is not the exclusive regulation of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles within the city. It supplements and is in addition to the other regulatory codes, statutes, and ordinances heretofore or hereafter enacted by the city, the state, or any other legal entity or agency having jurisdiction. (Ord. 293 §3, 1969)

 

8.08.050 Administration and enforcement.
Except as otherwise provided, herein, the provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced by the chief of police. In the enforcement of this chapter such officer and his or her deputies may enter upon private or public property to examine a vehicle or parts thereof, or obtain information as to the identity of a vehicle and to remove or cause the removal of a vehicle or parts thereof declared to be a nuisance pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 293 §4, 1969)

 

8.08.060 Removal by authorized personnel.
When the city council has contracted with or granted a franchise to any person or persons, such person or persons shall be authorized to enter upon private property or public property to remove or cause the removal of a vehicle or parts thereof declared to be a nuisance pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 293 §5, 1969)

 

8.08.070 Administrative cost determination.
The city council shall from time to time determine and fix an amount to be assessed as administrative costs (excluding the actual cost of removal of any vehicle or part thereof) under this chapter. (Ord. 293 §6, 1969)

 

8.08.080 Abatement—Authority.
Upon discovering the existence of an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative vehicle, or parts thereof, on private property or public property within the city, the chief of police has the authority to cause the abatement and removal thereof in accordance with the procedure prescribed herein. (Ord. 313 §2, 1971; Ord. 293 §7, 1969)

8.08.090 Abatement—Notice.
A ten-day notice of intention to abate and remove the vehicle, or parts thereof, as a public nuisance shall be mailed by registered mail to the owner of the land and to the owner of the vehicle, unless the vehicle is in such condition that identification numbers are not available to determine ownership.

The notices of intention shall be in substantially the following forms:

NOTICE OF INTENTION TO ABATE AND REMOVE AN ABANDONED, WRECKED, DISMANTLED, OR INOPERATIVE VEHICLE OR PARTS THEREOF AS A PUBLIC NUISANCE

(Name and address of owner of the land)

As owner shown on the last equalized assessment roll of the land located at (address), you are hereby notified that the undersigned pursuant to (section of ordinance or municipal code) has determined that there exists upon said land an (or parts of an) abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle registered to _________, license number _________, which constitutes a public nuisance pursuant to the provisions of (ordinance or municipal code chapter number).

You are hereby notified to abate said nuisance by the removal of said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) within 10 days from the date of mailing of this notice, and upon your failure to do so the same will be abated and removed by the (city or county) and the costs thereof, together with administrative costs, assessed to you as owner of the land on which said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) is located.

As owner of the land on which said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) is located, you are hereby notified that you may, within 10 days after the mailing of this notice of intention, request a public hearing and if such a request is not received by the (hearing body or officer) within such 10-day period, the (locally designated officer) shall have the authority to abate and remove said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) as a public nuisance and assess the costs as aforesaid without a public hearing. You may submit a sworn written statement within such 10-day period denying responsibility for the presence of said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) on said land, with your reasons for denial, and such statement shall be construed as a request for hearing at which your presence is not required. You may appear in person at any hearing requested by you or the owner of the vehicle or, in lieu thereof, may present a sworn written statement as aforesaid in time for consideration at such hearing.

Notice Mailed _____________   s/ ____________________________

                             (date)                   (locally designated officer)

 

NOTICE OF INTENTION TO ABATE AND REMOVE AN ABANDONED, WRECKED, DISMANTLED OR INOPERATIVE VEHICLE OR PARTS THEREOF AS A PUBLIC NUISANCE

(Name and address of last registered and/or legal owner of record of vehicle—notice should be given to both if different)

As last registered (and/or legal) owner of record of (description of vehicle—make, model, license, etc.), you are hereby notified that the undersigned pursuant to (section of ordinance or municipal code) has determined that said vehicle (or parts of a vehicle) exists as an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle at (describe location on public or private property) and constitutes a public nuisance pursuant to the provisions of (ordinance or municipal code chapter number).

You are hereby notified to abate said nuisance by the removal of said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) within 10 days from the date of mailing of this notice.

As registered (and/or legal) owner of record of said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle), you are hereby notified that you may, within 10 days after the mailing of this notice of intention, request a public hearing, and if such a request is not received by the (hearing body or officer) within such 10-day period, the (locally designated officer) shall have the authority to abate and remove said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) without a hearing.

Notice Mailed _______________       s/ _________________________________

                                (date)                        (locally designated officer)

(Ord. 313 §3, 1971; Ord. 293 §8, 1969)

 

8.08.100 Abatement—Hearing—Notice.
A.    Upon request by the owner of the vehicle or owner of the land received by the chief of police within ten days after the mailing of the notices of intention to abate and remove, a public hearing shall be held by the hearing officer, on the question of abatement and removal of the vehicle or parts thereof as an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle, and the assessment of the administrative costs and the cost of removal of the vehicle or parts thereof against the property on which it is located.

B.     If the owner of the land submits a sworn written statement denying responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on his or her land within such ten day period, the statement shall be construed as a request for a hearing which does not require his or her presence. Notice of the hearing shall be mailed, by registered mail, at least ten days before the hearing to the owner of the land and to the owner of the vehicle, unless the vehicle is in such condition that identification numbers are not available to determine ownership. If such a request for hearing is not received within the ten days after mailing of the notice of intention to abate and remove, the city shall have the authority to abate and remove the vehicle or parts thereof as a public nuisance without holding a public hearing. (Ord. 313 §4, 1971; Ord. 293 §9, 1969)

 

8.08.110 Abatement—Hearing—Procedure.
A.    All hearings under this chapter shall be held before the hearing officer, which shall hear all facts and testimony it deems pertinent. The facts and testimony may include testimony on the condition of the vehicle or parts thereof and the circumstances concerning its location on the private or public property. The hearing officer shall not be limited by the technical rules of evidence. The owner of the land may appear in person at the hearing or present a sworn written statement in time for consideration at the hearing, and deny responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on the land, with his or her reasons for such denial.

B.     The hearing officer may impose such conditions and take such other action as it deems appropriate under the circumstances to carry out the purpose of this chapter. It may delay the time for removal of the vehicle or parts thereof if, in its opinion, the circumstances justify it. At the conclusion of the public hearing, the hearing officer may find that a vehicle or parts thereof has been abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or is inoperative on private or public property and order it removed from the property as a public nuisance and disposed of as hereinafter provided and determine the administrative costs and the cost of removal to be charged against the owner of the land. The order requiring removal shall include a description of the vehicle or parts thereof and the correct identification number and license number of the vehicle, if available at the site.

C.     If it is determined at the hearing that the vehicle was placed on the land without the consent of the owner of the land and that he or she has not subsequently acquiesced in its presence, the hearing officer shall not assess the costs of administration or removal of the vehicle against the property upon which the vehicle is located or otherwise attempt to collect such costs from such owner of the land.

D.    If the owner of the land submits a sworn statement denying responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on his or her land but does not appear, or if an interested party makes written presentation to the hearing officer but does not appear, he or she shall be notified in writing of the decision. (Ord. 313 §4, 1971; Ord. 293 §10, 1969)

 

8.08.120 Abatement—Appeal.
A.    Any interested party may appeal the decision of the hearing officer by filing a written notice of appeal with the hearing officer within five days after his or her decision.

B.     Such appeal shall be heard by the city council which may affirm, amend, or reverse the order or take other action deemed appropriate.

C.     The clerk shall give written notice of the time and place of the hearing to the appellant and those persons specified in Section 8.08.080.

D.    In conducting the hearing the city council shall not be limited by the technical rules of evidence. (Ord. 313 §5, 1971; Ord. 293 §11, 1969)

 

8.08.130 Removal—When.
Five days after adoption of the order declaring the vehicle or parts thereof to be a public nuisance, five days from the date of mailing of notice of the decision if such notice is required by Section 8.08.100, or fifteen days after such action of the governing body authorizing removal following appeal, the vehicles or parts thereof may be disposed of by removal to scrapyard or automobile dismantler’s yard. After a vehicle has been removed it shall not thereafter be reconstructed or made operable. (Ord. 313 §5, 1971; Ord. 293 §12, 1969)

Chapter 8.12 WEED ABATEMENT
8.12.010 Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:

A.    “Weeds” means any of the following:

1.     Weeds which bear seeds of a downy or wingy nature;

2.     Any brush or weeds which attain such large growth as to become, when dry, a fire menace to adjacent improved property;

3.     Weeds which are otherwise noxious or dangerous;

4.     Dry grass, stubble, brush, litter or other flammable material which endangers the public safety by creating a fire hazard.

B.     “Refuse” means all putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes (except body wastes), including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals, abandoned automobiles and solid market and industrial wastes.

C.     “Rubbish” means nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of both combustible and noncombustible wastes, such as paper, wrappings, cigarettes, cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass, bedding, crockery and similar materials. (Ord. 448 §1, 1980)

 

8.12.020 Nuisance declaration and abatement.
The city council may declare by resolution as public nuisances, and abate, all weeds, rubbish and refuse as defined in this chapter and as the council may deem necessary for the health, safety and welfare of city residents. (Ord. 448 §2, 1980)

 

8.12.030 Resolution declaring nuisance.
A.    The resolution declaring a nuisance shall refer to the street address by its commonly known name and describe the property upon which the nuisance exists by giving its lot and block number according to the official assessment map.

B.     At the time it adopts the resolution, the city council may also find and declare that weeds on specified parcels of property are seasonal and recurrent nuisances which shall be abated in accordance with this chapter upon any second or subsequent occurrence within the same calendar year without further hearings.

C.     The resolution declaring the weeds, refuse or rubbish to be a nuisance shall further state the time and place for hearing any objections to the proposed abatement. (Ord. 448 §3, 1980)

 

8.12.040 Notice to abate nuisances.
A.    Form. Notice to abate weeds, refuse or rubbish which have been declared public nuisances by resolution under Section 8.12.030 shall be written in substantially the same form as designated in California Government Code Section 39566.

B.     Posting, Publication or Mailing.

1.     After passage of the resolution, the superintendent shall cause notices to be conspicuously posted on or in front of the property on which the nuisance exists at least ten days prior to the time fixed for hearing objections. He or she shall post:

a.     One notice to each separately owned parcel of property of not over fifty feet frontage;

b.     Not more than two notices to any such parcel of one hundred feet frontage or less;

c.     Notices at not more than one hundred feet apart if the frontage of a parcel is greater than one hundred feet.

2.     In addition to or as an alternative to notification by publication the city council may cause a copy of the notice to be published at least twice in a newspaper published and circulated in the city, at least ten days prior to the time fixed by the council for hearing objections.

3.     As alternative to posting or publishing, a copy of the resolution and the notice declaring a nuisance, may be mailed by the city clerk (upon the direction of the city council) to all persons owning property described in the resolution, pursuant to the method designated in California Government Code Section 39567.1. (Ord. 448 §4, 1980)

 

8.12.050 Hearing/abatement order.
A.    Hearing. At the time stated in the notices, the city council shall hear and consider all objections to the proposed removal of weeds, rubbish and refuse. By motion or resolution at the conclusion of the hearing, the council shall allow or overrule any objections and at that time shall acquire jurisdiction to proceed and perform the work of removal. Any decision of the council is final.

B.     Abatement Order. After conclusion of the hearing, the city council may order by motion or resolution, the superintendent of public works or the fire chief to abate the nuisance by having the weeds, rubbish and refuse removed.

C.     Abatement by Owner. Before the superintendent or fire chief arrives, any property owner may remove the nuisance at his or her own expense. (Ord. 448 §5, 1980)

 

8.12.060 Abatement by city.
A.    Entry to Abate. The superintendent or fire chief or any of their personnel may enter upon private property to abate the nuisance.

B.     Cost Report. The superintendent or fire chief shall keep a report (itemized written account) of the cost of abatement on each separate parcel of land, which report shall be submitted to the city council for confirmation.

1.     A copy of the report shall be posted at the city hall for at least three days prior to its submission to the council, with a notice of the time of submission.

2.     At the fixed time for receiving the report, the council shall hear it with any objections of the property owners liable to be assessed for the abatement. The council shall modify and/or confirm the report by motion. (Ord. 448 §6, 1980)

 

8.12.070 Cost of abatement.
A.    The cost of abatement upon each parcel of land, constitutes a special assessment against that parcel, and after the assessment is made and confirmed, it constitutes a lien on the parcel.

B.     After confirmation of the report, a certified copy shall be filed with the county assessor and tax collector on or before August 10th, who shall add the amount of the assessment to the next regular tax bill levied against the parcel for municipal purposes, pursuant to California Government Code Sections 39580 through 39583. (Ord. 448 §7, 1980)

Chapter 8.16 NUISANCES GENERALLY
8.16.000 Definitions.
Except as otherwise provided, the following words, terms and phrases used in this chapter are defined as set forth in this section:

A.    “Abate” means, but is not limited to, modifying, repairing, replacing, removing, securing, locking, demolishing, or otherwise remedying the condition in question by such means and to such extent as necessary;

B.     “Building” means any structure (including, but not limited to, any house, garage, duplex, apartment, condominium, stock cooperative, mobile home or other residential buildings or associated accessory structures) and any commercial, industrial or other establishment, warehouse, kiosk, sign or other structure affixed to or upon real property used as a dwelling or for the purpose of conducting a business, storage or any other activity;

C.     “City” means the City of Jackson;

D.    “City council” means the city council of the City of Jackson;

E.     “Code” means the Jackson Municipal Code;

F.     “Day” means calendar day;

G.    “Enforcement officer” means the building official, city manager, code enforcement officer, fire chief, or police chief of the city, or their designees, when such persons have been delegated in writing the authority to enforce and administer the particular provisions of this chapter at issue in a particular matter;

H.    “Hearing officer” means the hearing officer appointed by the city council or, if no officer is appointed, the city council. The hearing officer may be a city employee, but in that event the hearing officer shall not have had any responsibility for the investigation, prosecution or enforcement of this chapter and shall not have had any personal involvement in the proceeding to be heard within the past twelve months or possess any disqualifying interest in the outcome of the proceeding.

I.      “Owner” means any person, his/her heirs, executors, administrators or assigns, agent, firm, partnership or corporation having or claiming any legal or equitable interest in the property in question as listed on the last available equalized tax assessment roll for Amador County;

J.      “Property” means all residential, industrial, commercial, agricultural, open space and other real property, including, but not limited to, front yards, side yards, driveways, walkways, alleys and sidewalks, and shall include any building or other structure, whether fixed or moveable, located on such property.

K.    “Responsible party” means any individual or legal entity who is the owner, tenant, co-tenant, lessee, sub-lessee, occupant or other person with any right to possession of the real property, owner or authorized agent of any business, company or entity, or the parent or the legal guardian of any person under the age of eighteen years, who causes, permits or maintains a violation of this code, its adopted codes or applicable state codes.

 

8.16.010 Nuisances declared.
The following are declared to be public nuisances in the city:

A.    Any building, fence or other structure, tree or growth, which is located or encroaches upon or obstructs, any street, parkway, sidewalk, alley, lane, court, park or other public place;

B.     Any structure partially destroyed by fire or otherwise or any unsafe building or structure which is liable to become a fire menace or cause injuries to any person;

C.     Storing, keeping or maintaining weeds, dry or dead vegetation, papers or paper products, and other combustible and noncombustible refuse or waste;

D.    Storing, keeping or maintaining: vehicle parts; scrap metal; bottles; cans; wire; firewood; boxes; containers; wood and building materials no longer usable for their intended purpose; tools; machinery; equipment or parts thereof; or abandoned, discarded or unused household furniture or appliances;

E.     Storing, keeping or maintaining: rubbish; refuse; trash; junk; garbage; and other waste or discarded material, including, but not limited to, the accumulation of asphalt, concrete, plaster, tile, rocks, bricks, crates, cartons, boxes, dirt, sand or gravel;

F.     Any violation of the California Building Standards Code as adopted and amended by the city.

G.    The existence of any building which has not been used for its legal and intended purpose for a three hundred sixty-five-day period. Uses that occur within any three hundred sixty-five-day period and are of duration of less than thirty days shall, for the purpose of this chapter, not qualify as meeting the use requirements of this section. Time during which the building is either being actively remodeled, or marketed for either sale or rental, shall not be included in determining the period of nonuse;

H.    The existence of any condition dangerous to children or others, including, but not limited to: unsecured structures; fences or portions of fences in disrepair, leaning and/or partially down; abandoned, broken, unprotected and/or unsecured equipment, machinery or household appliances; unprotected, unfenced and/or unsecured pools, ponds or excavations;

I.      The existence of any condition or use which unlawfully obstructs, injures or interferes with the free passage or use in the customary manner of property, any public park, street, highway, sidewalk, and any other portion of the public right-of-way;

J.      The existence of any body of stagnant water or other liquid in which mosquitoes or other insects may breed, or which may or does generate noxious or offensive gases or odors;

K.    The existence of sewage, chemical, petroleum commercial or industrial waste which has the potential to leak into the groundwater or may or does generate noxious or offensive odors;

L.     The existence of any barbed wire, razor ribbon, glass, nails or other sharp objects on, in, or affixed to any fence or wall, or any electric fences in or adjacent to a residential zoning district or property used for residential purposes;

M.    The existence of any sign, banner, balloon, flags, inflated advertising device and/or the display of retail or manufactured products on private property or in the public right-of-way, which is not in compliance with this code;

N.    The existence of graffiti on any building, fence, wall, equipment, motor vehicle, trailer, sign or other object on private or public property or in the public right-of-way;

O.    The existence of a use, business or activity in any zoning district that does not conform with the requirements of that zoning district in which it is located as set forth in this code; or which does not conform with any discretionary permit or review approval by the planning commission or city council; or which does not conform with any law, ordinance or regulations adopted by the city applicable to the property;

P.     The existence of smoke, fumes, gas, dust, soot, cinders or other particulate matter in such quantities as to render the occupancy or use of property uncomfortable to a person or persons;

Q.    The existence of any condition or use which poses a threat to the public health or safety;

R.     A violation of this code or applicable state law;

S.     Any condition that constitutes a nuisance under Civil Code Section 3479.

T.     The use of potable water in a manner that causes runoff such that water flows onto adjacent property, non-irrigated areas, private and public walkways, roadways, parking lots, or structures. (Ord. 709 §1, 2019)

 

8.16.020 Property owner responsibilities.
It shall be the duty of the owner, and of the responsible party occupying or having charge or control of any parcel of land, improved or unimproved, to maintain such parcel of land free of any nuisance and/or nuisance conditions at all times. The same responsibility extends to the public rights-of-way or public land, related to any vehicle, vessel, structure, machinery, container, refuse, debris or other item found to be or having been under the charge or control of a property owner, responsible party, or last registered or documented owner. Any owner or responsible party shall be responsible for the removal or correction of any nuisance or nuisance conditions and the costs for such removal or correction.

 

8.16.030 Attorneys’ fees.
A.    Notwithstanding anything in this code to the contrary, the city may only recover its attorneys’ fees in any action, administrative proceeding or special proceeding commenced by the city to abate a public nuisance, to enjoin violation of any provision of this code, including its adopted codes, or to collect a civil debt owing to the city, if the city elects, at the initiation of that individual action or proceeding, to seek recovery of its own attorneys’ fees. In these cases, the prevailing party shall be entitled to recover all costs incurred therein, including reasonable attorneys’ fees and costs of suit. In no action, administrative proceeding or special proceeding shall an award of attorneys’ fees to a prevailing party exceed the amount of reasonable attorneys’ fees incurred by the city in the action or proceeding.

B.     The city shall be considered a prevailing party entitled to attorneys’ fees under subsection A when it can demonstrate that:

1.     Its lawsuit was the catalyst motivating the defendant to provide the primary relief sought;

2.     The lawsuit was meritorious and achieved its result by “threat of victory”; and

3.     The city reasonably attempted to settle the litigation before filing the lawsuit.

 

8.16.040 Notice to abate nuisance conditions.
A.    When the enforcement officer finds that a nuisance condition exists upon any property in the city, he or she may, or upon the direction of the city council shall, serve a notice to abate upon the owner or responsible party in possession or having control of the property upon which the condition exists, directing him or her to abate or cause the nuisance condition(s) upon the premises to be abated on or before a specified compliance date. The notice shall also state that the responsible party may file a written request for a hearing with the city clerk to dispute the alleged conditions within ten days of the notice.

B.     The enforcement officer shall post one copy of the notice in a conspicuous place on the property in question and shall deliver one copy of the notice to the owner or responsible party in possession or control of the property upon which the nuisance condition exists either in person or by certified mail, with a return receipt requested.

C.     The failure of the owner or responsible party to actually receive the notice shall not affect in any manner the validity of any proceedings pursuant to this chapter. Moreover, if any certified letter is returned for lack of service, it shall be deemed to have been served.

D.    In the event the responsible party files a timely request for hearing, the city clerk and hearing officer shall schedule the hearing. The hearing shall be conducted within thirty days of receipt of the request unless otherwise agreed to in writing by the parties. The city clerk shall send written notice of the location, time and date of the hearing at least ten days in advance of the hearing date.

E.     In the event the responsible party fails to appeal the notice, the nuisance conditions shall be deemed confirmed. Such failure shall also constitute a failure to exhaust available administrative remedies.

 

8.16.050 Manner of conducting abatement hearing.
In the event a hearing is timely requested pursuant to Section 8.16.040, the hearing shall be conducted pursuant to the following procedures:

A.    At the time and place designated in the notice of hearing, the hearing officer shall hear and consider all relevant evidence, including, but not limited to, applicable staff reports, oral evidence, physical evidence and documentary evidence regarding the alleged nuisance, and proposed method of abatement. The hearing may be continued from time to time.

B.     Failure of the owner or responsible party to appear at the hearing shall be deemed a waiver of the right to a hearing and an admission by the owner or responsible party of the existence of the nuisance condition charged. In the event of such failure to appear, the hearing officer may order that the nuisance condition be abated by the enforcement officer. Such failure to appear shall also constitute a failure to exhaust available administrative remedies.

C.     The city shall bear the burden of proof to demonstrate, by a preponderance of the evidence, that a nuisance exists and that the proposed mechanism for abatement is appropriate. The city need not demonstrate that the proposed mechanism for abatement is either the most appropriate or least expensive.

D.    The hearing shall not be conducted according to the formal rules of evidence. Any relevant evidence shall be admitted if it is the type of evidence on which reasonable persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of serious affairs, regardless of the existence of any common law or statutory rule which might make improper the admission of such evidence over objection in civil actions in courts of competent jurisdiction in this state. However, irrelevant or unduly repetitious evidence may be excluded.

E.     Prior to conclusion of the hearing, if the owner or responsible party is present, the hearing officer may request the owner or responsible party to sign a consent to enter and perform work. The permission given shall be used only if the nuisance condition is determined to exist and is not abated by the schedule of correction specified in the hearing officer’s decision.

F.     If the owner or responsible party does not provide written consent, entry onto the property may be made by obtaining verbal permission from the owner or a responsible party, or by means of an inspection warrant, or by any other lawful manner.

 

8.16.060 Issuance of decision, findings and order.
A.    Within ten days after the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer shall issue a written decision. The decision shall set forth the factual findings made by the hearing officer, a conclusion as to whether a nuisance condition exists, the manner of abatement, including an order that such nuisance (if one is found to exist) be abated by the city and a schedule of correction or the date by which the abatement shall be completed.

B.     If the hearing officer determines that a nuisance exists which has not been corrected within the time period specified in the notice to abate nuisance conditions, the hearing officer shall so find in the decision, and may include in the decision any or all of the following:

1.     An order to correct, including a schedule of correction where appropriate;

2.     An order to pay administrative costs as provided in Section 8.16.090 of this chapter.

C.     Failure to issue a decision in ten days shall not affect the validity of such decision.

D.    The decision shall be mailed by certified mail with a return receipt requested to the owner and shall be mailed to the enforcement officer. A copy of a summary of the decision and any order it contains shall also be posted on the property by the enforcement officer in a conspicuous location.

 

8.16.070 Abatement by enforcement officer if nuisance is not abated.
A.    Upon receipt of the hearing officer’s decision if: (i) no schedule of correction has been issued; or (ii) upon the failure of the property owner to comply with such schedule if a schedule was included, if the nuisance condition has not been abated the enforcement officer shall forthwith abate, or cause to be abated, the nuisance condition upon the premises. The enforcement officer is authorized to enter upon private property for this purpose, consistent with the provisions of the U.S. Constitution.

B.     The cost of abatement shall become a personal obligation of the property owner and responsible party and may be collected in any legal manner, expressly including as lien or special assessment pursuant to the procedures set forth in this chapter.

 

8.16.080 Abatement by owner/responsible party.
A.    Any owner or responsible party may, at his/her/its own expense and prior to the scheduled abatement hearing, abate a declared nuisance condition in accordance with the provisions of the notice sent by the enforcement officer; provided that all necessary permits are first obtained. If the enforcement officer determines that the nuisance condition has been abated prior to the hearing, the hearing proceedings shall be terminated. If any abatement referenced in this section takes place after the specified compliance date, but prior to date set for hearing, termination of the hearing shall only take place upon the owner or responsible party’s payment of outstanding penalties, administrative and/or abatement costs, including attorneys’ fees if applicable.

B.     Any owner or responsible party may also request the city to abate a declared nuisance condition on his/her/its property. However, the owner or responsible party making the request shall be responsible for the payment of all penalties, abatement costs and/or administrative costs, including attorneys’ fees if applicable, incurred by the city. The request for the city to perform the abatement shall be in writing and include a written consent to enter and perform work. Any such request shall be deemed an agreement to pay for the costs of such abatement, including, but not limited to, any penalties, administrative costs, and an agreement that such costs may be collected as a lien or special assessment upon the property. The abatement hearing proceedings shall thereafter be terminated.

 

8.16.090 Liability for abatement costs.
A.    In addition to liability for the costs of abatement itself pursuant to Sections 8.16.070 and this section of this chapter, the owner and/or responsible party shall also be liable for any expenses and administrative costs incurred by the city, county or any related agency incurred after the initial inspection and identification of the nuisance.

B.     The administrative costs may include any and all costs incurred by the city in connection with the matter before the hearing officer, including, but not limited to, costs of investigation, city staffing costs incurred in preparation for the hearing and for the hearing itself, including, but not limited to, the fees and costs of the city’s consultants, and costs for all re-inspections necessary to enforce the notice to abate nuisance conditions.

C.     In the event that the city is entitled to recover its attorneys’ fees and costs pursuant to Section 8.16.030, such fees and costs shall be collected at the same time and pursuant to the same procedures as administrative costs pursuant to this section.

D.    The enforcement officer or other authorized city official shall keep an itemized report of the costs incurred by the city in the abatement of any public nuisance in addition to any accrued fees and penalties due. The responsible party may be invoiced for the total. If payment is not received, the itemized report shall be submitted in writing to the city clerk no sooner than twenty days of the invoice date. Any such report may include the abatement costs, fees and penalties for any number of properties and abatements, whether or not such properties are contiguous. In the event, the invoice is not paid within thirty days, the city may collect all such costs, penalties and interest through a lien or special assessment under Sections 8.16.100 and 8.16.110.

E.     All abatement costs shall bear interest at the rate of ten percent per annum from the date of abatement.

 

8.16.100 Lien procedure.
In the event the city decides to collect abatement costs as a lien, it shall impose such lien pursuant to this section:

A.    Upon receipt of the itemized report, the city clerk, or his/her designee, shall serve notice of the lien in the same manner as summons in a civil action in accordance with Code of Civil Procedure Section 415.10 et seq. If the owner of record, after diligent search cannot be found, the notice may be served by posting a copy thereof in a conspicuous place upon the property for a period of ten days and publication thereof in a newspaper of general circulation in Amador County. The period of notice commences upon the first day of publication and terminates at the end of the tenth day, including therein the first day. Publication shall be made on each day on which the newspaper is published during the ten-day period.

B.     The notice shall inform the owner of the pending lien and inform the property owner of the public hearing where the city council will consider imposing the itemized report as a lien against the property. The hearing shall be conducted no less than ten days from service of the notice.

C.     At the hearing and after considering the relevant evidence, the city council may adopt a resolution confirming the itemized report and directing the city clerk to record a lien against the property in the Amador County Recorder’s office and, from the date of recording, shall have the force, effect and priority of a judgment lien.

D.    The lien shall identify:

1.     The amount of the lien;

2.     The city as the agency on whose behalf the lien is imposed;

3.     The date of the abatement order or citation;

4.     The street address, legal description and assessor’s parcel number of the parcel on which the lien is imposed; and

5.     The name and address of the recorded owner of the parcel.

E.     In the event that the lien is discharged, released or satisfied, through either payment or foreclosure, notice of the discharge containing the information specified in subsection D shall be recorded by the city clerk.

F.     A lien may be foreclosed by an action brought by the city for a money judgment.

G.    The city may recover from the property owner any costs incurred in the processing and recording of the lien and providing notice to the property owner as part of its foreclosure action to enforce the lien.

 

8.16.110 Special assessment procedure.
In the event the city decides to collect abatement costs as a special assessment, it shall impose such special assessment pursuant to this section:

A.    The enforcement officer or other authorized city official shall keep an itemized report of the costs incurred by the city in the abatement of any public nuisance in addition to any accrued fees and penalties due. The property owner may be invoiced for the total. If payment is not received, the itemized report shall be submitted in writing to the city clerk no sooner than fifteen days of the invoice date. Any such report may include the abatement costs, fees and penalties for any number of properties and abatements, whether or not such properties are contiguous.

B.     If the invoice is not timely paid, the city clerk shall provide written notice to the property owner by certified mail, if the property owner’s identity can be determined from the county assessor’s or county recorder’s records. The notice shall inform the owner of the pending special assessment, and the date, time and location of the public hearing where the city council will consider imposing the itemized report as a special assessment against the property. The hearing shall be conducted no less than ten days from service of the notice.

C.     At the hearing and after considering the relevant evidence, the city council may adopt a resolution confirming the itemized report and assessing the report as a special assessment against the property. The city clerk shall then provide all documentation necessary to the county to enter such assessment. After entry, the assessment may be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary municipal taxes are collected, and shall be subject to the same penalties and the same procedure and sale in case of delinquency as provided for ordinary municipal taxes. The property may be sold after three years by the tax collector for unpaid delinquent assessments. The tax collector’s power of sale shall not be affected by the failure of the property owner to receive notice. All laws applicable to the levy, collection and enforcement of municipal taxes shall be applicable to the special assessment. However, if any real property to which the cost of abatement relates has been transferred or conveyed to a bona fide purchaser for value, or if a lien of a bona fide encumbrancer for value has been created and attaches thereon, prior to the date on which the first installment of the taxes would become delinquent, then the cost of abatement shall not result in a lien against the real property but instead transferred to the unsecured roll for collection.

D.    Subject to the requirements applicable to the sale of property pursuant to Section 3691 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, the city may conduct a sale of vacant residential developed property for which the payment of that assessment is delinquent.

E.     Notices or instruments relating to the special assessment shall be entitled to recordation.

 

8.16.120 Order for treble costs of abatement.
Upon entry of a second or subsequent civil or criminal judgment within a two-year period finding that an owner of property is responsible for a condition that may be abated in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, except for conditions abated pursuant to Section 17980 of the Health and Safety Code, relating to abandoned buildings, the court may order the owner to pay treble the costs of the abatement, as authorized by Government Code Section 38773.7. Costs of abatement shall include, without limitation by reason of enumeration, all administrative costs of the city.

 

8.16.130 Summary abatement.
A.    Any nuisance which the enforcement officer, determines is immediately or potentially dangerous to the life, health or safety of the occupants of the property or to the public, may be summarily abated in accordance with the procedures set forth in this section.

B.     Actions taken to abate immediately or potentially dangerous nuisances may include, but are not limited to, repair or removal of the condition creating the danger and/or the restriction from use or occupancy of the property on which the condition exists or any other abatement action determined by the enforcement officer to be necessary. Where a residential rental property is involved, this may require the moving and relocation of the occupants by the owner and/or responsible party to other habitable temporary or permanent accommodations. Any temporary accommodations will be maintained by the owner and/or responsible party, at his/her/its expense, until the corrections are done to the vacated residential property so that it is habitable and the occupants are returned.

C.     Notice of the summary abatement shall be provided to the owner or responsible party as provided for in this chapter the same day or as soon as practical. Such notice shall include a provision authorizing the owner or responsible party to dispute the existence of the nuisance conditions before the hearing officer. Any request for an appeal shall be filed in writing with the city clerk within ten days of the notice and shall be conducted in the same manner as all applicable procedures under Sections 8.16.040 through 8.16.060.

D.    The costs and expenses for summary abatement, if not paid by the property owner within thirty days of the date of the invoice, shall be collected pursuant to the procedures set forth in Sections 8.16.090 through 8.16.110 of this chapter.

 

8.16.140 Right of judicial review.
Except as otherwise provided by law, any person aggrieved by any administrative decision of a hearing officer pursuant to this chapter, may obtain judicial review of the administrative decision in the superior court by filing with the court a petition for writ of mandate pursuant to Section 1094.6 of the Code of Civil Procedure.

 

8.16.150 Remedies.
The remedies provided in this chapter are nonexclusive. The city may prosecute any violation and abate any nuisance pursuant to any criminal, civil or other administrative remedies available to the city.

Chapter 8.24 TOBACCO SALES RESTRICTIONS
8.24.010 Definition of words and phrases.
A.    “Business” means any sole proprietorship, joint venture, corporation or other business entity formed for profit making purposes, including retail establishments where goods or services are sold as well as professional corporations and other entities where legal, medical, dental, engineering, architectural or other professional services are delivered.

B.     “City” means the City of Jackson.

C.     “Employee” means any person who is employed by any employer in consideration for direct or indirect wages or profit, and any person who volunteers his or her services for a non-profit entity.

D.    “Minor” means any individual who is less than eighteen years old.

E.     “Non-profit entity” means any corporation, unincorporated association or other entity created for charitable, philanthropic, educational character-building, political, social or other similar purpose, the net proceeds from the operations of which are committed to the promotion of the objectives or purposes of the entity and not to private gain. A public agency is not a non-profit entity within the meaning of this section.

F.     “Person” shall mean any individual, partnership, cooperative association, private corporation, personal representative, receiver, trustee, assignee or any other legal entity.

G.    “Self-service merchandising” means open display of tobacco products and point-of-sale tobacco-related promotional products that the public has access to without the intervention of an employee.

H.    “Tobacco product” means any tobacco cigarette, cigar, pipe tobacco, smokeless tobacco, snuff or any other form of tobacco which may be utilized for smoking, chewing or other manner of ingestion.

I.      “Tobacco retailer” shall be any person or governmental entity that operates a store, stand, booth concession, or other place at which sales of tobacco products are made to purchasers for consumption or use.

J.      “Tobacco vending machine” means any electronic or mechanical device or appliance that operation of which depends upon the insertion of money, whether in coin or paper currency, or other things representative of value, which dispenses or releases a tobacco product.

K.    “Vendor-assisted” means only a store employee has access to the tobacco product and assists the customer by supplying the product. The customer does not take possession of the product until it is purchased. (Ord. 621 §1, 2001)

 

8.24.020 Prohibitions.
A.    No person or business shall engage in the sale of tobacco products without first posting a plainly visible sign at the point of purchase of tobacco products which has the wording similar to: THE SALE OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS TO PERSONS UNDER 18 YEARS OF AGE IS PROHIBITED BY LAW AND SUBJECT TO PENALTIES. PHOTO IDENTIFICATION IS REQUIRED OF PURCHASERS APPEARING TO BE 26 AND YOUNGER. The letters of the sign shall be at least one-quarter inch high.

B.     No person, business, tobacco retailer, owner, manager or operator of any establishment subject to the ordinance codified in this chapter shall sell, offer to sell or permit to be sold any tobacco product to an individual without requesting and examining identification of customers appearing to be twenty-six and younger for the purpose of establishing the purchaser’s age as eighteen years or greater, unless the seller has some other reasonable basis for determining buyer’s age.

C.     It shall be unlawful for any person, business or tobacco retailer to sell, permit to be sold, offer for sale or display for sale any tobacco product by means of self-service merchandising or by means other than vendor-assisted sales. Exception: Any business which primarily sells tobacco products and tobacco related products (a tobacco retailer store) is exempt from this section if persons under the age of eighteen are prohibited from entering the tobacco retailer store.

D.    No person, business, tobacco retailer or other establishment shall sell or offer for sale cigarettes or other tobacco or smoking products not in the original packaging provided by the manufacturer and with all required health warnings.

E.     No person, business or tobacco retailer shall locate, install, keep, maintain or use or permit the location, installation, keeping, maintenance or use on his, her, or its premises any tobacco vending machine for purposes of selling or distributing any tobacco product. (Ord. 621 §1, 2001)

 

8.24.030 Non-retaliation.
A.    No person or employer shall discharge, refuse to hire or in any manner retaliate against any employee or applicant for employment because such employee or applicant agrees to abide by the provisions of this chapter.

B.     No person shall intimidate or threaten any reprisal or effect any reprisal for the purpose of retaliating against another person because such other person seeks to attain compliance with provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 621 §1, 2001)

 

8.24.040 Conflict with other applicable laws.
This chapter shall not be interpreted or constructed to permit tobacco vending machines and distribution of tobacco product samples where they are otherwise restricted by other applicable laws, nor shall this chapter be construed to cause for breach of any pre-existing private contract, or cause for interference with regulations imposed by state or federal law or relation to interstate commerce. (Ord. 621 §1, 2001)

 

8.24.050 Violation—Enforcement.
Any person, business or tobacco retailer who violates any provision of this chapter shall upon conviction thereof, be guilty of a misdemeanor as defined in Section 1.20.010 of this code. The owner, operator or manager of any public place or place of employment within the preview of this chapter shall comply herewith. Such owner, operator or manager shall further post or cause to be posted all signage required by this chapter. (Ord. 621 §1, 2001)

Chapter 8.28 CAMPING WITHIN CITY LIMITS
8.28.010 Purpose and intent.
This chapter is intended to protect the public health, welfare, and safety by reserving open spaces and facilities within the city limits for their intended purposes. Public property within the city should be readily accessible and available to residents and the public at large. The use of these areas for camping purposes or storage of personal property interferes with the rights of others to use the areas for their intended purposes and is deleterious to the public peace, health, safety, and welfare. The use of these areas for camping obstructs the intended uses for the public at large, contributes to blight, and can cause damage to public property. This chapter is intended to avoid unsafe and potentially disorderly conditions, unsanitary and unhealthful conditions, and the degradation or destruction of open spaces and facilities within the city. (Ord. 712 §1, 2019)

 

8.28.020 Definitions.
Unless it is apparent from the context that another meaning is intended, the following words, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:

“Available shelter” means a public or private shelter, with an available overnight space, open to an individual or family unit experiencing homelessness, at no charge. A shelter shall not be considered available when the individual cannot occupy said space due to overcapacity, exhaustion of stay limitations, or when religious observance is required as a condition of gaining shelter. If the individual cannot utilize the overnight shelter space due to voluntary actions including, but not limited to, intoxication, drug use, unruly behavior, or violation of shelter rules, the overnight shelter space shall be considered available.

“Camp” and “camping” mean the placement on public or private property for the purpose of making a living accommodation for one or more nights of tents, tarpaulins, temporary shelters, house trailers, motor vehicles or parts thereof, trailers, cooking facilities, cots, ground covers, bedding, hammocks, backpacks, sleeping bags and other equipment of a similar nature used to live temporarily in the outdoors.

“Camp facilities” include, but are not limited to, tents, huts, or temporary shelters.

“Camp paraphernalia” includes, but is not limited to, tarpaulins, cots, beds, sleeping bags, hammocks, or non-city designated cooking facilities and similar equipment.

“Public property” means any publicly owned property in the city, whether improved or unimproved, including, but not limited to, the following: public alleyways, public parking lots, public passageways, public streets, public rights-of-way, publicly owned, maintained, or operated parks, publicly owned, maintained, or operated landscaped areas or greenbelts, publicly owned, maintained, or operated open spaces, including, but not limited to, public facilities or buildings of any kind, public sidewalks, curbs, and gutters, public educational institutions, or other government owned, maintained, or operated properties located within the city.

“Store” means to put aside or accumulate for use when needed, to put for safekeeping, to place or leave in a location.

“Vehicle” shall be defined, for purposes of this chapter, by Section 670 of the Vehicle Code of the State of California as it now exists or may hereafter be amended.

“Voluntarily homeless” means an individual who does not have permanent shelter but has the resources sufficient to provide such shelter for him or herself. (Ord. 712 §1, 2019)

 

8.28.030 Camping on public property.
A.    Except as may be permitted within municipal parks and other municipal locations by the public works superintendent, or designee, it is unlawful to camp upon any public property owned by the city, including, without limitation, streets, parking structures, easements, open space, parks, dump sites, creek beds, electric utility substations, parking lots, or corporation yards when there is available overnight shelter or when an individual is voluntarily homeless. In order to comply with applicable case law, the city manager may establish guidelines to determine whether an individual is voluntarily homeless.

B.     Except as otherwise permitted under the Jackson Municipal Code, it is unlawful for any person to sleep between ten p.m. and five a.m. in any vehicle parked on any public street, alley way, or parking area, or any privately owned parking area used for the parking of customers of any business enterprise without the consent of the owner of such business enterprise when there is available overnight shelter or the person is voluntarily homeless. (Ord. 712 §1, 2019)

 

8.28.040 Storage of personal property on public property.
It is unlawful for any person to store personal property, including camp facilities and camp paraphernalia, on any public property within the city, except as otherwise provided herein or mandated by applicable law. (Ord. 712 §1, 2019)

 

8.28.050 Camping on private property.
A.    Except as otherwise provided in this section, it is unlawful to camp upon private property within the city.

B.     This section shall not apply to persons camping upon their own land or to persons camping with the written consent of the owner of the land, provided that such written consent is in their possession at the time and is shown upon demand of any peace officer and is not otherwise prohibited by the Jackson Municipal Code. No person shall camp, or permit another to camp, on private property for a period of time exceeding seven consecutive days without an interruption of at least seven consecutive non-camping days. For purposes of this section, camping for any portion of a day shall count as a full camping day.

C.     This section shall not apply to persons lawfully camping within campgrounds or trailer parks pursuant to Chapter 17.64 of the Jackson Municipal Code nor shall it be construed to waive or preempt any requirement or authorization provided under Chapter 17.64 of the Jackson Municipal Code. (Ord. 712 §1, 2019)

8.28.060 Public nuisance declared.
Any campsite established in violation of this chapter is declared to be a public nuisance, and the chief of police, after consultation with appropriate city officials and upon a determination that such a campsite constitutes an immediate threat to the health, safety or welfare of persons in the city, including persons using the campsite, is authorized and empowered to remove any such campsite forthwith in accordance with applicable laws. If persons are occupying the campsite at the time, then before removing the campsite, the chief of police, or the officer designated by the chief, shall warn the person or persons occupying the campsite that they are in violation of this chapter and shall give them the opportunity to remove the campsite forthwith. (Ord. 712 §1, 2019)

Chapter 8.32 PROTECTION OF CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURE AND WILDFIRE RISK AREAS
8.32.010 Findings and purpose.
The city council finds as follows: (1) a principal threat to the public health, safety, and welfare is the potential destruction of, damage to, or interference with, infrastructure that is critical to the provision of public services such as law enforcement, fire prevention, transportation, and utilities, including communication, water, and waste disposal; (2) destruction of, damage to, or interference with, critical infrastructure is caused by fire, contamination, restricting access, or other causes; and (3) destruction of, damage to, or interference with, critical infrastructure is often caused by persons whose activities are not permitted or authorized in, on, or near critical infrastructure.

The purpose of this chapter to mitigate the threat of fire and other potential causes of destruction and damage to and interference with, critical infrastructure, in order to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the public, by authorizing the removal of persons and their personal property in, on, or near critical infrastructure. (Ord. 715 §2, 2020)

 

8.32.020 Definitions.
When used in this chapter, the following words and phrases have the following meanings:

A.    “Camp” has the same meaning as in Section 8.28.020.

B.     “Camp facilities” has the same meaning as in Section 8.28.020.

C.     “Camp paraphernalia” has the same meaning as in Section 8.28.020.

D.    “Critical infrastructure” means real property or a facility, whether privately or publicly owned, that the city manager designates as being so vital and integral to the operation or functioning of the city or in need of protection that its damage, incapacity, disruption, or destruction would have a debilitating impact on the public health, safety, or welfare. Critical infrastructure may include, but is not limited to, government buildings, such as fire stations, police stations, jails, or courthouses; hospitals; structures, such as antennas, bridges, roads, train tracks, drainage systems, or levees; or systems, such as computer networks, public utilities, electrical wires, natural gas pipes, telecommunication centers, or water sources.

E.     “Facility” means a building, structure, equipment, system, or asset.

F.     “Fire prevention official” means the fire chief, the fire marshal, or a fire prevention officer.

G.    “Garbage” has the same meaning as in Section 8.04.020.

H.    “Hazardous waste” has the same meaning as in California Public Resources Code Section 40141.

I.      “Infectious waste” has the same meaning as in California Code of Regulations, Title 14, Section 17225.36.

J.      “Refuse” has the same meaning as in Section 8.04.020.

K.    “Solid waste or wastes” has the same meaning as in Section 8.04.020.

L.     “Wildfire risk area” has the same meaning as in California Code of Regulations, Title 24, Part 9, Section 202. (Ord. 715 §2, 2020)

 

8.32.030 Prohibited activities.
A.    It is unlawful and a public nuisance for any person to camp, occupy camp facilities, or use camp paraphernalia at the following locations:

1.     Critical infrastructure;

2.     Within twenty-five feet of critical infrastructure;

3.     Within twenty-five feet of a vehicular or pedestrian entrance or exit of critical infrastructure;

4.     On those portions of a right-of-way that are required by local, state, or federal law to be free of obstruction to first responders, including, but not limited to, members of law enforcement, fire prevention, or emergency medical services agencies; or

5.     Wildfire risk area.

B.     It is unlawful and a public nuisance for any person to store personal property, including camp facilities and camp paraphernalia, in the following locations without the written consent of the owner, except as otherwise provided by resolution of the city council:

1.     Critical infrastructure;

2.     Within twenty-five feet of critical infrastructure;

3.     Within twenty-five feet of a vehicular or pedestrian entrance or exit of critical infrastructure;

4.     On those portions of a right-of-way that are required by local, state, or federal law to be free of obstruction to first responders, including, but not limited to, members of law enforcement, fire prevention, or emergency medical services agencies; or

5.     Wildfire risk area.

C.     It is not intended by this section to prohibit overnight camping on private residential property by friends or family of the property owner, so long as the owner consents and the overnight camping is limited to the period specified in Section 8.28.050.

D.    Nothing in this chapter is intended to prohibit or make unlawful the activities of an owner of private property or other lawful user of private property that are normally associated with and incidental to the lawful and authorized use of private property for residential or other purposes; and nothing is intended to prohibit or make unlawful the activities of a property owner or other lawful user if such activities are expressly authorized by Title 17 or other laws, ordinances, and regulations. (Ord. 715 §2, 2020)

 

8.32.040 Summary abatement.
A.    Any violation of Section 8.32.030 may be immediately abated by the city without prior notice.

B.     Abatement pursuant to subsection A may include, but is not limited to, removal of camp facilities, camp paraphernalia, personal property, garbage, hazardous waste, infectious waste, junk, or refuse; and securing the perimeter of the property with fencing, gates, or barricades to prevent further occurrences of the nuisance activity.

C.     Regardless of the city’s authority to conduct abatement pursuant to this section, every owner, occupant, or lessee of real property, and every holder of any interest in real property, is required to maintain the property in compliance with local, state, and federal law; and is liable for violations thereof.

D.    The cost of abatement, including all administrative costs of any action taken hereunder, may be assessed against the subject premises as a lien, made a personal obligation of the owner, or both, in accordance with procedures in Section 8.16.090. (Ord. 715 §2, 2020)

 

8.32.050 Interference with summary abatement.
No person shall willfully prevent, delay, resist, obstruct, or otherwise interfere with a city official, employee, contractor, or volunteer in their execution of an abatement pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 715 §2, 2020)

 

8.32.060 Violation—Penalty.
A.    In addition to any other remedy allowed by law, any person who violates a provision of this chapter is subject to criminal, civil, and administrative penalties pursuant to Chapters 1.20 and 1.22.

B.     Violations of this chapter are hereby declared to be a public nuisance.

C.     All remedies prescribed under this chapter are cumulative and the election of one or more remedies does not bar the city from the pursuit of any other remedy to enforce this chapter. (Ord. 715 §2, 2020)

Title 9 PUBLIC PEACE, MORALS AND SAFETY
Article I. Offenses by or Against Public Officers and Government
Article II. Offenses Against the Person
Article III. Offenses Against Health and Safety
Article IV. Offenses Against Public Decency
Article V. Offenses Against Public Peace
Article VI. Offenses Against Property
Article VII. Consumer Protection
Article VIII. Offenses by or Against Minors
Article IX. Weapons

Article I. Offenses by or Against Public Officers and Government
Chapter 9.02 INTERFERING WITH POLICE DOGS
9.02.010 Teasing, harming or interfering with police dogs.
It is unlawful for any person to torture, tease, torment, beat, kick, strike, mutilate, injure, disable, kill or otherwise interfere with any dog used by the police department of the city in the performance of the functions or duties of such department or any officer or member thereof. (Ord. 433 §1, 1979)

 

 

Chapter 9.07 EMERGENCY ALARMS
9.07.010 Purpose.
The city council finds and declares that:

A.    Emergency responses to false alarms detract from the ability of the Jackson police department to respond to bona fide emergencies and other calls for assistance.

B.     Repeated activation of false emergency alarms creates a public nuisance by unnecessarily disturbing the peace of surrounding citizens.

C.     Responses to false emergency alarms creates a safety hazard for police officers, and for the public in general.

D.    Provisions of this chapter are needed to regulate the installation, maintenance and operation of alarm systems and to reduce the number of false emergency alarms received by the city. (Ord. 581, 1996)

 

9.07.020 Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, certain words and phrases shall be construed as set forth in this section, unless it is apparent from the context that a different meaning is intended.

“Alarm business” means any person, firm, partnership, corporation, or other association conducting or engaged in the business of selling, leasing, installing, repairing, maintaining, servicing or monitoring any alarm system within the city. Any representative or employee of any such business.

“Alarm system” means any mechanical or electrical device, or combination of devices, which when activated transmits, relays or emits any signal intended to summon, or that could reasonably be expected to summon, a response from the Jackson police department.

“Automatic dialing device” means any alarm system or component which automatically sends over regular telephone lines, by direct connection or otherwise, a prerecorded voice message indicating the existence of the emergency situation which the alarm system is designed to detect.

“Designated authority” means the chief of police, or any employee of the Jackson police department designated by the chief of police to oversee the alarm permit process.

“False alarm” means any alarm signal, either silent or audible, originating from any alarm system and causing a response from the Jackson police department, where the emergency situation the alarm system was designed to detect does not exist.

False alarm includes any alarm signal caused by the negligence of the subscriber or by any malfunction of the alarm system.

False alarms do not include any alarm signal resulting from violent acts of nature or abnormal natural conditions, such as high winds, earthquakes, floods, fires, or similar disasters.

“Subscriber” means any person, firm, partnership or corporation owning or operating the property or premises where an alarm system is installed, or who causes the installation of such alarm system. Includes any employee, representative, agent, or other person authorized to operate such alarm. (Ord. 581, 1996)

 

9.07.030 Exemptions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any of the following:

A.    Any person or business who engages solely in the manufacture or sale of alarm system components from a fixed location and who is involved in neither the design nor the installation of such system;

B.     Any alarm installed on a vehicle, unless the vehicle is permanently located at a site;

C.     Any alarm which, by design, only alerts the occupants of residence or business premises;

D.    Any alarm system installed on a temporary basis by the Jackson police department. (Ord. 581, 1996)

 

9.07.040 Standards and regulations.
A.    All alarm systems shall meet or exceed minimum standards as may be established by the city council by resolution. Any alarm system in existence on the effective date of such resolution shall be made to comply with minimum standards within one year of the effective date of the resolution.

B.     The chief of police may require inspection and approval of all alarm systems prior to installation.

C.     All alarm systems shall be supplied with an uninterrupted power supply in such a manner that failure or interruption of the normal electrical utility service will not activate the alarm system. The power supply shall be capable of operating the alarm system for a minimum four-hour period.

D.    Every alarm system permit, or a copy thereof, shall be kept on the premises where the alarm is installed.

E.     All audible alarm systems shall be equipped with a device which deactivates the alarm within fifteen minutes of the initial activation. Employees of the Jackson police department shall have the authority to take such steps as may be reasonable and necessary to disconnect any alarm not in compliance with this section.

F.     No alarm system shall be installed or used which emits a sound that is similar to that of an emergency vehicle siren or civil defense warning system.

G.    No alarm system shall be equipped with an automatic dialing device programmed to dial 9-1-1 or any emergency or nonemergency telephone number of the Jackson police department or the city.

H.    No subscriber shall cause any alarm system to be activated for any purpose other than reporting of the emergency situation which the alarm system was designed to detect or to report the existence of an immediate life-threatening situation. Violation of this section shall be a misdemeanor pursuant to Penal Code Section 148.3.

I.      A subscriber or alarm business may activate an alarm system for purposes of testing, service or maintenance, providing that the Jackson police department is notified prior to such activation. Such activation shall not constitute a false alarm when prior notice has been given.

J.      When any false alarm is caused by a malfunction of the alarm system, the subscriber shall cause the alarm system to be repaired, to eliminate the malfunction, before the alarm is again put into service.

K.    The subscriber shall at all times be responsible for the proper maintenance and repair of the alarm system. The subscriber shall be responsible to instruct all persons having access to the premises in the proper use and operation of the alarm system, and the prevention of false alarms. (Ord. 581, 1996)

 

9.07.050 Permits—Applications.
A.    Except as otherwise provided herein, it is unlawful for any person or subscriber to connect or operate, or cause to be connected or operated, any alarm system, unless the subscriber has first obtained an alarm permit from the Jackson police department. Permits shall be on a form as determined by the chief of police and shall contain the following information:

1.     The location of the premises, type of premises, and business name (if applicable);

2.     The type of alarm: silent or audible; business or residential; burglary, robbery, or panic;

3.     Name, address, and telephone number of the subscriber (and work telephone, if applicable);

4.     Name, address, and telephone number of at least two persons who can respond at any time to open or secure the premises or to operate the alarm system;

5.     Name, address, and telephone number of the alarm business responsible for maintaining and/or repairing the alarm system;

6.     Other information as may be reasonably required by the chief of police.

B.     Every application for an alarm system permit shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee in an amount set by resolution of the city council. This fee shall be in addition to any other fee imposed by the city and is imposed for the purpose of defraying the costs of processing and overseeing the permit process.

C.     The information contained in an alarm system permit application shall be confidential and shall not be disclosed to other than city employees or other public officials who require such information in the performance of their duties.

D.    Whenever any change occurs in the information contained on the permit application, the subscriber shall give written notice thereof to the Jackson police department within ten days after such change.

E.     Each alarm permit issued shall be valid until suspended, revoked, or until there is a significant change in subscriber information.

F.     Each subscriber shall place the alarm permit sticker in a conspicuous and clearly visible location on a front door or window of the alarm premises so that responding officers may identify the alarm permit and/or the permit holder. (Ord. 581, 1996)

 

9.07.060 Permits—Investigations, issuance, denial.
A.    The chief of police, or his/her designee, may conduct an investigation concerning each permit application prior to the issuance of a permit. The designated authority shall issue the permit within thirty days of the date of application, unless one of the conditions in subsection B of this section applies.

B.     An alarm permit may be denied for any of the following reasons:

1.     If the alarm system does not comply with regulations as set forth in this chapter;

2.     If the applicant has failed to pay the required fees;

3.     If the application contains any misrepresentation of fact;

4.     If the designated authority determines that the alarm system, due to the nature of its construction or installation, constitutes an unreasonable hazard to responding public safety officers;

5.     If a previously issued permit for the same alarm system and/or subscriber has been suspended or permanently revoked.

C.     In the event an alarm permit is denied, the applicant shall be given written notification as to the specific reason for the denial. The applicant may reapply, without additional fee, after the deficiencies have been corrected.

D.    In the event an alarm permit is denied, the applicant shall have the right to appeal the decision pursuant to Section 9.07.100. (Ord. 581, 1996)

 

9.07.070 Permits—Suspension, revocation.
A.    When grounds as hereafter provided exist, the designated authority may determine to suspend a permit. Suspensions of a permit shall be for a maximum of three hundred sixty-five calendar days. Use of an alarm system during the term of a suspension shall be a violation of this chapter. The following shall constitute grounds for suspension of an alarm permit:

1.     The violation of any provision of this chapter;

2.     A false statement on the permit application;

3.     Assessment of three or more false alarm service fees within any consecutive twelve-month period;

4.     Failure to pay any false alarm service fee;

5.     Failure to pay any fine assessed by a court of competent jurisdiction for any violation of this chapter;

6.     Failure of a subscriber to repair, or cause to be repaired, any malfunctioning alarm system.

B.     An alarm permit may be permanently revoked by the designated authority for any of the following reasons:

1.     If the permit has been previously suspended on three or more occasions;

2.     If, upon notification of suspension and order of disconnection of the alarm system, the subscriber fails or refuses to disconnect the alarm system and continues to operate the alarm system in violation of subsection A of this section.

C.     Prior to any suspension or revocation taking effect, the subscriber shall be notified in writing, delivered by certified/registered mail to the most recent address contained on the permit, of the intent to suspend or revoke the permit, the specific reasons for the proposed action, the effective date of the action, and the subscriber’s right to appeal the decision pursuant to Section 9.07.100.

D.    Upon the suspension of any alarm permit, such permit shall not be reinstated until all outstanding fees have been paid and the subscriber has supplied written documentation that mechanical repairs and/or personnel training have been completed to insure against future false alarms. (Ord. 581, 1996)

 

9.07.080 Service fees.
A.    In the event an alarm system produces a false alarm, the subscriber shall be assessed a service fee set by resolution. All service fees are payable within thirty days of the date of assessment to the city.

B.     Upon assessment of a service fee, the subscriber shall be notified in writing, delivered by certified/registered mail, of the assessment of the fee, the dates and times of the involved false alarms, and the subscriber’s right to appeal the fee pursuant to Section 9.07.100. The date of the assessment shall be considered to be the date on which the written notice is mailed. (Ord. 581, 1996)

 

9.07.090 Enforcement.
A.    Except where punishment is otherwise provided in this chapter, any person, subscriber, or alarm business violating any provision of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of an infraction punishable by:

1.     A fine not exceeding one hundred dollars for the first violation;

2.     A fine not exceeding two hundred dollars for a second violation occurring within one year;

3.     A fine not exceeding five hundred dollars for a third and subsequent violation occurring within one year.

B.     The chief of police is empowered, pursuant to Sections 36900 and 36901 of the Government Code, to seek recovery of all fines and/or false alarm service fees through civil action in small claims court.

C.     Disconnection of Alarms. The chief of police is empowered to order and take such steps as are reasonable and necessary to cause the disconnection of any alarm system under the following conditions:

1.     When a subscriber fails to pay any fine or service fee as imposed under this chapter;

2.     When a subscriber fails to cause the repair of a malfunctioning alarm;

3.     When a subscriber continues to use any alarm system while the permit for that system is suspended or revoked.

D.    The chief of police may discontinue a response by police officers to any alarm system or location when the permit for that alarm system has been suspended or when any of the conditions in subsection C of this section apply.

E.     Enforcement of the provisions of this chapter (except Section 9.07.080, Service fees) shall be suspended for a period of one year from the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. During that period, all persons owning or operating alarm systems within the city shall be notified of any violations of this chapter and shall be given the opportunity to correct such violation. (Ord. 581, 1996)

 

9.07.100 Appeals.
A.    Prior to the suspension, revocation, denial, assessment of any service fee, or discontinuance of response, or any other action against an alarm permit, the designated authority shall notify the subscriber in writing of the proposed action, the effective date of the proposed action, the subscriber’s circumstances causing the proposed action to be taken, the subscriber’s right to appeal the action, and the date by which any appeal must be filed.

B.     Notification shall be sent via certified/registered mail to the most recent address listed by the subscriber on the alarm permit. Service shall be considered complete when written notice has been mailed.

C.     The subscriber may appeal any proposed action by filing with the police department a written request for an appeal hearing. Such written request must be filed within fifteen days of the date of service of a proposed action. If the subscriber fails to file a request for hearing in the time and manner prescribed above, the right to an appeal hearing shall be deemed to have been waived, and the designated authority may proceed with the proposed action.

D.    Upon receipt of a request for appeal hearing, the designated authority shall take no further action until a hearing has been held pursuant to this section. Upon receiving a request for hearing, the designated authority shall schedule a hearing. The subscriber shall be served written notice, via first class mail, of the time and place of the hearing. Service shall be made at least ten calendar days prior to the date of the hearing.

E.     An official designated by the city manager, shall act as the hearing officer. The hearing shall be held informally. The subscriber may appear, present evidence and/or witnesses, and examine or cross-examine witnesses. The designated authority shall carry the burden of proof that grounds exist for the proposed action.

F.     For good cause, the hearing may be continued upon the request of the subscriber or the designated authority. In the event the subscriber fails to appear at the hearing, the hearing shall be conducted in the absence of the subscriber, and the hearing officer shall make a decision based on the evidence presented at the hearing.

G.    The hearing officer shall issue a written decision of his or her findings within fifteen calendar days of the hearing date. The decision of the hearing officer shall be final. (Ord. 581, 1996)

 

9.07.110 Liability.
The provisions of this chapter are not intended nor shall they be construed to create a special relationship between the city and any subscriber so as to create a duty on the part of the Jackson police department to respond to any alarm. Neither shall the provisions of this chapter be construed as a waiver of any immunity provided government agencies for tort liability contained in the California Government Code. (Ord. 581, 1996)

Article II. Offenses Against the Person

Article III. Offenses Against Health and Safety
Chapter 9.20 EXPLOSIVES
9.20.010 Discharge—Permit required.
Any person who explodes or causes to be exploded any fireworks or dynamite upon the public streets, alleys, highways, or sidewalks of the city, or explodes or causes to be exploded any giant powder or other high explosive within the city limits, without a written permit authorized by the city council or police chief, is guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 342 §2, 1973; Ord. 9 §14, 1906)

 

9.20.020 Storage restrictions.
Every person who stores, keeps, owns or has control of any powder, except fifty pounds of hunting powder, nitroglycerine, dynamite or other highly explosive substances within a quarter of a mile of Main Street is guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 9 §17, 1906)

 

 

Chapter 9.24 FIREWORKS
9.24.010 Permits prohibited generally—Exceptions.
No person, other than as permitted in this chapter, shall explode any rocket, firecracker, Roman candle, torpedo, torpedo cane, black cartridge or other combustible device or explosive substance, or any kind of fireworks, by whatsoever name known, within the city; provided, that public displays of fireworks may be given with permission of the city council under a competent director who understands explosives. (Ord. 572 §1, 1995; Ord. 272 §1, 1966)

 

9.24.020 Permits for use on special occasions.
Permission may be given by the city council for the use of fireworks on special occasions, such as the Chinese New Year. This permission may be given upon the recommendation of the chief of police, and given upon terms and conditions in such recommendation. (Ord. 572 §1, 1995; Ord. 272 §2, 1966)

 

9.24.030 Sale—Use in the city.
No person shall sell or offer for sale or expose for sale at retail for use within the city, any squib, rocket, firecracker, Roman candle or fire balloon or other explosive type fireworks, or any article for the making of a pyrotechnical display within the city, except that such fireworks as are defined and classified as “safe and sane fireworks” in Section 12.500 of the Health and Safety Code may be sold and displayed. (Ord. 572 §1, 1995; Ord. 272 §3, 1966)

 

9.24.040 Sale—Permit—Required.
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to sell fireworks, except those defined herein, with the city without having first applied and received a city permit therefor. (Ord. 572 §1, 1995; Ord. 272 §4, 1966)

 

9.24.050 Sale—Permit—Prerequisite for issuance.
A.    The city may issue one sole permit for the sale of sane and safe fireworks per year. No permit shall be issued to any person, firm or corporation, except nonprofit organizations or corporations organized primarily for veteran, patriotic, welfare, civic betterment or charitable purposes.

B.     The organization must have its principal and permanent meeting place within the city limits and must have been organized and established in an area which is presently within the city limits for a minimum of one year continuously preceding the filing of the application for the license and must have a bona fide membership of at least twenty members. (Ord. 572 §1, 1995; Ord. 272 §5, 1966)

 

9.24.060 Sale—Permit—Application.
A.    All applications for permit shall be in writing to the assessor-collector, license division, on forms supplied by the city.

1.     Applications shall set forth the proposed location of the fireworks stand(s) being applied for.

2.     Applications shall be accompanied by an assurance that if the license is issued to applicant, applicant shall, at the time of receipt of such license, deliver to the city manager a five million dollar combined single limit insurance policy, with riders attached to the policies designating the city as an additional insured thereunder, and further providing that such policy shall not be canceled unless a minimum of thirty days’ written notice is provided to the city manager of any such cancellation. No policy will be acceptable which contains a provision allowing a deductible amount.

3.     Applicants shall furnish such other data or information as may be required relating to the issuance of such fireworks permit.

B.     Applicants for such permit shall be notified on March 15th of each calendar year, except for the first year after the effectiveness hereof, by the license division of the approval or disapproval of permit. The organization whose permit has been approved shall have up to and including May 15th of the year to pick up the permit and pay the license fee of twenty-five dollars.

C.     The applicant must agree to and conduct a public display of fireworks consistent with Section 9.24.020 of this chapter on July 4th for the benefit of the city. (Ord. 587 §1, 1996; Ord. 572 §1, 1995; Ord. 272 §6, 1966)

 

9.24.070 Stand—Operation.
A.    No person other than the licensee organization shall operate the stand(s) for which the license is issued or share or otherwise participate in the benefits of the operation of such stand.

B.     No person other than the individuals who are members of the licensee organization, or the wives or husbands or adult children of such members, shall sell or otherwise participate in the sale of fireworks at such stand.

C.     No person shall be paid any consideration for selling or otherwise participating in the sale of fireworks at such stand. (Ord. 572 §1, 1995; Ord. 272 §7, 1966)

 

9.24.080 Stand—Temporary.
All retail sales of “safe and sane fireworks” shall be permitted only from within a temporary fireworks stand, and the sale from any other building or structure is prohibited. Temporary stands shall be subject to the following provisions:

A.    No fireworks stand shall be located within twenty-five feet of any other building nor within fifty feet of any gasoline station.

B.     Fireworks stands need not comply with the provisions of the city building code; provided, however, that all the stands shall be erected under the supervision of the inspector who shall require that stands be constructed in a manner which will reasonably insure the safety of attendants and patrons.

C.     No stand shall have a floor area in excess of seven hundred and fifty square feet.

D.    Each stand must have at least two exits; and each stand in excess of forty feet in length must have at least three exits spaced approximately equidistant apart, provided, however, that in no case shall the distance between exits exceed twenty feet. Exit doors shall be no less than twenty-four inches wide and six feet in height and shall swing in direction of exit travel.

E.     Each stand shall be provided with two and one-half gallon pressurized type “A” fire extinguishers, in good working order and easily accessible for use in case of fire. (Ord. 572 §1, 1995; Ord. 272 §8, 1966)

 

9.24.090 General requirements for permittee.
A.    Stands in excess of two shall not be located closer than six hundred feet apart.

B.     All weeds and combustible material shall be cleared from the location of the stand, including a distance of at least twenty feet surrounding the stand.

C.     No smoking signs shall be prominently displayed on the fireworks stand.

D.    Each stand must have an adult watchman in attendance and in charge thereof which the stand is being used for the sale, dispensing, or storage of fireworks.

E.     The sale of fireworks shall not begin before twelve noon on June 28th and shall not continue after twelve midnight on July 5th.

F.     All unsold stock of fireworks in the hands of the retailer after twelve midnight on the fifth day of July, shall be returned to the distributor or wholesaler and removed from the city, within one week. On closing of stands all litter shall be removed from premises.

G.    Wholesale storage of fireworks shall be in a building meeting of the requirements of a group E-1 occupancy as defined in the Uniform Building Code of the City of Jackson and can only be stored in the city from June 1st to July 12th. (Ord. 572 §1, 1995; Ord. 272 §9, 1966)

 

 

Chapter 9.28 MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
9.28.010 Bicycle riding.
A.    Any person who rides bicycles upon any public sidewalk situated within the city business district is guilty of a misdemeanor.

B.     It is unlawful and a misdemeanor for any persons to ride more than two abreast upon any public street situated within the city.

C.     No person operating a bicycle upon any city street shall permit any person to ride as a passenger, other than upon or astride a separate attached seat. If the passenger is a minor weighing forty pounds or less, the seat shall have adequate provision for retaining the minor in place and for protecting the minor from the moving parts of the bicycle.

D.    No person shall operate a bicycle on any city street in a manner which constitutes trick riding or exhibitionist functions preventing the operator from safely controlling and stopping the bicycle and supporting it in an upright position.

E.     The penalty for violations of this section shall be as prescribed in Section 1.20.010, Misdemeanor. (Ord. 456 §1, 1981; Ord. 342 §3, 1973; Ord. 9 §21, 1906)

 

9.28.015 Skateboards, coasters—Prohibited.
A.    It is unlawful for any person or party to operate, ride or use, skateboards, roller skates, coasters, toy vehicles or similar device, on or within any public roadway, sidewalk, pathway or other public service or activity area not clearly designated or otherwise authorized for such use.

B.     The penalty for violations of this section shall be prescribed in Section 1.20.010, Misdemeanor. (Ord. 518 §1, 1987)

 

9.28.020 Expectorating.
It is unlawful and a misdemeanor to expectorate on the floor of any public building, or on any sidewalk in the city. The penalty for violations of this section shall be as prescribed in Section 1.20.010. (Ord. 334 §2, 1973; Ord. 24 §4, 1906; Ord. 9 §47, 1906)

Article IV. Offenses Against Public Decency
Chapter 9.47 OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC DECENCY
9.47.010 Purpose of provision.
A.    Depositing human urine or feces on public or private property in a manner not acceptable by law is deemed to be a serious detriment to public health, safety and quality of life.

B.     It is unlawful for any person or persons to deposit human urine or feces on any publicly-owned or maintained property, or on any private property open to the public or exposed to public view. (Ord. 642 §1, 2004)

 

9.47.020 Exemptions.
A.    Urinating or defecating in any restroom toilet or other lawfully maintained facility designed for the sanitary disposal of human waste.

B.     Any person or persons who violates this section due to a verified medical condition. (Ord. 642 §1, 2004)

 

9.47.030 Violation—Penalty.
Any person or persons violating any of the provisions of this section other than allowed in exemptions, is guilty of a misdemeanor; and, upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine, by imprisonment in the county jail, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 642 §1, 2004)

Article V. Offenses Against Public Peace
Chapter 9.48 DISTURBING THE PEACE
Note
*       Prior ordinance history: Ord. Nos. 9, 289, 334, 437, and 519.

 

9.48.010 Purpose of provision.
It is hereby found and declared that:

A.    The creation or maintenance of excessive noise or vibration which is prolonged or unreasonable in its time, place and use is deemed to be a serious detriment to the public health, safety and quality of life of the residents of the city; and

B.     Therefore, it is the intent of the city to control and, in some instances, prohibit noise and vibration which may impact the health, safety or welfare of the citizens of Jackson. (Ord. 625 §1, 2002)

 

9.48.020 Definitions.
“Loud noise” means excessive or unreasonable noise, sound or vibration which endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of others within the limits of the city. The determination of whether a noise is unreasonable shall be based on, among other things, consideration of the hour, place, nature, and circumstances of the emission or transmission of any loud noise. (Ord. 625 §2, 2002)

 

9.48.030 Types of prohibited activity.
Every person who maliciously and wilfully disturbs another person by loud and unreasonable noise, or who unlawfully fights in a public place or challenges another person in a public place to fight, or any person who uses vulgar, profane or offensive words in a public place which are inherently likely to provoke a violent reaction is guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction by any court of competent jurisdiction, shall be punished by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars, or imprisonment in the county jail for not more than six months, or by both fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 437 §2, 1979; Ord. 334 §2, 1973; Ord. 289 §1, 1969; Ord. 9 §1, 1906)

 

9.48.040 Rude behavior.
Any person who accosts in a rude or impertinent or boisterous or insulting manner, any person passing along the streets or on the sidewalks of the city, is guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 9 §16, 1906)

 

9.48.050 Drinking of alcoholic beverages on public streets in commercial areas prohibited.
A.    Any person who has in his or her possession or is drinking upon a public sidewalk or public street in any commercially zoned area of the city, an open container, glass or cup which contains any alcoholic beverage, or any person who leaves upon a public sidewalk or public street in any commercially zoned area of the city an open container, glass or cup which contains any alcoholic beverage, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.

B.     Any person violating any of the provisions of this section and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars or by imprisonment in the county jail for a term not to exceed six months, or by both fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 437 §1, 1979)

 

9.48.051 Drinking of alcoholic beverage, or possession or deposit of open container thereof on public streets or public school facilities during authorized school activity prohibited.
A.    Any person who drinks an alcoholic beverage or has in his or her possession or leaves or places an open container containing an alcoholic beverage, within or upon a public street, sidewalk, or public school facility or within two hundred feet of a public school facility during such time an authorized school activity is being conducted shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.

B.     Any person convicted of violating any of the provisions of this section shall be punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars or by imprisonment in the county jail for a term not to exceed six months, or by both fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 519 §1, 1987)

 

9.48.060 Loud noises prohibited.
No person shall make, continue or cause to be made or continued, any loud, excessive or unreasonable noise or sound within the limits of the city. (Ord. 625 §3, 2002)

 

9.48.070 Prohibited noises enumerated.
As used in this article, loud, excessive or unreasonable noise shall include, but not be limited to, the following:

A.    Radios, Amplifiers, etc. The use, operation or maintenance of sound, from any radio, musical instrument, amplifier, “boom box” or other device designed for the production or reproduction of sound in such a manner as to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of individuals on a public street, or in or near a residence, business or other such occupied structure. The creation or maintenance of such noise in such a manner so as to be plainly audible at a distance of one hundred feet from the source of such noise between the hours of ten p.m. and seven a.m. shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this section.

B.     Maintenance Equipment. The use and operation of any noise-creating commercial or residential landscaping or home maintenance equipment or tools including, but not limited to, sweepers, hammers, blowers, trimmers, mowers, chainsaws, power fans or any engine, the operation of which causes noise due to the explosion of operating gases or fluids, other than between the hours of seven a.m. and sunset on weekdays which are not holidays, between eight a.m. and sunset on Saturdays, Sundays and holidays in residential areas and seven a.m. and ten-thirty p.m. in commercial areas.

C.     Motor Vehicles. The using or operating of any motor vehicle in a manner which creates piercing or loud noises which may be heard beyond the property lines of the property from which the subject noise is produced or caused. Noise limits prescribed in the California Vehicle Code shall be applicable within Jackson city limits.

D.    Yelling, Shouting, etc. Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling or singing on a public street at any time or place with the intent to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of a person or persons in any dwelling, office, building or structure, or of any person or persons in the vicinity.

E.     Animals. The keeping of any animal or bird, as pet or livestock, which, by causing frequent or continuous noise disturbs the comfort or repose of any persons in the vicinity. The creation or maintenance of noise by animals in such a manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of one hundred feet from the source of such noise shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this section.

F.     Construction or Repair of Buildings.

1.     The erection, construction, demolition, alteration or repair of any building, structure or residence that requires a permit, or the excavation of any earth, fill, streets or highways that requires a grading permit, other than between the hours of seven a.m. and eight p.m. on weekdays which are not holidays, between eight a.m. and seven p.m. on Saturdays, between nine a.m. and five p.m. on Sundays, or those precise hours of operation enumerated in individual building and grading permits.

2.     If the building official determines that the public health, safety and welfare will not be impaired by the erection, construction, demolition, alteration or repair of any building, structure or residence during hours other than permitted in the preceding paragraph, and if he or she further determines that loss or inconvenience would result to any person in interest, he or she may grant permission for such work to be done, the specific hours and days of operation to be enumerated in the permit, subject to approval of the city manager.

3.     This section shall not be construed to require a permit for a public utility engaged in any of the aforementioned activities provided reasonable effort is made to minimize noise disturbance while such work is in progress. (Ord. 628 §1, 2002; Ord. 625 §4, 2002)

 

9.48.075 Use of engine speed governors—Compression brake systems prohibited—Pursuant to California Vehicle Code Section 21101(c).
It is unlawful to use or operate any engine speed governor system equipped on any motor vehicle within the incorporated city limits, to include all streets, roadways, and state highways, which fall under the law enforcement jurisdiction of the Jackson police department and concurrent law enforcement jurisdiction of the California Highway Patrol. (Ord. 652 §1, 2007)

 

9.48.080 Exemptions.
A.    The provisions of this article shall not apply to any bona fide emergency wherein emergency braking is necessary to avoid a collision.

B.     Schools within the city’s limits using maintenance equipment may commence at six a.m. on weekdays which are not holidays but are otherwise subject to the limitations set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 652 §1, 2007; Ord. 625 §5, 2002)

 

9.48.090 Penalty—Misdemeanor or infraction.
A.    Any person violating any provision of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor and may be punished by a fine of up to one thousand dollars or six months imprisonment or both; provided, however, that in the discretion of the district attorney or city attorney any such violation may be charged as an infraction. Any such infraction shall be punishable by a fine of one hundred dollars for the first offense, two hundred and fifty dollars for the second offense, and five hundred dollars for the third and any subsequent offense.

B.     This chapter may also be enforced by any and all other means authorized by law. Additionally, and without limitation, the city manager or his/her designee may also convene an administrative hearing with regard to any alleged violation and assess administrative penalties or require corrective action as is determined to be appropriate. (Ord. 625 §6, 2002)

 

 

Chapter 9.52 OBSTRUCTING PUBLIC WAYS
9.52.010 Deemed misdemeanor.
It is unlawful and a misdemeanor for any of the persons composing a company or crowd of three or more persons to obstruct, impede, or impair the free and peaceful passage of others on or along any street, sidewalk, bridge, public way, any parking lot to which public has access, entrance to any theater or any other place open to the public. (Ord. 524 §1, 1989; Ord. 24 §3, 1906; Ord. 9 §46, 1906)

 

9.52.020 Prohibited obstruction.
Every person who obstructs the free movement of any person (or vehicle) on any street, sidewalk or other public place or on or in any place open to the public or who exhibits offensive personal conduct (as defined and proscribed in California Penal Code Section 647) in any of the said public places with the intent to cause public inconvenience, annoyance, or alarm, or wantonly creating a risk thereof is guilty of a misdemeanor and is punishable by a fine of not less than one hundred dollars nor more than five hundred dollars, by imprisonment in the county jail for not more than six months, or by both fine and imprisonment at the discretion of the court. (Ord. 525 §2, 1989; Ord. 437 §3, 1979)

 

9.52.030 Clearance of obstructions.
Every person who wilfully refuses to obey a lawful order by a police officer to disperse so as to clear the obstruction of public ways and places as provided in this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor and is punishable by a fine of not less than one hundred dollars nor more than five hundred dollars, by imprisonment in the county jail not more than six months, or by both fine and imprisonment at the discretion of the court. (Ord. 524 §3, 1989)

 

 

Chapter 9.54 UNLAWFUL PRESENCE IN BUSINESS AREA PARKING LOTS
9.54.010 Definitions.
For purposes of this chapter:

“Duly authorized agent” means and includes, but shall not be limited to, any police officer of the city who has been given specific or general authority on behalf of the owner of a parking lot to request that persons thereon leave the lot.

“Shopping center” means any store or stores, business or businesses, office or offices, theater or theaters, or any combined array or configuration thereof, with off-street parking facilities. (Ord. 523 §2, 1988)

 

9.54.020 Unlawful acts.
A.    When a sign is in place giving notice of the provisions hereof, it shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to park it or allow it to remain parked upon any parking lot in, or adjacent to a shopping center in the city except while the driver or the occupants of the vehicle are patronizing a store or service of said shopping center.

B.     When a sign is in place giving notice of the provision hereof, it is unlawful for any person to be or remain upon any parking lot in, or adjacent to a shopping center in the city except:

1.     While crossing said lot in the course of entering or exiting a store or service at said shopping center;

2.     While exiting, entering or being in a vehicle whose driver or occupant is patronizing a store or service of said shopping center or while said vehicle is exiting or entering the parking lot;

3.     While working as an employee of said shopping center or a store or service therein.

C.     It is unlawful for any person to be on, or remain upon any parking lot in, on or adjacent to a shopping center when asked to leave by a police officer or the owner thereof, or his/her duly authorized agent; or after complying with such lawful order, such person returns within twenty-four hours and resumes the unlawful acts described above. (Ord. 523 §3, 1988)

 

9.54.030 Exceptions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply:

A.    To any person or persons who have written permission of the owner of said parking lot to be on, or remain upon said lot or to park a vehicle upon said lot;

B.     Where its application would result in an interference with or inhibition of any exercise of a constitutionally protected right of freedom of speech, such as (but not limited to) peaceful expression of political or religious opinions not involving offensive personal conduct;

C.     When its application results or is coupled with any act prohibited by the Unruh Civil Rights Act or any other provision of law relating to prohibited discrimination against any person on account of color, race, religion, creed, ancestry or national origin;

D.    Where its application would result in an interference with or inhibition of peaceful labor picketing or other lawful labor activities. (Ord. 523 §4, 1988)

 

9.54.040 Violation—Penalty.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor; and, upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine, by imprisonment in the County Jail, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 523 §5, 1988)

 

9.54.050 Scope of law.
Nothing herein contained is intended or shall be construed to be in conflict with or as a limitation upon any of the provisions of the Penal Code or the Vehicle Code of the State of California. (Ord. 523 §6, 1988)

 

 

Chapter 9.60 REGULATIONS OF PRIVATE PATROL SYSTEMS AND PERSONNEL
9.60.010 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:

A.    “Private patrol system” means any business which purports to furnish or does furnish any private policeman, watchman, or guard to patrol any territory or to guard or watch property of another person in the city.

B.     “Private patrol watchman” means any individual who patrols any territory or guards or watches property of another person within the city, and who is employed by a person holding a private patrol system permit or who himself holds a permit to operate a private patrol system, and who holds a permit as required by this chapter. (Ord. 366 §1, 1975)

 

9.60.020 Uniforms.
It is unlawful for any person to wear, or cause or permit to be worn, any uniform in the operation of a private patrol system that is similar to the uniform used by the police or fire departments, and no uniform shall be worn unless the same has been first approved by the chief of police. (Ord. 366 §1, 1975)

 

9.60.030 Badges—Unlawful wearing or display.
It is unlawful for any person to wear or display, or cause to be worn or displayed, any badge or insignia similar in design to that used by the city police or fire departments, and no badge or insignia shall be worn, displayed, or used in any manner, unless the same has been first approved by the chief of police. (Ord. 366 §1, 1975)

 

9.60.040 Badges—Unlawful sale.
It is unlawful for any person to sell, for use in the city, any badge of a like or similar design to that used by the city police department or fire department, or to sell any badge to be used by a private patrol system or private patrol watchman in the city, except upon the written order of the chief of police. (Ord. 366 §1, 1975)

 

9.60.050 Complaints to be filed with Department of Professional and Vocational Standards.
The chief of police is directed to file, or cause to be filed, with the Department of Professional and Vocational Standards of the state, a complaint against any person holding a permit to carry on the business of private detective issued by such department of professional and vocational standards, whenever he or she believes good cause exists therefor. (Ord. 366 §1, 1975)

 

9.60.060 Payment of license fees.
Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to permit any person to operate a private patrol system unless such person has first paid any license that may be required by this code or other ordinance of the city, and nothing herein shall be construed as a waiver of any such license. (Ord. 366 §1, 1975)

 

9.60.070 Method of giving notice.
Any notice required by this chapter must be in writing and may be given by personal service or by mail. In case of service by mail, the notice must be deposited in the United States Post Office, in a sealed envelope, with postage prepaid, addressed to the person on whom it is to be served, at his or her last known address as the same appears from the files of the director of finance. The service is completed at the time of the deposit in the post office. (Ord. 366 §1, 1975)

 

9.60.080 Appeals.
Any holder of a private patrol system permit, or a private patrol watchman permit, excepting to any denial, suspension, or revocation of a permit applied for or held by him or her, or to any action taken by any official of the city concerning such permit, may appeal in writing to the city council by filing with the city clerk a written notice of such appeal setting forth the specific grounds thereof. Such notice must be filed within fourteen days after notice of such action appealed from, but in no event later than thirty days after the date of such action. The city clerk shall forthwith set the matter for hearing before the council and cause notice thereof to be given to the appellant not less than five days prior to such hearing. At such hearing, the appellant shall show cause, on the grounds specified in the notice of appeal, why the action excepted to should not be approved. Such hearings may, by the council, be continued over from time to time, and its findings on the appeal shall be final and conclusive in the matter. (Ord. 366 §1, 1975)

 

9.60.100 Permit required.
It is unlawful for any person, either as principal, or agent, or otherwise, to engage in the business of operating a private patrol system without first having obtained a permit therefor as provided by this chapter. (Ord. 366 §1, 1975)

 

9.60.110 Application generally—Application fee.
Any person desiring a permit to engage in the business of operating a private patrol system shall file with the director of finance a written application in triplicate, addressed to the city tax collector, setting forth the information required by this chapter, and shall pay to the tax collector a filing fee of fifteen dollars. If such applicant is an individual, he or she shall sign the application personally. If the applicant is an association, firm, or copartnership, such application shall be signed personally by each person composing or intending to comprise such association, firm, or copartnership. If the applicant is a corporation, such application shall be signed by each member of its board of directors. Such application shall be sworn to by all persons signing the same before some person authorized to administer oaths. (Ord. 366 §1, 1975)

 

9.60.120 Contents of application.
An application for a permit to operate a private patrol system shall be accompanied by the applicant’s fingerprints and a photograph not over six months old, and shall be on a form to be supplied by the director of finance, and shall set forth the following information:

A.    The full name and home address of each person signing the application;

B.     The name under which it is proposed to operate the intended private patrol system;

C.     The business or occupation for the five years last past of each person signing the application, giving the name and address of each employer, the date of commencement and termination of employment, and the nature of the services performed by each such person;

D.    The territory of the city in which it is desired to operate the proposed private patrol system;

E.     The hours during which it is proposed to patrol such territory or render guard or watchman service;

F.     The address of the principal place of business of the applicant, or the proposed principal place of business, and all existing or proposed branch offices;

G.    The date of the issuance of the license held by the applicant, issued by the Department of Professional and Vocational Standards of the state pursuant to the laws of the state, as a private detective, and the name and address of his or her surety or sureties;

H.    A statement whether any person signing the application has ever been arrested on a charge of the commission of a felony or a charge involving moral turpitude at any time, or arrested for any reason, within the five years last past, giving full details;

I.      The name and address of the person or persons who will have the active operation and management of the business;

J.      If the applicant is a corporation, the application shall be accompanied by a certified copy of the resolution or minutes authorizing the application; and

K.    Such other information as the chief of police or the city tax collector may require. (Ord. 366 §1, 1975)

 

9.60.130 Disposition and filing of applications.
Immediately upon the receipt of an application for a private patrol system permit, the director of finance shall forward one copy thereof to the chief of police, one copy to the city tax collector, and file with the permanent records of his or her office the original application. The tax collector shall maintain a permanent file to be known as “Applications and Permits for Private Patrol Systems,” wherein he or she shall maintain separately all records and documents of his or her office pertaining to each private patrol permit application and private patrol watchman permit. (Ord. 366 §1, 1975)

 

9.60.140 Investigation of applicant.
Upon receipt from the tax collector of a copy of an application for a permit to operate a private patrol system, the chief of police shall forthwith make an investigation and written report to the city tax collector as to the truthfulness of the facts therein set forth, and the reputation and character, competency and integrity of each person signing the application, and whether the management, conduct, and operation of such proposed private patrol system will or will not comport with the public welfare, and for this purpose, shall consider any facts or evidence bearing on the moral fitness and reputation of those who will be in charge of such private patrol system, and any other evidence or fact tending to assist in enlightening the city clerk in this respect. (Ord. 366 §1, 1975)

 

9.60.150 Hearing on application—Notice of hearing.
Upon receipt of the written report of the chief of police, the tax collector shall forthwith set the application for public hearing before the city clerk at a date not less than five days after its receipt. The tax collector shall give written notice to the applicant and to such other persons as may in writing request notice, of the day, time, and place of such hearing not less than two days prior to such hearing. (Ord. 366 §1, 1975)

 

9.60.160 Issuance or denial of permit.
The city clerk shall grant or deny a permit under this chapter to the applicant within ten days after the completion of such hearing; provided, however, that the city clerk shall deny an application if it appears:

A.    That any person signing the application has ever been convicted of a felony or a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude; or

B.     That any person signing the application does not have a good reputation for honesty, or character, or integrity, or sobriety, or is not a responsible person; or

C.     For any reason, within his or her sound discretion, that a private patrol system is not needed within the territory set forth in the application, or for any other reason which would not comport with the public welfare. (Ord. 366 §1, 1975)

 

9.60.170 Surety bond requirements.
Any person who has made application for a private patrol system permit under this chapter and who does not hold a valid permit issued by the department of professional and vocational standards of the state to carry on the business of a private detective shall, before any permit is issued to him or her, deliver to and file with the director of finance a surety bond, executed by a surety company authorized to do business in the state, in the sum of five thousand dollars, conditioned for the faithful and honest conduct of such business by such applicant, which bond shall be upon a form provided by the tax collector and approved as to its form and execution by the city attorney. Such bond shall be taken in the name of the people of the city, and every person injured by the wilful or malicious or negligent or wrongful act of the principal, his or her agents or employees, may bring an action on such bond in his or her own name to recover damages suffered by reason of the wilful or malicious or negligent or wrongful act. A surety bond filed as herein required may be canceled only by service of a written notice upon the tax collector not less than five days prior to the effective date of such cancellation, and the holder of a private patrol system permit and his or her private patrol watchmen, thereby secured, shall be ipso facto, suspended upon the cancellation of the bond until such time as another bond is filed as is required in the first instance. (Ord. 366 §1, 1975)

 

9.60.180 Conditions of permit.
Any permit for a private patrol system shall be issued upon the following terms and conditions:

A.    That such private patrol system shall be operated and conducted subject to the general supervision of the chief of police; and

B.     That the holder of such permit will require each private patrol watchman employed by him or her to:

1.     Report by telephone to such places and at such intervals as the chief of police may require, and

2.     Aid, assist, and cooperate with the city police department in the detention or apprehension of persons suspected of violating the law. (Ord. 366 §1, 1975)

 

9.60.190 Revocation.
Any permit granted pursuant to this chapter for the operation of a private patrol system may be revoked by the city clerk for any reason for which the granting of such permit might be lawfully denied, or for the violation of any provision of this chapter, or for any other good cause. Such revocation shall be made only after a hearing granted to the holder of such permit before the city clerk, after five days’ notice to the permit holder, setting forth the grounds of complaint against him or her and stating the time and place where such hearing will be held. Such hearing may be continued over from time to time as the circumstances may require. Upon revocation of any permit, such permit shall be forthwith surrendered to the city clerk. The revocation of any permit shall be in addition to any other penalties otherwise provided in this code. (Ord. 366 §1, 1975)

 

9.60.200 Transfer—Consent required.
No private patrol system permit may be transferred without the written consent of the city clerk obtained upon application in the same manner as provided by this chapter for the original application for such permit. (Ord. 366 §1, 1975)

 

9.60.300 Permit required—Private patrol watchman.
It is unlawful for any person to act as a private patrol watchman, or for any person holding a private patrol system permit to employ or permit to act as a private patrol watchman, any person, unless such person holds an unrevoked permit to so act as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 366 §1, 1975)

 

9.60.310 Application generally—Application fee.
The holder of a permit for a private patrol system may file with the tax collector an application, in triplicate, requesting that a permit to act as a private patrol watchman be issued to the person therein named. The application shall be accompanied by a filing fee of five dollars, and shall be upon a form supplied by the tax collector, and shall be sworn to before a person authorized to administer oaths, and must state the length of time that the affiant has known such person, that he or she has investigated such person and believes him or her to be a man or woman of good character, honesty, and reputation, competency and integrity, and physically and mentally capable of performing the duties of a private patrol watchman, and that he or she will require such person, if a permit is granted to him or her, to conform to and abide by all requirements of this chapter. If the applicant is the holder of a private patrol system permit, he or she need only file the written statement required by Section 9.60.320. (Ord. 366 §1, 1975)

 

9.60.320 Written statement to accompany application.
An application for a private patrol watchman permit shall be accompanied by a written statement, in triplicate, upon a form supplied by the tax collector, sworn to by the person to whom it is desired that a permit be issued, before a person authorized to administer oaths, setting forth the following information:

A.    The full name and home address of such person;

B.     The business or occupation, for the five years last past, of such person, giving the name and address of each employer, the date of commencement and termination of employment and the nature of the services performed;

C.     If he or she has ever been arrested on a charge of the commission of a felony or charge involving moral turpitude at any time, or arrested for any reason within five years last past, give full details;

D.    That he or she is able to read, write, and speak the English language;

E.     Such other information as the city clerk or chief of police may require. (Ord. 366 §1, 1975)

 

9.60.330 Disposition and filing of application and statement.
Immediately upon the receipt of an application for a private patrol watchman permit, and the written statement, the tax collector shall forward one copy thereof to the chief of police, and file the original with the records of his or her office pertaining to the permit issued to the applicant. (Ord. 366 §1, 1975)

 

9.60.340 Fingerprinting and photographing of applicant.
The person named in an application for a private patrol watchman’s permit shall, within three days after the filing of such application with the tax collector, present him or herself to the police department to be photographed and fingerprinted. The police department shall forthwith cause the person to be photographed and fingerprinted, and such photograph and fingerprints shall be filed in the permanent records of the police department. (Ord. 366 §1, 1975)

 

9.60.350 Investigation of applicant—Issuance or denial of permit.
Upon receipt by the chief of police of a copy of an application and written statement as provided by this chapter, he or she shall forthwith investigate the truthfulness of the facts therein set forth, the moral fitness, and reputation, character, integrity, and competency of the person who made such statement, and if, upon the completion of such investigation, he or she concludes that such statements are true and that he or she is a qualified and fit person to act as a private patrol watchman, he or she shall issue a permit to such person granting him or her the right to act as a private patrol watchman for the person making the application; provided, however, that such application must be denied if it appears:

A.    That such person has been convicted of a felony or a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude, or a violation of any liquor or narcotic law; or

B.     That he or she does not have a good reputation for honesty, or character, or integrity, or is not a responsible person, or does not have the necessary mental or moral or physical qualifications to perform the duties of a private patrol watchman; or

C.     That he or she cannot read, write, or speak the English language. (Ord. 366 §1, 1975)

 

9.60.360 Revocation.
Any permit granted pursuant to this chapter for a private patrol watchman may be revoked by the chief of police, after an opportunity to be heard has been granted to the person holding the permit after five days’ notice of the time and place of such hearing, for the violation of any provision of this chapter, or whenever it appears to the chief of police that the person does not have the intelligence, or courage, or judgment necessary for the performance of the duties of a private patrol watchman, or has been under the influence of intoxicating liquors while performing his or her duties, or for any other good cause. (Ord. 366 §1, 1975)

 

9.60.370 Expiration of permit.
A permit to act as a private patrol watchman, unless previously revoked as provided by Section 9.60.360, shall expire and terminate upon the termination or revocation of the permit granted to the person who made application for his or her private patrol watchman permit, or upon his or her discharge, removal, or resignation as an employee of the person who made application for his or her permit. (Ord. 366 §1, 1975)

Article VI. Offenses Against Property

Article VII. Consumer Protection

Article VIII. Offenses by or Against Minors
Chapter 9.76 CURFEW
9.76.010 Definitions.
The following definitions are applicable to this chapter:

A.    “Curfew hours” mean the period from ten-thirty p.m. any night until six a.m. the following morning.

B.     “Emergency” means unforeseen circumstances or a situation that calls for immediate action. The term includes, but is not limited to, an automobile accident, fire or explosion, natural disaster or any condition requiring immediate action to prevent bodily injury or loss of life.

C.     “Establishment” means any privately owned place of business operated for profit to which the public is invited, including, but not limited to, any place of amusement or entertainment.

D.    “Guardian” means: (1) a person who, under court order, is the guardian of the minor; or (2) a public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by a court.

E.     “Minor” means any person under eighteen years of age.

F.     “Operator” means any individual, firm, association, partnership or corporation operating, managing or conduction any establishment.

G.    “Parent” means a person who is a natural parent, adoptive parent, or step-parent of a minor.

H.    “Public place” means any place the public or a substantial group of the public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, highways, common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings, transport facilities and shops.

I.      “Remain” means to: (1) linger, stay or be present; or (2) fail to leave the premises when requested to so by a peace officer, the owner, operator or other person in control of the premises.

J.      “Responsible adult” means a person at least eighteen years of age and authorized by a parent or guardian to have the care and custody of a minor. (Ord. 597 §1, 1997)

 

9.76.020 Offenses.
It is unlawful for:

A.    Any minor to remain in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the city during curfew hours; or

B.     Any parent or guardian of a minor to knowingly permit, or by insufficient control allow, the minor to remain in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the city during curfew hours; or

C.     Any owner, operator or employee of an establishment to knowingly permit a minor to remain in or upon the premises of an establishment during curfew hours. (Ord. 597 §1, 1997)

 

9.76.030 Defenses.
A.    It is a defense to prosecution of the above offenses that the minor was:

1.     Accompanied by the minor’s parent or guardian or by a responsible adult;

2.     On an errand at the direction of the minor’s parent or guardian or responsible adult, without detour or delay;

3.     In a motor vehicle involved in intrastate or interstate travel;

4.     Engaged in employment, or going to or returning home from employment, without detour or delay;

5.     Involved in an emergency;

6.     On the sidewalk adjacent to the minor’s residence, providing the minor is not otherwise violating the law;

7.     Attending an official school, religious or other adult-supervised recreational activity sponsored by the city, a civic organization or other similar entity that takes a responsibility for the safety of the minor, or going to or returning home from such an activity, without detour or delay;

8.     Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech and the right of assembly;

9.     Emancipated pursuant to law.

B.     It is a defense to prosecution under offense 9.76.020(C), that the owner, operator or employee of an establishment promptly notified the police department that a minor was present on the premises of the establishment during curfew hours and refused to leave. (Ord. 597 §1, 1997)

 

9.76.040 Enforcement.
Before taking any enforcement action under this chapter, a peace officer shall ask the apparent offender’s age and reason for being in a public place or on the premises of an establishment during curfew hours. The officer shall not issue a citation or detain a minor under this chapter unless the officer reasonably believes an offense has occurred and based upon the minor’s response(s) and other circumstances, no defense under this chapter appears present or applicable. (Ord. 597 §1, 1997)

 

9.76.050 Penalties.
Any person who violates a provision of this chapter is guilty of a separate offense for each day or part of a day during which the violation is committed, continued or permitted. Any person who violates the offenses described in this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor; provided, however, that any such offense may be charged as an infraction in the discretion of the district attorney. (Ord. 597 §1, 1997)

Article IX. Weapons
Chapter 9.88 DISCHARGE
9.88.010 Restrictions.
Every person who, on the public streets of the city or on private property, fires any gun, rifle or pistol within the city limits, except in defense of person or property, is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable as prescribed in Section 1.20.010, except persons performing or participating in:

A.    Theatrical exhibitions;

B.     Parades;

C.     Civic events; or

D.    Military events;

who have obtained a permit from the chief of police upon such terms and regulations as the city council may, from time to time, prescribe. (Ord. 334 §2, 1973; Ord. 289 §2, 1969; Ord. 9 §1(A), 1906)

Title 10 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
Chapter 10.04 STOP INTERSECTIONS
Chapter 10.05 ONE-WAY STREETS
Chapter 10.08 PARKING RESTRICTIONS
Chapter 10.14 TIME LIMITS FOR PARKING
Chapter 10.16 VEHICLE IMPOUNDMENT
Chapter 10.20 VEHICLE WEIGHT RESTRICTIONS
Chapter 10.30 PARKING FOR HANDICAPPED
Chapter 10.34 APPLICABILITY TO PRIVATE ROADS AND WAYS
Chapter 10.38 ABANDONED VEHICLE ABATEMENT

Chapter 10.04 STOP INTERSECTIONS
10.04.010 Designated.
The intersections listed below are designated as “stop” intersections:

Broadway Street at South Highway 49

Frontier Drive at Broadway Street

Pioneer Circle at Frontier Drive

Quartz Circle at Frontier Drive

Broadway Street at Clinton Road-North

Broadway Street at Clinton Road-South

Clinton Road at South Highway 49

Shopping Drive at Clinton Road

French Bar Road at Highway 49-West

French Bar Road at Highway 49-East

St. Sava Mission Road at Broadway Street

Bright Avenue at Broadway Street

South Avenue at Broadway Street

South Avenue at South Highway 49

Marcucci Lane at South Highway 49

Marcucci Lane at South Avenue

Broadway Street at Highway 88-North

Broadway Street at Highway 88-South

Center Street at East Highway 88

Center Street at Bright Avenue

Golf Course Road at Bright Avenue

Bright Avenue at Pitt Street

Pitt Street at Bright Avenue

Peek Street at South Highway 49

Schober Avenue at South Highway 49

Endicott Avenue at Sargent Avenue

Sargent Avenue at Perry Street

Lloyda Street at South Highway 49

Mattley Street at Sutter Street

Hoffman Street at Sutter Street

Sierra View Drive at Hoffman Street

Walnut Street at Hoffman Street

Rex Avenue at Hoffman Street

Rex Avenue at Sutter Street

Vogan Toll Road at North Highways 49 and 88

Vogan Toll Road at Sutter Street

City Park Exit at Sutter Street

Main Street and Highways 49 and 88

California Street at Main Street

North Main Street at Main Street

Court Street at Main Street

Court Street at Summit Street

Broadway Street at Water Street

Broadway Street at East Highway 88

Summit Street at Water Street

McDowell Street at Water Street

Pitt Street at East Highway 88-North

Pitt Street at Water Street

Court Street at Water Street

New York Ranch Road at Court Street

Court Street at East Highway 88

Pitt Street at East Highway 88-South

Court Street at Church Street

Summit Street at North Street

Stasal Avenue at North

North at North Main

North Main at North-South

North Main at North-North

Church at North Main Street

China Graveyard Road at North Main Street

Amador Hospital Exits onto Court Street

Highway 88 at Highway 49

Exit from Wells Fargo Bank Parking Lot at Highways 49 and 88

Exit from Bank of America Parking Lot at Highways 49 and 88

Pine Street at Hoffman Street

Oak Street at Hoffman Street

Hill Street at Hoffman Street

Elizabeth Street at Vogan Toll Road

Jackson Highlands Mobile Home Park at Clinton Road

North Main Street at the Jackson Apartments

Jackson Gate Road at China Graveyard Road

Perry Street at French Bar Road

Argonaut Lane at entrance of Jackson High School parking lot. (Ord. 457 §1, 1981; Ord. 392 §2, 1976; Ord. 343 §1, 1973)

 

10.04.020 Sign posting.
There is or shall be posted at the aforesaid intersections a traffic sign designating the intersection as a “stop” intersection. (Ord. 343 §2, 1973)

 

10.04.030 Compliance with stop signs.
When a “stop” traffic sign is in place it is unlawful for any person driving a vehicle to proceed into the intersection without first bringing the vehicle to a full and complete stop. (Ord. 343 §3, 1973)

 

10.04.040 Designation of additional stop intersections.
The city council may from time to time designate additional locations as “stop” intersections by resolution adopted pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 343 §4, 1973)

 

10.04.050 Violation—Penalty.
The penalty for violations of this chapter shall be as prescribed in Section 1.20.010. (Ord. 343 §5, 1973)

Chapter 10.05 ONE-WAY STREETS
10.05.010 Designated.
The following streets, or portions of streets, are restricted to traffic in only one direction as indicated:

McDowell Street between Court Street and Water Street in a southerly direction only;

Anita Street between Schober Avenue and Folger in a northerly direction only as marked;

Peek Street between Highway 88 and Schober Avenue in a southwesterly direction;

Pitt Street between Water Street to State Highway 88 E., in a southerly direction only. (Ord. 457 §2, 1981; Ord. 373 §2, 1975; Ord. 358-A §2, 1975)

 

10.05.020 Signposting.
There is or shall be posted at the aforesaid intersections a traffic sign designating the street, or portion of a street, as “one-way” traffic only. (Ord. 358-A §2, 1975)

 

10.05.030 Driving wrong way on one-way street unlawful.
It is unlawful to drive in or upon a one-way street in any direction but the one direction so designated. (Ord. 358-A §2, 1975)

 

10.05.040 Designation of additional one-way streets.
The city council may from time to time designate additional streets, or portions of streets, by resolution adopted pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 358-A §2, 1975)

 

10.05.050 Violation—Penalty.
The penalty for violation of this chapter shall be as prescribed in Section 1.20.010. (Ord. 358-A §2, 1975)

Chapter 10.08 PARKING RESTRICTIONS
10.08.010 Prohibited where.
It is unlawful to park any vehicle upon or along the following streets or portions of streets:

On the south side of Water Street between Broadway and a point one hundred fifty-five feet east of Broadway on the south side of Water Street;

On the south side of Water Street between Pitt Street and a point five hundred feet west of Pitt Street on the south side of Water Street;

On the north side of Water Street from McDowell Street twenty feet west of McDowell Street on the north side of Water Street;

On the south side of Kearney Street between Church Street and Summit Street;

Summit Street between California Street and the south side of the driveway of the house on the northwest corner of Summit and Water;

On the west side of North Main Street from Main Street to a point across from the north end of the ramp on North Main Street;

Broadway Street between State Highway 88 and Water Street;

One hundred thirty-five feet along Summit Street between Court Street and Water Street;

In front of St. Patrick’s Catholic Church between Church Street and Summit Street;

Court Street between Church Street on McDowell Street on south side;

East side of Broadway Street between State Highway 88 to Belluommi Street;

State Highway 88 between Broadway Street and 88 Fruit Stand;

South side of Pitt Street between State Highway 88 to three hundred three feet west of the eastern end of Pitt Street;

Pitt Street from Water Street to State Highway 88;

Rex Avenue between Hoffman Street and Spinks Res. on east side only during school hours;

Walnut Street adjacent to Hoffman Street on east side;

Rex Avenue curve;

State Highway 88 and 49 between Rex Avenue and Hoffman Street on west side;

Vogan Alley;

Court Street between Main Street and Summit Street on south and north side;

California Street between Main Street and Summit Street on north side;

East side of alley between Main Street and Summit Street which runs between California Street and Court Street;

North Street twenty feet east from North Main Street on the north side;

Peek Street between Peek Hill Market and Schober;

Ramp on east side of North Main between North Street and Church Street;

On both sides of State Highway 49 from a point approximately two hundred twenty-five feet north of the centerline of the north leg of Sutter Street (also known as Vogan Toll Road) to a point approximately two hundred forty-five feet south of the centerline of Main Street, and from a point approximately five hundred thirty-five feet north of the centerline of State Highway 88 to a point approximately three hundred fifteen feet south of the centerline of State Highway 88;

Upon or along the west side of State Highway 49 and 88 between approximately Engineer’s Station 589 plus 51 and Engineer’s Station 594 plus 43, both of the Department of Public Works, Division of Highways, State of California;

West side of State Highway 49-88 from the southern side of Safeway’s driveway to the north side of the Peek Hill Market driveway;

Court Street between Main Street and Summit Street on the north side;

North Main Street from a point one hundred feet from the northwest corner of the United States Post Office lot, six hundred forty-eight feet north on the west side;

North Main street from the northern boundary of Church Street, six hundred forty-eight feet north on the east side;

Twenty feet on the west side of Pine Street and five feet on the South side of Hoffman Street, at their intersection;

On North Main Street in front of St. Sava Church parking lot extending twenty-five feet north to a point thirty-five feet south of the corner of Argonaut Street;

On Broadway, forty-six feet south from the corner of Water Street;

On Water Street, eighty-three feet east from the corner of Broadway.

On Court Street, both north and south sides, between New York Ranch Road and State Highway 88 East;

On Broadway between Clinton Road and a point three hundred fifty feet northerly of Clinton Road. (Ord. 505 §1, 1986; Ord. 498 §2, 1986; Ord. 472 §1, 1982; Ord. 401 §2, 1977; Ord. 392 §1, 1976; Ord. 373 §1, 1975; Ord. 358-A §1, 1974; Ord. 344 §1, 1973; Ord. 341 §1, 1973; Ord. 292 §1, 1969; Ord. 266 §1, 1965)

 

10.08.020 Enforcement prerequisites.
Parking restriction for Highway 49-88 in Section 10.12.010 shall not become effective until:

A.    The same is approved in writing by the Department of Public Works, Division of Highways; and

B.     Signs indicating “no parking” have been erected along that section of the highway on which parking is prohibited and the curb, if any, along that section has been properly marked in red in accordance with Section 21458 of the Vehicle Code of this state, pursuant to a resolution of the city council ordering the erection of these signs and marking of these curbs on any particular portion of the State Highway, within the city limits, regularly passed subsequent to the council receiving written approval from the Department of Transportation, to prohibit parking in the particular portion of that highway described in the resolution. (Ord. 341 §2, 1973)

 

10.08.030 Violation of Section 10.08.010—Penalty.
Penalty for violations of Section 10.08.010 shall be as prescribed in Section 1.20.010. (Ord. 334 §2, 1973; Ord. 266 §4, 1965)

 

10.08.040 Designation of additional no parking streets.
The city council may from time to time by ordinance or resolution designate additional “no parking” streets or portions thereof. (Ord. 344 §2, 1973)

 

10.08.050 Sign posting authority.
The superintendent of streets is directed to cause the streets described in Section 10.12.010 to be posted with “no parking” signs. (Ord. 292 §2, 1969)

 

10.08.060 Vehicle defined.
“Vehicle,” as used in this title, means a device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may be propelled, moved, or drawn upon a highway. (Ord. 266 §2, 1965)

 

10.08.070 Violation unlawful.
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, to violate any provisions or fail to comply with the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 341 §3, 1973)

 

10.08.080 Limited parking—Defined.
“Limited parking” is parking specified to be for certain specific definite time periods only. (Ord. 295 §2, 1969)

 

10.08.090 Limited parking—Designation.
The city council may by ordinance or resolution from time to time designate limited parking on any street, parking lot, or city property within the city limits. These limited parking areas shall be posted by appropriate signs indicating the limited time period. (Ord. 295 §1, 1969)

 

10.08.100 Limited parking—Time limits.
It is unlawful to park any vehicle for longer than the designated period between nine a.m. and six p.m., Sundays and holidays excluded. (Ord. 295 §3, 1969)

 

10.08.110 Curb painted red.
It is unlawful to park a vehicle upon any portion of any street within the city within the area designated by red paint and the words “no parking” upon the adjacent curb. (Ord. 188 §1, 1948)

 

10.08.120 Curb painted green.
It is unlawful to park for a period longer than twelve minutes adjacent to any curb within the city limits where the adjacent curb is painted green. (Ord. 188 §2, 1948)

 

10.08.130 Curb painted yellow.
It is unlawful for any vehicle except authorized mail or package delivery services and commercial freight hauling delivery trucks unloading or loading freight and merchandise to and from places of business or industrial facilities, to stop or park within any area adjacent to any curb painted yellow, between the hours posted. During the hours of regulation, no vehicle may park in the zone adjacent to any curb painted yellow more than fifteen minutes at any one time. These restrictions shall apply Monday through Saturday, excepting Sundays and legal holidays. (Ord. 521 §1, 1988; Ord. 256 §1, 1963; Ord. 188 §3, 1948)

 

10.08.135 Curb painted white.
The white curb designation is for loading and unloading of passengers, or for the deposit of mail in an adjacent mailbox. It is unlawful for any vehicle to park for more than ten minutes adjacent to a white curb. No vehicle parked adjacent to a white curb may be left unattended by the operator. White curb regulations shall be in effect Monday through Friday, from seven a.m. until five p.m. Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays are exempted from this regulation. Taxicabs parked in a designated taxicab stand, pursuant to Section 5.32.280 of this code, are exempt from the restrictions of this section. (Ord. 546 §1, 1991)

 

10.08.140 Sign posted areas.
It is unlawful to park any vehicle upon any portion of any street within the city limits where the city, by appropriate signs, markings or traffic regulatory devices has indicated that no parking shall be permitted. (Ord. 546 §2, 1991; Ord. 188 §4, 1948)

 

10.08.150 Violation of Sections 10.08.110 through 10.08.140—Penalty.
The penalty for violations of Sections 10.08.110 through 10.08.140, parking restrictions, shall constitute an infraction as prescribed in Section 1.20.020. (Ord. 401 §3, 1977; Ord. 334 §2, 1973; Ord. 188 §5, 1948)

 

10.08.160 Removal of illegally parked vehicles.
Any vehicle parked, or left standing, in violation of Sections 10.08.110 through 10.08.140, parking restrictions, may be towed by the police department or their designee, at the expense of the owner of the vehicle. (Ord. 521 §3, 1988)

Chapter 10.14 TIME LIMITS FOR PARKING
10.14.010 Parking time limit zones.
The following time limits zones are hereby established in the downtown Jackson area.

A.    Parking on Main Street, from the intersection of Main Street and Highway 49/88 south to Water Street shall be set to be three hours.

B.     Parking along Water Street, from Main Street to McDowell Street, shall be set to be three hours.

C.     Parking in the parking lot on North Main Street, between the intersection with State Route 49/88 and North Street shall be set to be three hours.

D.    Parking in the parking spaces in the Civic Center parking garage, except for those spaces along the south wall and eastern area shall be three hours.

E.     Parking in the parking spaces along the south wall of the Civic Center garage shall be ten hours.

F.     Parking in the spaces in the parking lot adjacent to El Dorado Bank shall be one hour, except six spaces on the east side of the parking lot (four on the south side and two on the north side) shall be set at fifteen minutes.

 

10.14.020 Time limit enforcement periods.
Time limited parking shall apply in parking areas only between nine a.m. and six p.m.

 

10.14.030 Sundays and holidays.
Time limit parking shall not be in force on Sundays and holidays and at such other times as the city council may from time to time establish by resolution.

 

10.14.040 Unlawful parking.
It is unlawful to park any vehicle in any time limited area between the hours of nine a.m. and six p.m., for the period longer than the posted time limit for the area.

 

10.14.050 Violations—Penalty.
A.    Overtime Parking. Any vehicle parking in a time limited area for a period of time exceeding the time posted is in violation of this section and the registered owner thereof is guilty of an infraction.

B.     Overtime Parking Continuing. Any vehicle parked in violation of subsection A of this section, and having been cited for that violation, is guilty of a separate and additional violation for each period it remains exceeding the posted time limit within any twenty-four hour period. The bail or fine for multiple violations by the same vehicle within any twenty-four hour period may be set at any multiple amount set for the first violation.

C.     Interfering With Marking Devices. Any person, firm or corporation, who in any manner interferes with the lawful enforcement of these regulations, by erasing or otherwise obscuring chalk marks or other marks or devices used by the enforcing officer to determine whether a violation has occurred, is guilty of an infraction.

D.    Fines and charges for violation of this section shall be set from time to time by resolution.

Chapter 10.16 VEHICLE IMPOUNDMENT
10.16.010 Purpose of chapter.
This chapter is intended to and does implement, extend, and provide other additional and alternative penalties to those set forth in Section 1.20.010 for illegal parking violations under present or future city ordinances. (Ord. 346 §1, 1973; Ord. 237 §1, 1961)

 

10.16.020 Obstruction of police and fire officials.
It is unlawful to park any vehicle upon any street, lane or alley usually and normally used for and by the general public, used and utilized by the law enforcement department and officers of the city, used and utilized by the fire department, or the officers or members thereof while engaged in the operation of firefighting equipment, wherein, the manner or place of the parking constitutes an obstruction to the police and fire department of the city in the usual, normal, regular and necessary conduct of city business. (Ord. 237 §2, 1961)

 

10.16.030 Illegal parking.
Wherein and by virtue of any city ordinance presently in effect or enacted in the future, the parking of any vehicle is and becomes thereby unlawful or illegally parked, the provisions set forth in Sections 10.16.040—10.16.070 apply. (Ord. 346 §2, 1973; Ord. 237 §3, 1961)

 

10.16.040 Impoundment—Conditions.
Members of the police department are authorized to remove a vehicle from a street or highway to the nearest garage or other place of safety, or to a garage designated or maintained by the police department, or otherwise maintained by this city under the following additional circumstances:

A.    When any vehicle is left unattended upon any bridge, viaduct, or causeway, or in any tube or tunnel where such vehicle constitutes an obstruction to traffic;

B.     When a vehicle upon a highway is so disabled as to constitute an obstruction to traffic and the person or persons in charge of the vehicle are by reason of physical injury incapacitated to such an extent as to be unable to provide for its custody or removal;

C.     When any vehicle is left unattended upon a street and is so parked illegally as to constitute a definite hazard or obstruction to the normal movement of traffic. (Ord. 237 §3(A), 1961)

 

10.16.050 Impoundment—Notice.
Whenever an officer removes a vehicle from a street as authorized in Sections 10.16.030—10.16.070 and the officer knows or is able to ascertain from the registration records in the vehicle the name and address of the owner thereof, he or she shall immediately give or cause to be given notice in writing to such owner of the fact of such removal and the reasons therefor and of the place to which such vehicle has been removed. In the event any such vehicle is stored in a public garage, a copy of such notice shall be given to the proprietor of the garage. (Ord. 237 §3(B), 1961)

 

10.16.060 Impoundment—Report required when.
Whenever an officer removes a vehicle from a street under Sections 10.16.030—10.16.070 and does not know and is not able to ascertain the name of the owner, or for any other reason is unable to give the notice to the owner as provided in Section 10.16.050, and in the event the vehicle is not returned to the owner within a period of three days, then, and in that event, the officer shall immediately send, or cause to be sent, written report of such removal by mail to the State Department whose duty it is to register motor vehicles, and shall file a copy of such notice with the proprietor of any public garage in which the vehicle may be stored. Such notice shall include a complete description of the vehicle, the date, time, and place from which removed, the reasons for such removal, and name of the garage or place where the vehicle is stored. (Ord. 237 §3(C), 1961)

 

10.16.070 Impoundment—Costs—Payment provisions.
In the event, and whenever, under the provisions of Sections 10.16.030—10.16.070, a vehicle is impounded, the total costs for such impounding and storage, including the cost for tow-a-way, impounding and storage, must be, by the owner of the automobile, before he or she can or may reclaim the vehicle from such storage depository, pay all costs and charges incident to the tow-a-way, impounding and storage, directly to the agency physically providing the tow-a-way, impounding and storage, under the direction of the police department. (Ord. 237 §3(D), 1961)

Chapter 10.20 VEHICLE WEIGHT RESTRICTIONS
10.20.010 Truck route.
No person shall operate a motor vehicle or other object or contrivance on or over any city street except Hoffman Street, Clinton Road, French Bar Road from Highway 49 West, North Main Street, China Graveyard Road, New York Ranch Road, and Court Street from New York Ranch Road to Highway 88, when the weight of the motor vehicle or other object or contrivance, or vehicle, object, or contrivance and load on same, exceeds a total of twelve thousand pounds. (Ord. 307 §1, 1971)

 

10.20.020 Bridge weight limits.
No person shall operate a motor or other vehicle or other object or contrivance, exceeding a total of twelve thousand pounds, or vehicle, object, or contrivance and load on same exceeding twelve thousand pounds over any city bridge. (Ord. 307 §2, 1971)

 

10.20.030 Exceptions.
This chapter shall not be effective with respect to any vehicle which is a “passenger stage” as defined in Public Utilities Code, Sections 1031 et seq.; any commercial vehicle for the purpose of making pickups or deliveries of goods, wares, and merchandise from or to any building or structure located on the restricted street, or for the purpose of delivering materials to be used in the actual and bona fide repair, alteration, remodeling, or construction of any building or structure upon the restricted street for which a building permit has previously been obtained; any ambulance or hearse when operated as same; or any vehicle owned, operated, controlled, or used by a public utility in the normal course of business. (Ord. 307 §3, 1971)

 

10.20.040 When effective.
This chapter becomes effective May 30, 1971 and upon posting of signs giving notice of the limitations at all entrances to city streets affected by this chapter. (Ord. 307 §4, 1971)

 

10.20.050 Violation—Penalty.
The penalty for violations of this chapter shall be as prescribed in Section 1.20.010. (Ord. 334 §2, 1973; Ord. 307 §5, 1971)

Chapter 10.30 PARKING FOR HANDICAPPED
10.30.010 Designated—Authority.
The chief of police shall designate parking stalls or spaces in publicly owned, leased, or controlled off-street parking facilities for exclusive use by physically handicapped persons. Owners of privately operated parking facilities may reserve parking stalls for exclusive use by physically handicapped persons. (Ord. 401 §5, 1977)

 

10.30.020 Designated—Signs.
A.    Designation of “blue curb” parking stalls shall be made by posting immediately adjacent to, and visible from, same, a sign consisting of the International Symbol of Access.

B.     In addition a sign not less than seventeen inches by twenty-two inches in size must be posted, either at the entrance to the parking facility or immediately adjacent to and visible from the reserved stall, which states with lettering not less than one inch in height:

“Unauthorized vehicles not displaying distinguishing license plates or placards issued for physically handicapped persons will be issued citations.”

C.     All signs shall be posted at a height of eighty degrees from the ground. (Ord. 401 §5, 1977)

 

10.30.030 Regulations.
Persons using “blue curb” parking spaces shall comply with the following:

A.    No person shall park or stand any vehicle in a disabled persons parking zone (blue curb) unless said vehicle bears a special license or displays a special placard issued under the provisions of Section 9105 or Section 22511.5 of the California Vehicle Code.

B.     Blue curb parking spaces shall be operative twenty-four hours a day, Sundays and holidays included. (Ord. 401 §5, 1977)

 

10.30.040 Violation—Penalty.
The penalty for violation of this chapter shall be as prescribed in Section 1.20.020 of this code. (Ord. 401 §5, 1977)

Chapter 10.34 APPLICABILITY TO PRIVATE ROADS AND WAYS
10.34.010 Applicability of Vehicle Code.
The city council finds and declares that within the designated areas described in this chapter there are privately owned and maintained roads and ways generally open to the public for vehicular traffic serving various establishments, whereby upon enactment of the ordinance codified in this chapter, the provisions of the Vehicle Code may apply to such privately owned and maintained roads and ways in conformance with provisions of the California Vehicle Code. (Ord. 512 §1, 1986)

 

10.34.020 Posting of notice required.
The provisions of this chapter shall apply only during such times as the owners or operators of such private roads or ways maintain a notice to the effect that such private roads or ways are subject to the public traffic regulations enacted in this chapter. Such notice shall be posted in a conspicuous place at each entrance to such private roads and ways and shall be not less than seventeen by twenty-two inches in size, and shall have lettering not less than one inch in height. (Ord. 512 §1, 1986)

Chapter 10.38 ABANDONED VEHICLE ABATEMENT
10.38.010 Declaration of nuisance.
A.    In addition to and in accordance with the determination made and the authority granted by the state under Section 22660 of the Vehicle Code to remove, from private or public property, abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles or any parts thereof as public nuisances, the city council makes the following findings and declarations:

B.     The accumulation and storage of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles or any parts thereof on private or public property is found to create a condition tending to reduce the value of private property, to promote blight and deterioration, to invite plundering, to create fire hazards, to constitute an attractive nuisance-creating hazard to the health and safety of children, to create a harborage for rodents and insects and to be injurious to the health, safety and general welfare. Therefore, the presence of an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle, or any part thereof, on private or public property, except as expressly hereinafter permitted, is declared to constitute a public nuisance which may be abated as such in this chapter. (Ord. 573 §1, 1995)

 

10.38.020 Definitions.
As used in this chapter:

A.    “Abandoned vehicle” means a motor vehicle left on a highway, public property, or private property in such an inoperable or neglected condition that it may be reasonably inferred that the owner’s intention is to relinquish all further rights or interests in the vehicle.

A vehicle is presumed to be “abandoned” when it is left on a highway for seventy-two hours or more without being moved, is parked, resting, or otherwise immobilized on any highway or public right-of-way and lacks an engine, transmission, wheels, tires, doors, windshield, or any other part or equipment necessary to operate the vehicle safely on the highway. Vehicles found in such a condition on a highway or public right-of-way are presumed to be a hazard to public health, safety and welfare and may be removed immediately upon discovery by a peace officer or other designated employee.

B.     “Designated employee” or “designee” means a city employee designated in writing by the city manager.

C.     “Dismantled vehicle” means any motor vehicle that is partially or wholly disassembled.

D.    “Highway” means a way or place of whatever nature, publicly maintained and open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. “Highway” includes a street, and all or any part of the entire width of the right-of-way of said highway.

E.     “Inoperative vehicle” means any motor vehicle that cannot move under its own power.

F.     “Public property” includes streets and “highways.”

G.    “Vehicle” means a device by which any person or property may be propelled, moved, or drawn upon a highway, except a device moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.

H.    “Wrecked vehicle” means any motor vehicle that is damaged to such an extent that it cannot lawfully be operated upon the highway. A vehicle which has been wrecked in a traffic collision, then removed from the roadway to a storage facility, but not yet claimed by its owner, will not be considered an abandoned vehicle. (Ord. 573 §1, 1995)

 

10.38.030 Exceptions.
This chapter shall not apply to:

A.    A vehicle or any part thereof which is completely enclosed within a building in a lawful manner where it is not visible from the street or other public or private property; or

B.     A vehicle or any part thereof which is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed dismantler, licensed vehicle dealer, or a licensed junk dealer, or when such storage or parking is necessary to the operation of a lawfully conducted business or commercial enterprise; or

C.     Nothing in this section shall authorize the maintenance of a public or private nuisance as defined under the provisions of law. (Ord. 573 §1, 1995)

 

10.38.040 Chapter not exclusive regulation.
The provisions of this chapter are not the exclusive regulation of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles. It is in addition to the other regulatory codes, statutes and ordinances heretofore or hereafter enacted by the city, the county, the state or any other legal entity or agency having jurisdiction. (Ord. 573 §1, 1995)

 

10.38.050 Enforcement authority—Right of entry.
Except as otherwise provided herein, the provisions of this chapter may be administered and enforced by the city manager or designated employees. In enforcing this chapter, designated employees may enter upon private or public property to examine a vehicle or parts thereof, or obtain information as to the identity of a vehicle (and to remove or cause the removal of a vehicle or parts thereof) declared to be a nuisance pursuant to this chapter; provided, however, that such entry shall be made in a lawful manner. (Ord. 573 §1, 1995)

 

10.38.060 Contract or franchise—Right of entry for removal of vehicle.
When the city has contracted with or granted a franchise to any person or persons, such person or persons shall be authorized to enter upon private property or public property to remove or cause the removal of a vehicle or parts thereof declared to be a nuisance pursuant to this chapter; provided, however, that such entry shall be made in a lawful manner. (Ord. 573 §1, 1995)

 

10.38.070 Administrative costs determination.
The city council, by resolution, shall from time to time determine and fix an amount to be assessed as administrative costs (excluding the actual cost of removal of any vehicle or part thereof) under this chapter. Such amount shall be based on an analysis of the staff time reasonably necessary to process each case involving the removal of a vehicle, and shall not exceed the good-faith estimate of such administrative costs based on such analysis. (Ord. 573 §1, 1995)

 

10.38.080 Notice of intention to abate and remove vehicle.
A.    Unless both the property owner and the owner of the vehicle have signed releases authorizing removal and waiving further interest in the vehicle or any part thereof, not less than ten days before the date of intended removal of the vehicle pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, a notice of intention to abate and remove the abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle shall be sent by the city manager or his/her designee by registered or certified mail, to the owner of the land on which the vehicle is located, as shown on the last equalized assessment roll, and to the last registered and legal owners of the vehicle, unless the vehicle is in such condition that identification numbers are not available to determine ownership. It shall not be a prerequisite to removal of the vehicle pursuant to this section that the return receipt be received showing delivery of the notice.

B.     Such notice of intention shall contain a statement that the owner of the property and the owner of the vehicle have a right to request a hearing before the designated employee, at which hearing the property owner may in lieu of appearing, submit a sworn written statement denying responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on the land, with his or her reasons for such denial. If such a statement is submitted, it shall be construed as a request for hearing on the issue of assessment of costs which does not require the presence of the property owner submitting such request, although the submission of such a statement shall not preclude the owner from presenting testimony at the hearing if he or she should decide to do so. If, based on the inspection by the designated employee or his/her designated representative, there is evidence that a known third party who is not the property owner or the vehicle owner left the vehicle on the property without the consent of the vehicle owner or the property owner, the notice referenced above in this section shall be sent to said third party in the manner specified in this section, at the best known address available to the designated employee. The request shall be made to the designated employee within ten days after the mailing of the notice of intention to abate and remove the vehicle. If such a request is not received within such period, the designated employee shall have authority to remove or cause the removal of the vehicle. (Ord. 573 §1, 1995)

 

10.38.090 Conduct of hearing.
If either the property owner or the vehicle owner requests a hearing within ten days after the mailing of the notice of intention to abate and remove the vehicle, the person or persons making such request shall be entitled to a hearing before the designated employee, who shall hear all facts and testimony the designated employee deems pertinent. (Ord. 573 §1, 1995)

 

10.38.100 Appeal to city council.
A.    Any interested party may appeal the decision of the designated employee by filing a written notice of appeal with the designated employee within five days of his or her decision. Appellant shall pay an appeal fee of seventy-five dollars when filing an appeal with the city council. No such appeal fee shall be required unless the appeal is from such hearing.

B.     Such appeal shall be heard by the city council, which may affirm, amend, or reverse the order or take such other action as it deems appropriate.

C.     The city council shall give written notice of the time and place of the hearing to the appellant and those persons specified as entitled to notice under Section 10.38.080 of this chapter.

D.    In conducting the hearing, the city council shall not be limited by the technical rules of evidence. (Ord. 573 §1, 1995)

 

10.38.110 Order of vehicle removal—Assessment of costs.
A.    If no request for a hearing is received by the city manager or his/her designee within ten days after the notice is mailed, or both the property owner and the owner of the vehicle have signed releases authorizing removal and waiving further interest in the vehicle, and the city manager or his/her designee finds, at the conclusion of the hearing, that the vehicle or part thereof is abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative within the meaning of this chapter, and in the event of an appeal to the city council, the city council upholds the city manager or his/her designee’s findings, then the city manager or his/her designee may order the vehicle removed from the property as a public nuisance and disposed of as hereinafter provided, and determine the administrative costs and the costs of removal to be charged against the owner of the vehicle, the owner of the property on which it is located, and/or the person who placed the vehicle on the property if that fact has been determined at the hearing.

B.     The city manager or his/her designee may impose such conditions and take such other action as he or she deems appropriate under the circumstances to carry out the purposes of this chapter, including without limitation delaying the time for removal of the vehicle or part thereof if, in his or her opinion, the circumstances justify it. If the vehicle is ordered removed, the order shall include a description of the vehicle or part thereof and the correct identification number and license number, if available. (Ord. 573 §1, 1995)

 

10.38.120 Exceptions to hearing requirement.
A hearing as provided above in this chapter shall not be required under the following circumstances:

A.    When both the property owner and the owner of the vehicle have signed releases authorizing removal and waiving further interest in the vehicle or any part thereof; or

B.     When the property owner has signed a release authorizing removal and waiving further interest in the vehicle or any part thereof and the vehicle is located upon a parcel which is:

1.     Either zoned for agricultural use, or is not improved with a residential structure containing one or more dwelling units, and

2.     Inoperable due to the absence of a motor, transmission, or wheels and is incapable of being towed, and

3.     Valued at less than three hundred dollars by the city manager or his/her designee, the Jackson police chief or any of his or her officers, or any California Highway Patrol officer, and

4.     Determined by the city manager or his/her designee to be a public nuisance presenting an immediate threat to public health or safety.

Prior to final disposition pursuant to Section 10.38.130 of this chapter, of such a low-valued vehicle for which evidence of registration is available, the city manager or his/her designee shall provide notice to the registered and legal owners of intent to dispose of the vehicle or any part thereof, and if the vehicle or any part thereof is not claimed and removed within ten days after the notice is mailed, from the disposal site to which the vehicle was taken, final disposition may proceed. (Ord. 573 §1, 1995)

 

10.38.130 Disposition of vehicle or parts.
Vehicles or any parts thereof removed pursuant to this chapter may be disposed of by removal to a scrap yard, automobile dismantler’s yard, or any suitable site to receive junk and/or dismantled vehicles. (Ord. 573 §1, 1995)

 

10.38.140 Prohibition against reconstruction.
After a vehicle or any part thereof has been removed, it shall not be reconstructed or made operable, unless it is a vehicle which qualifies for either horseless carriage license plates or historical vehicle license plates, pursuant to Vehicle Code Section 5004, in which case the vehicle may be reconstructed or made operable. (Ord. 573 §1, 1995)

 

10.38.150 Notice to Department of Motor Vehicles.
Within five days after the date of removal of the vehicle pursuant to this chapter, notice shall be given by the city manager or his/her designee to the Department of Motor Vehicles, identifying the vehicle or any part thereof, and any evidence of registration available, including, but not limited to, the registration card, certificates of ownership, or license plates. (Ord. 573 §1, 1995)

 

10.38.160 Notice to California Highway Patrol.
An employee, other than a peace officer or employee of a sheriff’s department, designated to remove vehicles pursuant to Section 22669 of the Vehicle Code may do so only after he or she has mailed or personally delivered a written report identifying the vehicle and its location to the Department of California Highway Patrol located nearest to the vehicle. (Ord. 573 §1, 1995)

 

10.38.170 Collection of delinquent assessment.
If the administrative costs and costs of removal are charged against the owner of the land pursuant to Section 10.38.110 and are not paid within thirty days of the date of the order, or the final disposition of an appeal therefrom, such costs shall be assessed against the parcel of land pursuant to Section 38773.5 of the Government Code, and shall be transmitted to the finance officer for collection subject to collection in any manner specified in said section. Such assessment shall have the same priority as other municipal taxes. (Ord. 573 §1, 1995)

 

10.38.180 Collection of costs.
If the administrative costs and costs of removal are not paid within thirty days after the date of the order, or the final disposition of an appeal therefrom, the designated employee shall have the right, in addition to any other manner provided by law for the collection of such costs, to recover such administrative costs and costs of removal from the property, the registered owner and/or legal owner of any vehicle removed from property pursuant to this chapter, and/or from the third party, if any, responsible for placing such vehicle on the property from which it was removed in an action in a court of competent jurisdiction over the amount of such costs. (Ord. 573 §1, 1995)

 

10.38.190 Refusal to remove vehicle—Misdemeanor.
It is unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person to fail or refuse to remove an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle or part thereof or refuse to abate such nuisance when ordered to do so in accordance with the abatement provisions of this chapter or state law where state law is applicable. This offense is punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars or imprisonment in the city jail not to exceed six months, or by both such fine or imprisonment. (Ord. 573 §1, 1995)

Title 11 RESERVED

Title 12 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Chapter 12.04 EXCAVATIONS
Chapter 12.08 ENCROACHMENTS
Chapter 12.12 PARKS

Chapter 12.04 EXCAVATIONS
12.04.010 Permit required.
It is unlawful for any person to lay, construct, or maintain any pipes, drain or conduit across, along or on any city street or to make any excavation or cut or obstruction therein for such purpose, without first obtaining a permit to do so, in the manner provided in this chapter.

A.    “Person” includes any firm, corporation or political subdivision.

B.     “Obstruction” shall not be deemed to include poles or pole line appurtenances. (Ord. 447 §2, 1980; Ord. 123 §1, 1928)

 

12.04.020 Bond required.
When any person desires to tear up or disturb any part of any paved street in the city, he or she shall, in addition to procuring the permit provided for in Section 12.04.010, also give to the city a cash bond, in such amount as the city council may require, conditioned that the street where torn up or disturbed shall be placed in the same condition that it was in before being torn up or disturbed. (Ord. 123 §2, 1928)

 

12.04.030 Violation—Penalty.
The penalty for violations of this chapter shall be as prescribed in Section 1.20.010. (Ord. 334 §2, 1973; Ord. 123 §3, 1928)

Chapter 12.08 ENCROACHMENTS
12.08.005 Definitions.
Whenever in this chapter the words or phrases defined in this section are used, they shall have the following respective meanings:

A.    “Adjoining property” means the private property located immediately adjacent to the section of public right-of-way to be encroached upon.

B.     “Applicant” means any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, entity or organization of any kind who proposes to encroach upon a public place, right-of-way, sidewalk or street and who has applied for a permit for the proposed encroachment, pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.

C.     “City engineer” means the city engineer of the City of Jackson or his/her designee.

D.    “City inspector” means the city’s senior building or public works inspector or his/her designee.

E.     “Encroachment area” means the section of public right-of-way located between the property line and the edge of the walkway or roadway.

F.     “Encroachment” means and includes any paving, obstruction, fence, stand, building, entry monument, or any structure or object of any kind or character, including, but not limited to, a window in violation of Section 12.08.010 or any improvement requiring an encroachment permit pursuant to Section 12.08.020, which is placed on, in, along, under, over or across a public place, right-of-way, sidewalk or street by or for the use of the adjoining property.

G.    “Encroachment work” means the work of constructing, placing or installing an encroachment.

H.    “Excavation” means any opening in the surface of a public place, right-of-way, sidewalk or street made in any manner whatsoever. The term shall also include any excavation on private property which removes or imperils the lateral support of a public place, right-of-way, sidewalk or street.

I.      “Occupy” means owning or operating any facilities that are located in rights-of-way.

J.      “Person” means any living individual, public or private corporation, joint venture, partnership, other business entity, the state or a political subdivision of the state.

K.    “Public walkway” means the portion of the public right-of-way improved and designated by the city for pedestrian travel.

L.     “Right-of-way” means the surface and space in, on, above, through and below any real property in which the City of Jackson has a legal or equitable interest whether held in fee or any other estate or interest, or as a trustee for the public, including, but not limited to, any public street, boulevard, road, highway, freeway, lane, alley, court, sidewalk, curb, parkway, river, tunnel, viaduct, bridge, public easement, or dedicated easement.

M.    “Usable surface” means a relatively level surface intended for active recreation, passive occupation, or pedestrian access, including, but not limited to, lawns, patios and decks, but excluding a walkway not exceeding forty-four inches in width that provides access from the public walkway to private property.

N.    “Utility district” or “public utility” means any entity as defined in Public Utilities Code Section 216 or the state or any political subdivision of the state providing substantially similar services. (Ord. 659, 2009; Ord. 39, 1908)

 

12.08.010 Projecting windows.
It is unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person to construct or permit to remain on premises belonging to him or her, or under his or her possession or control, any bow, or other window, projecting into or over any sidewalk from the first story of any building on the premises, within the city limits and without an encroachment permit issued pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 659, 2009; Ord. 39, 1908)

 

12.08.020 Porches, awnings, roofs, balconies.
Except as authorized by an encroachment permit issued pursuant to this chapter, it is unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person to erect and maintain, or permit to remain any post, pole or support of any kind imbedded in, attached to or connected with, sidewalks or streets of the city for the support of any porch, awning, roof, shelter, veranda or balcony in front of any premises owned or controlled by him or her. Except as authorized by an encroachment permit issued pursuant to this chapter, all porches, awnings, roofs, shelters, verandas and balconies shall be at least ten feet above the main traveled portion of sidewalks and be securely built into the buildings of which they form a part, or be supported by iron brackets, or other contrivances, securely and safely attached to buildings. (Ord. 659, 2009; Ord. 69, 1912)

 

12.08.030 Permit—Required.
It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to construct, create, occupy or use an encroachment in the public right-of-way without an encroachment permit. To the extent permitted by law the issuance of such a permit shall be discretionary and may be denied or revoked without cause. Application of this chapter shall include, but not be limited to, private improvements, long-term commercial use and commercial sidewalk dining, temporary access for installation of private street improvements and all other intrusions into the public right-of-way whether temporary or permanent. (Ord. 659, 2009; Ord. 316, 1972)

 

12.08.040 Council action.
The city council may establish from time to time by resolution, the procedures to be followed for requesting and obtaining written approval to encroach upon city property. The city council may also, from time to time by resolution, adopt such regulations, conditions, standards or other requirements as it deems best and advisable in the circumstances consistent with the objectives of this chapter. (Ord. 659, 2009; Ord. 316, 1972)

 

12.08.050 Permit—Procedure.
Any person shall submit to the city engineer an application for an encroachment permit, approval of which permit is required by the engineer prior to any encroachment as defined in this chapter.

A.    Blanket Permit. Any utility district or public utility is entitled to apply for a blanket permit issued by the city engineer, renewable annually, for the installation and maintenance of its facilities located within the city street right-of-way outside of paved roadway. Any utility district or public utility that has had a permit revoked for failure to comply with the provisions of this code may obtain a permit only after furnishing a bond.

B.     Content of Permit. Every applicant shall state in detail the information required on the forms provided by the city, and all applicants for a permit other than a blanket permit shall state the following:

1.     The location, dimension, purpose, extent and nature of the encroachment or encroachments;

2.     The time during which it is estimated the excavation or obstruction will exist;

3.     Such other information as may be required by the engineer including a designation of tie-in points.

In the case of an annual permittee such information, together with the annual permit number, shall be shown on the working sketch or plat.

C.     Non-Utility Applicants. All permit applicants and drawings appurtenant thereto, other than those submitted annually by public utilities, shall be submitted to the city engineer for his/her approval prior to the date for commencement of work involving the encroachment.

D.    Utility Applicants. Public utilities who have been granted annual permits shall nevertheless submit a working sketch or plat for the city engineer’s review and signature of approval at least ten days prior to the commencement of any work involving the encroachment. Public utilities with minor jobs and services involving an encroachment shall be excepted from this requirement with regard to those jobs only.

E.     Actual Notification. All applicants and permittees shall provide the city with actual notifications, by telephone call or post card, to start work on the encroachment preferably ten days but in no event less than forty-eight hours in advance of commencement of the work.

F.     Emergency Exceptions. Notwithstanding the requirements contained in subsections D and E of this section, in the event of an emergency the applicant shall notify the city of the encroachment at the time of the occurrence or as soon thereafter as possible, providing that it was otherwise impossible for the utility to give notification in compliance with subsection E of this section, or to provide work sketch pursuant to subsection D of this section.

G.    Permit Fee. The city council shall establish by resolution a fee for all encroachment permits based on the city’s costs of administration and inspection of said encroachments. And at least once a year the city council shall set a cost per square foot of resurfacing as recommended by the city engineer.

H.    Issuance. After consulting with the city inspector, the city engineer shall issue a written decision regarding each encroachment permit application. If the decision grants the encroachment, it shall set forth the conditions to be imposed. The decision of the city engineer shall be final ten calendar days after mailing a copy of the decision to the applicant and shall be consistent with any regulations, conditions, standards or other requirements adopted by the city council pursuant to Section 12.08.040. In the event the city engineer issues an encroachment permit and the applicant wishes to challenge a condition of the permit, the applicant may appeal the decision in the same manner as requesting an exception pursuant to subsection I.

I.      Exceptions. Any applicant wishes to appeal the city engineer’s decision shall request such appeal in writing to the city council within ten working days of the mailing of the city engineer’s decision. Applications which are inconsistent with any regulations, conditions, standards or other requirements adopted by the city council pursuant to Section 12.08.040 must be appealed to and approved by the city council. A notice shall be sent to the property owners whose lots’ front property lines are within three hundred feet of the subject encroachment area site at least ten calendar days prior to each body’s consideration of the exception request. The notice will describe the proposed encroachment, make the plans available for review, and set a deadline for registering objections. Upon consideration of such appeal application, the city council may approve, modify, or disapprove the application for encroachment. The action of the city council shall be final.

J.      Revocation. The city engineer or the city council may revoke any encroachment permit for noncompliance with the conditions set forth in granting such encroachment. A written notice shall be mailed to the permittee of such revocation. Within ten working days of mailing of such notice of revocation to the permittee, a written appeal of such action may be filed. Any such appeal shall be made to the city council and the council’s determination of the matter shall be final. (Ord. 659, 2009; Ord. 447, 1980; Ord. 316, 1972)

 

12.08.060 Violation—Penalty.
Violation of this chapter shall be punishable as a misdemeanor as set forth in Section 1.20.010 of this code. Causing, permitting, aiding, abetting, or concealing a violation of any provision of this chapter shall constitute a separate violation of such provision. (Ord. 659, 2009; Ord. 334, 1973; Ord. 316, 1972; Ord. 69, 1912; Ord. 39, 1908)

 

12.08.070 Restoration of public right-of-way.
Upon completion of the encroachment work authorized by a permit, the permittee shall restore the right-of-way or street by replacing, repairing or rebuilding it in accordance with the specifications or any special requirement included in the permit, but not less than to its original condition before the encroachment work was commenced and in all cases in good usable quality. The permittee shall remove all obstructions, materials and debris upon the right-of-way and street, and shall do any other work necessary to restore the right-of-way and street to a safe and usable condition, as directed by the city engineer. Where excavation occurs within areas already paved, the city engineer may require temporary paving to be installed within four hours after the excavation area is backfilled. In the event that the permittee fails to act promptly to restore the right-of-way and/or street as provided in this section, or should the nature of any damage to the right-of-way or street require restoration before the permittee can be notified or can respond to notification, the city engineer may, at his or her option, make the necessary restoration and the permittee shall reimburse the city for the full cost of such work, and such cost shall be a lien upon the permittee’s adjacent real property.

In addition, if upon completion of the backfilling of the excavation the permittee has cut an area of three hundred square feet, more or less, the permittee shall paint the outside perimeters of the cut area to correspond with the underground service alert colors.

The area included within the painted perimeter shall be calculated in square footage and the square footage commitment for resurfacing shall be mutually agreeable between the permittee and the city engineer at the time of final inspection.

 

Color

Symbol

Name

Blue

W

Water

Orange

Tele-FA

Communications

Green

D

Storm Drain

 

S

Sewer

Red

L

Street Lighting

 

E

Electric

 

T

Traffic Signal

Yellow

G

Gas-oil

 

In case of an excavation involving more than one utility company, the U.S.A. color of the coordinating company shall be painted around the encroachment area. (Ord. 659, 2009; Ord. 447, 1980)

 

12.08.080 City inspection.
The city inspector shall require that inspections be completed before commencement, and after completion of encroachment work. Inspections while encroachment work is in progress shall be completed as determined to be appropriate by the city inspector or city engineer. Such inspection fee shall be included in the permit fee. No cost of inspection shall be charged to any public corporation provided, however, that this section shall not operate to prevent charges made pursuant to Government Code Section 6103.6. (Ord. 659, 2009; Ord. 447, 1980)

 

12.08.090 Maintenance.
A.    The permittee shall, by acceptance of the permit, exercise reasonable care to properly maintain any encroachment placed by it in the city right-of-way, and to properly inspect and immediately repair it, making good any damage to the street which occurs as a result of the encroachment or as a result of the work done under this permit.

B.     If the city has made a commitment to repave an area for a permittee and the permittee has submitted payment therefor to the city, then the city shall assume all reasonable liability for the resurfacing or patching of the encroachment eight months after the date of the commitment to repave. Reasonable liability by the city for the encroachment shall not include trench or compaction failure or other similar type repair. (Ord. 659, 2009; Ord. 447, 1980)

 

12.08.100 Nonconforming encroachments.
A.    Existing encroachments which do not conform to this Chapter 12.08 and any regulations, conditions, standards or other requirements adopted pursuant to Section 12.08.040 must be removed or brought into conformance if the related structure on the adjoining property is significantly remodeled or reconstructed or if any new significant construction is proposed in the public right-of-way. Existing permitted improvements that have been made nonconforming by changes to these standards may otherwise remain provided any nonconforming element is not increased or expanded. The intent is to cause nonconforming encroachments to be brought into conformity concurrent with major alterations or entirely new structures constructed on adjoining private property.

B.     Routine maintenance and repair may be performed on a nonconforming encroachment structure or improvement and replacement with a comparable improvement is permitted upon demonstration that the encroachment is deteriorated and creating an unsafe condition. (Ord. 659, 2009; Ord. 447, 1980)

 

12.08.110 Relocation.
Any permit issued under this chapter shall contain a provision that in the event that future improvement of the right-of-way necessitates the relocation of such encroachment, the permittee will relocate the same at his or her sole expense, providing that the project necessitating the relocation is publicly funded. In said event, the city engineer shall serve upon the permittee a written demand specifying the place of relocation and a reasonable time within which the work of relocation must be completed. (Ord. 659, 2009; Ord. 447, 1980)

 

12.08.120 Enforcement.
In addition to any other remedies provided in this section, any violation of this chapter may be enforced by civil action brought by the city. In any such action, the city may seek, as appropriate, any or all of the following remedies: a temporary and/or permanent injunction; assessment of the violator for the costs of any investigation, inspection, or monitoring survey which led to the establishment of the violation, and for the reasonable costs of preparing and bringing legal action under this section; costs incurred in removing, correcting, or terminating the adverse effects resulting from violation; compensatory damages; and attorney fees. (Ord. 659, 2009; Ord. 447, 1980)

 

12.08.130 City liability.
The issuance of a permit under this chapter shall not be construed as imposing any liability upon the city or upon any of its officers or employees by reason of damages or injury to persons or property resulting from any excavating or obstruction authorized by the permit; and any cleanup or other work related to any excavation which is not satisfactorily completed may be completed by the city at the permittee’s expense.

 

12.08.140 Time limit.
A.    Any encroachment granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be developed and utilized within a period not to exceed twelve months from and after the date of the granting of such encroachment, and, if not so developed and utilized, such encroachment automatically shall become null and void at the expiration of such twelve-month period.

B.     The permittee may apply in writing for one extension of time, not to exceed six months, within which to develop and use such encroachment. The city engineer, in his or her sole discretion after due consideration, shall either grant or deny the extension of time for such development and use. (Ord. 659, 2009)

Chapter 12.12 PARKS
12.12.010 Hours of operation.
A.    All parks owned or operated by the city, except for Kennedy Tailing Wheels Park, shall close at nine p.m. Sundays through Thursdays, and at ten p.m. Fridays and Saturdays. The closing time at Kennedy Tailing Wheels Park shall be at sunset each day. Parks, except for Kennedy Tailing Wheels Park, will close at ten p.m. on official holidays as set forth from time to time by resolution of the city council.

B.     All parks owned or operated by the city, except Kennedy Tailing Wheels Park, shall open at seven a.m. The Kennedy Tailing Wheels Park shall open at eight a.m. (Ord. 691 §1, 2016)

 

12.12.020 Extension of hours—Permit required.
A.    With issuance of a permit as specified below, regularly scheduled and approved events (baseball, swimming, dances, and other activities, etc.) may be extended past normal closing time of the parks.

B.     Use of a city park after closing time will be by permit only. The police department, including field officers, will be empowered to issue the permits if the officer determines that there is no significant likelihood of disturbance of the peace and no significant increase in potential for injury to persons or property.

C.     Persons without permission to be in the park after closing time will be asked to leave. Failure to do so constitutes an infraction for which they may be cited under this code. (Ord. 508 §1(C—E), 1986)

 

12.12.030 Closure of entrances and exits—Signs.
A.    Park entrances and exits may be chained or otherwise closed to access during hours the park is closed.

B.     Park entrances shall be conspicuously signed advising of park hours, traffic rules and other rules concerning the use thereof. (Ord. 508 §1(F, G), 1986)

 

12.12.040 Glass containers restricted.
Glass containers for beverages will be allowed only in designated picnic areas. (Ord. 508 §1(H), 1986)

 

12.12.050 Drug free zones.
The city parks and playgrounds set forth in this section are declared to be drug free zones pursuant to California Health and Safety Code Section 11380.5 which sets forth enhanced penalties for specified offenses involving the possession or sale of controlled substances which occur upon the grounds of city parks and playgrounds. The parks and playgrounds declared to be drug free zones are as follows:

A.    Detert Park;

B.     Petkovich Park. (Ord. 582, 1996)

 

12.12.055 Alcoholic beverage restrictions.
A.    No person shall use, possess or consume any alcoholic beverage within Petkovich Park or Detert Park.

B.     This prohibition shall become effective and enforceable only upon placement of signs of sufficient size, number and visibility to provide reasonable notice to park patrons of the prohibition. All such signs shall be approved by the chief of police prior to their placement.

C.     The city council may, from time to time, grant special use permits to permit the use, possession or consumption of alcoholic beverages in the parks listed in this section. Such permits shall be issued under standards that require liability insurance, security, and traffic and parking control for any such use. (Ord. 641 §1, 1996)

 

12.12.057 Tobacco restrictions.
A.    Tobacco use is prohibited in all current and future parks within the City of Jackson, including Detert Park, Aime Field, the Jackson Pool, Kennedy Tailing Wheel Park, Petkovich Park, and Gold Ridge Park. This shall include all areas of the parks, including streets and sidewalks within the parks.

B.     No person shall be in possession of a burning tobacco or tobacco related product, including, but not limited to, cigars, cigarettes, chewing tobacco, or electronic smoking devices. This includes e-cigarettes and all vapor smoking devices.

C.     Clear signage must be posted in all parks at any and all entrances and within the park notifying citizens of tobacco restrictions. This prohibition shall become effective upon the posting of the appropriate signage. (Ord. 686 §2, 2015)

 

12.12.060 Penalty—Misdemeanor or infraction.
Any person violating any provision of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor and may be punished by a fine of up to one thousand dollars or six months imprisonment or both; provided, however, that in the discretion of the district attorney or city attorney any such violation may be charged as an infraction. Any such infraction shall be punishable by a fine of one hundred dollars for the first offense, two hundred and fifty dollars for the second offense, and five hundred dollars for the third and any sequent offense. (Ord. 641 §1, 1996)

Title 13 PUBLIC UTILITIES
Article I. Electric Power and Communication Service
Article II. Sewers
Article III. Water

Article I. Electric Power and Communication Service
Chapter 13.04 UNDERGROUND UTILITIES
13.04.010 Definitions.
Whenever in this chapter the words or phrases defined in this section are used, they shall have the following respective meanings:

A.    “Commission” means the Public Utilities Commission of the State of California.

B.     “Person” means and includes individuals, firms, corporations, partnerships, and their agents and employees.

C.     “Poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures” mean poles, towers, supports, wires, conductors, guys, stubs, platforms, crossarms, braces, transformers, insulators, cutouts, switches, communication circuits, appliances, attachments and appurtenances located above-ground within a district and used or useful in supplying electric, communication or similar or associated service.

D.    “Underground utility district” or “district” means that area in the city within which poles, overhead wires, and associated overhead structures are prohibited as such area is described in a resolution adopted pursuant to the provisions of Section 13.04.030.

E.     “Utility” includes all persons or entities supplying electric, communication or similar or associated service by means of electrical materials or devices. (Ord. 284 §1, 1969)

 

13.04.020 Public hearing by council.
The council may, from time to time, call public hearings to ascertain whether the public necessity, health, safety or welfare requires the removal of poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures within designated areas of the city and the underground installation of wires and facilities for supplying electric, communication, or similar or associated service. The city clerk shall notify all affected property owners as shown on the last equalized assessment roll and utilities concerned by mail of the time and place of such hearings at least ten days prior to the date thereof. Each such hearing shall be open to the public and may be continued from time to time. At each such hearing all persons interested shall be given an opportunity to be heard. If written protests objecting to the removal are received and the council finds such protests are signed by the owners of a majority of the property in the proposed district any further proceeding shall be barred for five years. (Ord. 284 §2, 1969)

 

13.04.030 District designation.
If, after any such public hearing as set forth in Section 13.04.020, the council finds that the public necessity, health, safety or welfare requires removal and underground installation within a designated area, the council shall, by resolution, declare such designated area an “underground utility district” and order the removal and underground installation. This resolution shall include a description of the area comprising such district and fix the time within which such removal and underground installation shall be accomplished and within which affected property owners must be ready to receive underground service. A reasonable time shall be allowed for such removal and underground installation, having due regard for the availability of labor, materials and equipment necessary for removal and for the installation of such underground facilities as may be occasioned thereby. (Ord. 284 §3, 1969)

 

13.04.040 Unlawful acts.
Whenever the council creates an underground utility district and orders the removal of poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures therein as provided in Section 13.04.030, it is unlawful for any person or utility to erect, construct, place, keep, maintain, continue, employ or operate poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures in the district after the date when the overhead facilities are required to be removed by such resolution, except as the overhead facilities may be required to furnish service to an owner or occupant of property prior to the performance by such owner or occupant of the underground work necessary for such owner or occupant to continue to receive utility service as provided in Section 13.04.090, and for such reasonable time required to remove the facilities after the work has been performed, and except as otherwise provided in this chapter. (Ord. 284 §4, 1969)

 

13.04.050 Exception, emergency or unusual circumstances.
Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, overhead facilities may be installed and maintained for a period, not to exceed ten days, without authority of the council in order to provide emergency service. The council may deem appropriate, in cases of unusual circumstances, without discrimination as to any person or utility, to erect, construct, install, maintain, use or operate poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures. If the city prefers, this could be the director of public works or some other appropriate city official. (Ord. 284 §5, 1969)

 

13.04.060 Other exceptions.
In any resolution adopted pursuant to Section 13.04.030, the city may authorize any or all of the following exceptions:

A.    Any municipal facilities or equipment installed under the supervision and to the satisfaction of the city engineer;

B.     Poles, or electroliers used exclusively for street lighting;

C.     Overhead wires (exclusive of supporting structures) crossing any portion of a district within which overhead wires have been prohibited, or connecting to buildings on the perimeter of a district, when such wires originate in an area from which poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures are not prohibited;

D.    Poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures used for the transmission of electric energy at nominal voltages in excess of thirty-four thousand five hundred volts;

E.     Overhead wires attached to the exterior surface of a building by means of a bracket or other fixture and extending from one location on the building to another location on the same building or to an adjacent building without crossing any public street;

F.     Antennae, associated equipment and supporting structures, used by a utility for furnishing communication services;

G.    Equipment appurtenant to underground facilities, such as surface mounted transformers, pedestal mounted terminal boxes and meter cabinets, and concealed ducts;

H.    Temporary poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures used or to be used in conjunction with construction projects. (Ord. 284 §6, 1969)

 

13.04.070 Notice to property owners and utility companies.
Within ten days after the effective date of a resolution adopted pursuant to Section 13.04.030, the city clerk shall notify all affected utilities and all persons owning real property within the district created by this resolution of the adoption thereof. The city clerk shall further notify such affected property owners of the necessity that, if they or any person occupying such property desire to continue to receive electric, communication, or similar or associated service, they or such occupant shall provide all necessary facility changes on their premises so as to receive such service from the lines of the supplying utility or utilities at a new location, subject to the applicable rules, regulations and tariffs of the respective utility or utilities on file with the Commission.

Notification by the city clerk shall be made by mailing a copy of the resolution adopted pursuant to Section 13.04.030, together with a copy of the ordinance codified in this chapter, to affected property owners as such are shown on the last equalized assessment roll and to the affected utilities. (Ord. 284 §7, 1969)

 

13.04.080 Responsibility of utility companies.
If underground construction is necessary to provide utility service within a district created by any resolution adopted pursuant to Section 13.04.030, the supplying utility shall furnish that portion of the conduits, conductors and associated equipment required to be furnished by it under its applicable rules, regulations and tariffs on file with the Commission. (Ord. 284 §8, 1969)

 

13.04.090 Responsibility of property owners.
A.    Every person owning, operating, leasing, occupying or renting a building or structure within a district shall construct and provide that portion of the service connection on his or her property between the facilities referred to in Section 13.04.080 and the termination facility on or within the building or structure being served, all in accordance with the applicable rules, regulations and tariffs of the respective utility or utilities on file with the Commission.

B.     In the event any person owning, operating, leasing, occupying or renting the property does not comply with the provisions of subsection A within the time provided for in the resolution enacted pursuant to Section 13.04.030, the city engineer shall post written notice on the property being served and thirty days thereafter shall have the authority to order the disconnection and removal of any and all overhead service wires and associated facilities supplying utility service to the property. (Ord. 284 §9, 1969)

 

13.04.100 Responsibility of city.
The city shall remove at its own expense all city-owned equipment from all poles required to be removed hereunder in ample time to enable the owner or user of such poles to remove the same within the time specified in the resolution enacted pursuant to Section 13.04.030. (Ord. 284 §10, 1969)

 

13.04.110 Extension of time.
In the event that any act required by this chapter or by a resolution adopted pursuant to Section 13.04.030 cannot be performed within the time provided on account of shortage of materials, war, restraint by public authorities, strikes, labor disturbances, civil disobedience, or any other circumstances beyond the control of the actor, then the time within which such act will be accomplished shall be extended for a period equivalent to the time of such limitation. (Ord. 284 §11, 1969)

 

13.04.120 Violation—Penalty.
The penalty for violations of this chapter shall be as prescribed in Section 1.20.010. (Ord. 334 §2, 1973; Ord. 284 §12, 1969)

Article II. Sewers
Chapter 13.20 REGULATIONS, CONNECTIONS AND CONNECTION FEES
Note
*       Prior ordinance history: Ord. Nos. 495, 490, 485, 462, 436, 421, 411, 388, 379, 374, 371, 334, 304, 260, 236, 210, and 198.

 

 

13.20.010 Definitions.
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms used in this chapter shall be as set forth in this section:

“Backfill” means replacement of earth material removed from any trench or excavation, and replacement of any and all road materials removed in order to lay sewer pipes or connections.

“Cesspool” means a tank, box or sump used for receipt of crude sewage, containing no provision for the purification, clarification or disposal of the sewage, or which discharges such sewage upon the open ground.

“City” means the City of Jackson, County of Amador, State of California.

“Council” means the city council.

“Engineer” means the city’s engineer or person duly appointed to act in this capacity.

“Garbage” means solid waste from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage and sale of produce.

“Health officer” means the Amador County public health officer or his/her duly appointed representative.

“Industrial waste” means the liquid wastes from industrial processes as distinct from sanitary sewage.

“Natural outlet” means any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake, or other body of surface water or groundwater.

“Outside user” means any person responsible for payment of sewer service fees for premises served outside the city limits.

“Properly shredded garbage” means the wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch in any dimension.

“Public sewer” means a sewer designed to accommodate more than one service sewer and which is accepted and maintained by the city or other public authority.

“Sanitary sewer” means a sewer which carries sewage or industrial waste and to which stormwaters, surface waters and groundwaters are not intentionally admitted.

“Septic tank system” means a system of reservoirs or tanks which receive crude sewage and, by septic bacterial action, effect decomposition and settlement of settable solids and diversion of the septic liquid for clarification and purification which takes place by further bacterial action in percolation ducts extending into natural or prepared porous subsoil beds.

“Service lateral” means a privately owned, operated, and maintained sewer line connecting a building or private facility to the city’s main sewer. The lateral includes that portion of the line located within the public right-of-way.

“Sewage” means any waste discharging in the city sewage system and which contains human or animal excreta.

“Sewer” means a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.

“Sewer main” means a public sewer designated to accommodate more than one lateral sewer, in which all owners of abutting properties have equal rights and is controlled by the city.

“Shall” is mandatory; “may” is permissive.

“Slug” means any discharge of water, sewage or industrial waste which, in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow, exceeds for any period of duration longer than fifteen minutes more than five times the average twenty-four-hour concentration or flows during normal operation.

“Storm sewer” or “storm drain” means a conduit which carries stormwaters and surface waters and drainage, but is intended to exclude sewage and polluted industrial wastes.

“Street” means any public highway, road, street, avenue, alley, way, easement, or right-of-way.

“Wastewater treatment plant” means any arrangement of devices and structures used for treating sewage.

“Watercourse” means a channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently. (Ord. 699 §§2, 3, 2017; Ord. 698 §§2, 3, 2017; Ord. 548 §1, 1992; Ord. 334, 1973)

 

13.20.020 Deposit of wastes unlawful when.
It is unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be deposited in an unsanitary manner upon public or private property within the city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of said city, any human or animal excrement, garbage, or other objectionable waste. (Ord. 548 §1, 1992; Ord. 334, 1973)

 

13.20.030 Discharge to natural outlet unlawful when.
It is unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, or any sanitary sewer, industrial wastes, or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has first been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 548 §1, 1992; Ord. 334, 1973)

 

13.20.040 Sewage disposal facility unlawful when.
Except as provided in this chapter, it is unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage except pursuant to permit issued therefor which may be issued by the city only at locations permitted by city zoning regulations. (Ord. 548 §1, 1992; Ord. 334, 1973)

 

13.20.050 Connection with public sewer—Required.
The owner of all houses, buildings, or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or other purpose, situated within the city is required at his or her expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein, and to construct any required sewer extension and to connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 548 §1, 1992; Ord. 334, 1973)

 

13.20.060 Connection with public sewer—Permit required.
No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer, service sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a permit for same from the city. (Ord. 548 §1, 1992; Ord. 334, 1973)

 

13.20.070 Encroachment permits—Necessary fees.
No sewer or service shall be constructed or any excavation made within the right-of-way of any street within the city until after a permit has been issued therefor by the superintendent as provided in this chapter. All work within dedicated public rights-of-way, or rights-of-way by prescriptive rights, is under the control of the city, Amador County, or the State Department of Transportation. The contractor actually doing the work must obtain all necessary encroachment permits from the city, county or the State Department of Transportation, and pay all fees required by the city, county, or the state. (Ord. 548 §1, 1992; Ord. 334, 1973)

 

13.20.080 Sewer service permit—Classes designated.
A.    There shall be three classes of service sewer permits:

1.     For single-family residential service;

2.     For service to commercial establishments; and

3.     For service to establishments producing industrial wastes.

B.     In each case, the owner or his/her agent shall apply to the city on a special form furnished by the city. The permit application shall be supplemented by plans, specifications or other information considered by the authorized city official to be pertinent. Facility participation (connection) charges as adopted by the city shall be paid at the time of obtaining a permit. (Ord. 548 §1, 1992; Ord. 334, 1973)

 

13.20.090 Sewer construction to be by licensed contractor.
Construction of sanitary sewer mains or sewer service laterals and related facilities in streets, public rights-of-way, or easements, shall be by persons holding a valid contractor’s license issued by the state, authorizing the holder thereof to perform the work of constructing sewage systems and laying the pipes therefor. (Ord. 548 §1, 1992; Ord. 334, 1973)

 

13.20.100 Costs to be borne by owner.
All costs incidental to the installation and connection of sewer laterals and main extensions, on-site or off-site shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the city from any loss of damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of sewer facilities. (Ord. 548 §1, 1992; Ord. 334, 1973)

 

13.20.110 Correction of faulty work.
All persons performing work under this chapter shall be responsible for any and all acts of their agents or employees in connection with said work. Upon being notified in writing by the city of any defect arising therefrom in any sewer or violations of the provisions of this chapter, the person or persons responsible for such work shall immediately correct such defect or violation. (Ord. 548 §1, 1992; Ord. 334, 1973)

 

13.20.120 Separate building sewer for each structure—Exceptions.
A separate and independent sewer service lateral shall be provided for each separate building or structure. (Ord. 548 §1, 1992; Ord. 334, 1973)

 

13.20.130 Existing service laterals requiring backflow preventor—Inspection—Correction.
The city may at any time issue a notice upon finding that a backflow hazard exists. The owner shall, at his or her expense, within ninety days from the date of issuance, install an approved backflow prevention device on the sewer service lateral, in such a manner as to correct the backflow hazard. All backflow prevention device installations shall be subject to city inspection. The property owner shall be responsible for testing backflow prevention devices and equipment, and for maintaining backflow prevention devices and equipment in working order at all times. (Ord. 548 §1, 1992; Ord. 334, 1973)

13.20.131 Technical specifications.
Technical specifications and minimum standards for construction of sanitary sewer facilities shall be provided as adopted by resolution of the city council and amended from time to time. (Ord. 548 §1, 1992; Ord. 334, 1973)

 

13.20.140 Service sewer—Backflow preventors.
In all cases where the rim of the manhole or rodding inlet upstream from the service sewer connection is less than one foot below the finished floor level of the lowest floor having any plumbing fixtures, the property owner shall, at his or her expense, install an approved backflow prevention device. Maintenance and testing of the backflow prevention device or devices shall be the responsibility of the property owner. The property owner shall maintain all such backflow prevention devices and equipment in good working condition at all times. (Ord. 548 §1, 1992; Ord. 334, 1973)

 

13.20.150 Insufficient gravity flow—Artificial lifting devices.
In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage may be lifted by approved artificial means and discharged to the building sewer. Where installed, such installations shall be maintained by the owner at his or her expense. (Ord. 548 §1, 1992; Ord. 334, 1973)

 

13.20.155 Lateral responsibility.
All privately owned service laterals and private sewage disposal systems and appurtenances from all points of the property to the sewer main shall be maintained by the property owner or owners in a safe and proper operating condition; and all devices or safeguards which are required by this chapter for the operation thereof shall be maintained in good working order. In the event that more than one property is served by the same service lateral, all owners served by that lateral shall be severally and jointly responsible for its maintenance.

A.    To determine compliance with this chapter the city may require any plumbing system, new or existing, to be reinspected.

B.     The city may require a property owner to submit to the city a video of the private lateral and appurtenances. If the city determines that the private lateral or any portion thereof, has become unsanitary or a threat to health or property, the city shall order in writing that plumbing be removed or placed in a safe and sanitary condition. Any such order shall fix a reasonable time limit for compliance. No person shall use or maintain defective plumbing after receiving such notice. (Ord. 699 §4, 2017; Ord. 698 §4, 2017)

 

13.20.160 Prohibited sewage—Toxic substances.
It is unlawful to discharge any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process which constitutes a hazard to humans or animals, creates a public nuisance, or creates any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant, including, but not limited to, cyanides in excess of two mg/l as CN in the wastes as discharged to the public sewer. (Ord. 548 §1, 1992; Ord. 334, 1973)

 

13.20.170 Prohibited sewage—Stormwater or washwater.
Stormwater or pavement washwater shall not be introduced into the sanitary sewer system. Connection of roof drains or surface water drains is prohibited. Any person, firm, or corporation having a roof or surface drain now connected shall disconnect the same within thirty days of the date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. The resultant opening left in the sanitary sewer shall be closed by city maintenance personnel. (Ord. 548 §1, 1992; Ord. 334, 1973)

 

13.20.180 Prohibited sewage—Harmful or dangerous substances designated.
A.    No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following described substances, materials, waters or wastes if it appears likely in the opinion of the city that such wastes can harm either the sewers, sewage treatment process or equipment; have an adverse effect on the treatment plant; or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public property, or constitute a nuisance. In forming such opinion as to the acceptability of these wastes, the city will give consideration to such factors as the quantities of subject wastes in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment process, capacity of the sewage treatment plant, degree of treatability of wastes in the sewage treatment plant, and other pertinent factors. The substances prohibited are:

1.     Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than one hundred fifty degrees Fahrenheit;

2.     Any waters or wastes containing fats, wax, grease or oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of one hundred mg/l or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between thirty-two and one hundred fifty degrees Fahrenheit;

3.     Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths’ horsepower or greater shall be subject to the review and approval of the superintendent;

4.     Any waters containing synthetic detergents in sufficient quantity to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process or create problems in the receiving waters of the sewage plant;

5.     Any waters or wastes containing suspended solids of such character and quantity that unusual attention or expense is required to handle such materials at the sewage treatment plant;

6.     Any noxious or malodorous gas or substance capable of creating a public nuisance;

7.     Any waters or wastes containing strong acid ironpickling wastes, or concentrated plating solutions, whether neutralized or not;

8.     Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc, and similar objectionable or toxic substances; or wastes exerting an excessive chlorine requirement, to such degree that any such material received in the composite sewage at the sewage treatment works exceeds the limits established for such materials;

9.     Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste or odor producing substances in such concentrations exceeding limits which may be established by the engineer as necessary, after treatment of the composite sewage, to meet the requirements of the state, federal, or other public agencies of jurisdiction for such discharges to the receiving waters;

10.   Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established by the engineer in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations;

11.   Any waters or wastes having pH in excess of 9.5;

12.   Materials which exert or cause:

a.     Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but not limited to, fuller’s earth, lime slurries and lime residues) or of dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate),

b.     Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions),

c.     Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand, or chlorine requirements in such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment works,

d.     Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting “slugs” as defined in Section 13.20.010;

13.   Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed, or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters.

B.     If any waters or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in subsection A of this section, and which, in the judgement of the engineer, may have a deleterious effect upon the sewage works, processes, equipment, or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the city shall:

1.     Reject the waste; or

2.     Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewers; and

3.     Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/or

4.     Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges under the provisions of this chapter.

C.     If the city permits the pretreatment of the equalization of waste flows, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject to the review and approval of the city engineer and subject to the requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances and laws. (Ord. 548 §1, 1992; Ord. 334, 1973)

 

13.20.190 Grease, oil and sand interceptors—Construction.
A.    Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the city, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand and other harmful ingredients, except that such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the city, and shall be located so as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection.

B.     Grease and oil interceptors shall be constructed of impervious materials capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in temperature. They shall be of substantial construction, watertight, and equipped with easily removable covers which when bolted in place shall be gastight and watertight. (Ord. 548 §1, 1992; Ord. 334, 1973)

 

13.20.200 Grease, oil and sand interceptors—Maintenance.
Where installed, all grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be maintained by the owner, at his or her expense, in continuously efficient operation at all times. (Ord. 548 §1, 1992; Ord. 334, 1973)

 

13.20.210 Swimming or wading pools.
All swimming or wading pools over two thousand gallons in capacity with drain connection to the public sewers shall be provided with a recirculation system equipped with an approved filter. Where storm sewers or storm drains are available, discharge to the sanitary sewers shall be prohibited. Where discharge of swimming pool waters to public sewers is authorized, the following special conditions shall apply:

A.    The maximum size of discharge pipe from pool to sump shall be limited to one and one-half inches, with a control valve provided for possible future regulation in the event the sanitary sewer capacity is exceeded.

B.     Disconnection from sanitary sewer by the owner shall be mandatory if the sanitary sewer capacity becomes inadequate for both sanitary flows and swimming pool drainage waters.

C.     An approved sand interceptor shall be provided for filter backwash and pool drainage waters.

D.    Drainage of swimming pool waters to public sewers shall be limited to the hours between nine p.m. and seven a.m. (Ord. 548 §1, 1992; Ord. 334, 1973)

 

13.20.220 Preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities—Maintenance.
Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his or her expense. (Ord. 548 §1, 1992; Ord. 334, 1973)

 

13.20.230 Control manhole required when.
When required by the city, the owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control manhole, together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of the wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be accessibly and safely located, and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the engineer. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at his or her expense, and shall be maintained by him or her so as to be safe and accessible at all times. (Ord. 548 §1, 1992; Ord. 334, 1973)

 

13.20.240 Payment to city for special treatment.
No statement contained in this chapter shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the city and any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the city for treatment, subject to payment therefore by the industrial concern. (Ord. 548 §1, 1992; Ord. 334, 1973)

 

13.20.250 Outside users—Permitted when.
Sewer service may be provided to users outside the corporate limits of the city only when there is sufficient capacity to serve those users and when such outside users are legally unable to annex to the city, in which case such users shall first have made or entered a binding annexation agreement with the city, agreeing to annex to the city upon such becoming legally possible. This section shall not preclude the city from contracting to receive and treat sewage for another public agency when found by the city council to be in the interest of public health and welfare. Outside users shall be subject to all rules and regulations of the city applicable to sewer service and related construction. Outside users shall make application for service and shall have first received approval thereof by the city prior to any connection to the city sewerage system. (Ord. 548 §1, 1992; Ord. 334, 1973)

 

13.20.260 Outside users—Disconnection when.
In the event that it develops, by reason of increased flow, change in character of discharge, or changes of any cause whatsoever, that the flow becomes adverse to the city’s interest or that capacity in the sewage works is no longer available for outside users, such users may be disconnected ninety days after notice is given in writing that service is to be terminated. (Ord. 548 §1, 1992; Ord. 334, 1973)

 

13.20.270 Surety bond—Contractor liability.
A.    All persons who intend to engage in any of the work covered by this chapter may first be required to execute a corporate surety bond made payable to the city, conditioned upon the faithful performance of the terms and conditions of this chapter, which bond, if required, shall be filed with the city clerk. The amount of the surety bonds, when required, shall be related to the engineer’s estimate of the cost of the improvement or work proposed. A cash bond may be deposited in lieu of the corporate surety bond.

B.     The city or its representatives shall not be answerable or accountable in any manner for any loss or damage that may happen to the work or any part thereof; or for any of the materials or other things used or employed in performing the works; or the injury to any person or persons, either workmen or the public; or for damage to property from any cause which might have been prevented by the contractor, or his/her workmen, or anyone employed by him or her; against all of the injuries or damages to persons and property the contractor having control over such work must properly guard. The contractor shall be responsible for any liability imposed by law for any damage to any person or property resulting from defects or obstructions or from any cause whatsoever during the progress of the work or at any time before its completion and final acceptance, and shall indemnify and save harmless the city and its representatives from all suits or actions of every name and description, brought for or on account of any injuries or damages received or sustained by any person or persons by or from the contractor, his or her servants or agents, in the construction of the work, or by or in consequence of any negligence in guarding the same, in improper materials used in its construction, or by or on account of any act or omission by the contractor or his/her agents, and in addition to any remedy authorized by law, so much of the money due the contractor under and by virtue of the contract as shall be considered necessary by the city may be retained by the city until disposition has been made of such suits or claims for damages as aforesaid. (Ord. 548 §1, 1992; Ord. 334, 1973)

 

13.20.280 Insurance coverage.
All persons who intend to engage in any of the work covered by this chapter shall furnish the city with a certificate or certificates substantiating the insurance coverage as follows:

A.    Public liability insurance shall be in the amount of not less than two hundred thousand dollars for one person injured in one accident, and not less than four hundred thousand dollars for more than one person injured in one accident, to protect the contractor against loss from liability imposed by law for damages on account of bodily injuries, including death resulting therefrom accidentally suffered or alleged to have been suffered by any person or persons not employed by the contractor, that may have been caused directly or indirectly by the performance of the contract.

B.     Property damage insurance shall be in the amount of not less than fifty thousand dollars for any one accident, to protect the contractor against loss from liability imposed by law for damages on account of injuries to or destruction of property, including the loss of use thereof, resulting from any act of commission or omission by the contractor, or otherwise resulting directly or indirectly from the contractor’s operation in the performance of the contract.

C.     The public liability and property damage insurance shall also name the city as an insured and shall directly protect the city as well as the contractor and his or her subcontractors, and shall assume the defense of the city, its officers, employees and agents, including the engineer, from all suits, actions, damages or claims of every type and description to which they may be subjected or put by reason of or resulting from the contractor’s operations in the performance of the contract, and all insurance policies shall so state.

D.    If the contractor fails to maintain such insurance, the city may take out insurance to cover damages of the above-mentioned classes for which the city might be held liable on account of the contractor failing to pay such damages, and deduct and retain the amount of the premiums for such insurance from any sums due the contractor under the contract. The contractor shall carry full workmen’s compensation insurance coverage either through the State Compensation Insurance Fund or a standard approved policy obtained from a licensed carrier, for all persons employed, either directly or through subcontractors, in carrying out the work under this contract, in accordance with the Workmen’s Compensation and Insurance Act, Division IV of the Labor Code of the State of California and any acts amendatory thereof.

E.     If the contractor fails to maintain such insurance the city may take out insurance to cover any compensation which the city might be liable to pay under the provisions of said Act as amended by reason of an employee of the contractor being injured or killed while engaged in the work covered by this contract, and deduct and retain the amount of the premiums for such insurance from any sums due the contractor under this contract. (Ord. 548 §1, 1992; Ord. 334, 1973)

 

13.20.290 Inspectors—Powers and duties.
A.    The duly authorized employees of the city, having proper credentials and identification, shall be permitted to enter upon all properties for the purpose of inspections, observation, measurement, sampling and testing in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. The superintendent or his/her representatives shall have no authority to inquire into any processes, including metallurgical, chemical, oil, refining, ceramic, paper or other industries, beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the sewers or waterways or facilities for waste treatment.

B.     The duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private properties through which the city holds a duly negotiated easement for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling repair and maintenance of any portion of the sewage works lying within such easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on the easement shall be done in full accordance with the terms of property involved. (Ord. 548 §1, 1992; Ord. 334, 1973)

 

13.20.300 Facility participation charges.
A.    There are enacted the following facility participation charges for new connections to the city sewerage system. The purpose of such charges is to establish a capital fund from such proceeds, as the new users’ share of the existing system cost, to be the replacement cost of capacity consumed, and which charges may be amended from time to time by city council resolution.

B.     All connection charges, both residential and commercial new construction, will be based upon individual building permits. Any modifications or addition to an existing building, or change in the use of a building, which would increase the expected sewage output from the building, will be considered as new construction, for the purposes of determining connection fees. However, if a developer proposes to phase construction and submits building plans showing such unit phasing, he or she may prepay the connection charge based upon full development at the time of his or her first unit submittal and thereby possibly avail him or herself of lesser connection charges per unit.

C.     Should connection to the city sewer system require connection to be made by city forces, the cost thereof shall be not less than 1.50 times actual city cost.

D.    Should connection to the city sewer system require extension, replacement or enlarging of existing off-site trunk or main sewers to serve a new development or annexation to the city, an agreement for reimbursement of portions of the cost thereof may be entered into between the city and the sewer service applicant. Such an agreement may contain an “area of benefit” provision prescribing limits and terms of any such reimbursement to the applicant. (Ord. 548 §1, 1992; Ord. 334, 1973)

 

13.20.310 Expansion allowance.
The city’s sewer design and construction specifications shall define a maximum allowable infiltration/exfiltration rate for new sewers. (Ord. 548 §1, 1992; Ord. 334, 1973)

 

13.20.320 Penalty for violation.
A.    Any person found to be violating any provision of this chapter except Section 13.20.280 shall be served by the city with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations.

B.     Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit provided for in subsection A of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be fined an amount not exceeding two hundred fifty dollars, or be imprisoned for not more than ninety days in the county jail, or penalized by both said fine and imprisonment for each violation. Each day in which any such violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense.

C.     Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall become liable to the city for any expense, loss, or damage occasioned the city by reason of such violation. (Ord. 548 §1, 1992; Ord. 334, 1973)

 

 

Chapter 13.24 SEWER SERVICE CHARGES, CONNECTION AND FACILITY PARTICIPATION CHARGES
13.24.010 Service charges authorized.
Within and outside the city, each person, firm, individual business, or corporation using the city sewer system shall pay for the use of such facilities a sewer service charge as shall be set from time to time by resolution or ordinance of the city council. The default customer shall be the owner of the property as shown on the latest Amador County secured assessment roll. However, to the extent required by law or permitted by the city, tenants may obtain service subject to Section 13.24.030.

 

13.24.020 Metering facilities.
Sewage metering facilities may be required, in which case, service will be governed by terms of a special agreement. (Ord. 548 §2, 1992; Ord. 374 §1, 1975)

 

13.24.030 Billing and payment.
A.    The procedure for rendering bills for sewer service, the payment thereof, and the penalties for failure to pay, if not otherwise provided in this chapter, shall be governed by resolution.

B.     Sewer service charges shall be billed in advance of the billing period as provided in regulations and rules for billing and charges set by resolution or ordinance of the council.

C.     Customers shall be responsible for paying all sewer service charges. Moreover, any delinquency may be collected on the latest Amador County secured assessment roll in the manner permitted by law.

D.    In the event that the city establishes a variable sewer charge based in whole or in part on water usage, the customer shall ensure city receives current and accurate water usage information, including if water service is provided by a different public or private entity.

 

13.24.032 Time and place when bills are due and payable.
Bills are due and payable upon receipt. Payment shall be made at the commercial office or other place or places designated by the city manager. The city accepts no responsibility for no receipt of bills, except in circumstances which are under its direct control. (Ord. 559 §2, 1993)

 

13.24.033 Delinquent accounts.
All sewer bills become delinquent fifteen days following the billing date and if not paid by the delinquent date a ten percent delinquency charge will be charged and added to the notice. Such delinquencies shall also be subject to a penalty of not exceeding one and one-half percent per month for nonpayment of the charges and basic penalty.

 

13.24.040 Reserves to be placed in fund.
All moneys collected by the city as sewer service charges and participation (connection) charges set forth in this chapter shall be placed in a restricted special enterprise fund and shall thereafter be expanded only for the acquisition, construction, maintenance and operation of water/wastewater related facilities. (Ord. 548 §2, 1992; Ord. 374 §1, 1975)

 

13.24.050 Outside city limits.
Users outside the corporate limits of the city shall pay sewer service charges related to rates charged to users within the corporate limits plus costs incurred by the city to provide service outside the corporate limits in excess of the charges to users within the corporate limits, and shall pay connection and/or facility participation charges established to reimburse portions of city costs incurred for the existing sewage system, and to replace capacity consumed, as established by resolution or ordinance of the city council, and updated from time to time. Facility participation charges and sewer service charges for outside users shall not be less than 1.25 times the amount or rate charged sewer users inside the corporate limits.

Article III. Water
Chapter 13.50 MUNICIPAL WATER SYSTEM
Division I. In General
13.50.010 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meaning respectively ascribed to them by this section:

“Administrative regulations” means the regulations (“the regulations”) adopted by resolution of the city council which, in addition to the provisions of this chapter, govern the operation of the water system.

“Applicant” means the property owner applying for water service, water service connection, or water main extension.

“City” means the City of Jackson, a municipal corporation, and its duly authorized representatives.

“Commercial office” means the business office of the City of Jackson, department of water resources.

“Construction water permit” means the permit required for anyone using water for construction purposes prior to installation of permanent meter.

“Consumer” means a person or entity of record as a customer receiving water service or other services from the water system.

“Demand” means the rate of draft of water for specified time; the total quantity of water delivered or received.

“Fire Chief” means the chief officer of the Jackson fire department.

“Jackson municipal water system, “water system,” “the water department” or the “department” means the water system acquired by the City of Jackson from Jackson water works effective January 1, 1993, together with such additions and improvements thereto as may be made from time to time.

“Main extension” means extension of transmission or distribution pipelines, exclusive of service connections, beyond existing facilities.

“Mains” means the transmission or distribution pipelines of the water system.

“Owner” means the person owning fee title or the person in whose name the legal title to the property appears by deed duly recorded in the county recorder’s office, or the person in possession of the property of buildings under claim of, or exercising acts of ownership over the property for him or herself or, as executor, administrator, guardian or trustee for another.

“Premises” means that separate, identifiable and transferable lot or parcel of real property, including the improvements thereon; except that, any portion thereof having well defined boundaries such as walls, fences or hedges, which prevent the common use of the property by all occupants, for the purpose of this chapter shall be considered separate premises.

“Services” means the delivery or receipt of water; a water service connection; and act or duty performed by the water system.

“Superintendent” means the water superintendent charged with the responsibility of operation and maintenance of the water system in the field.

“Water service” means the delivery or receipt of water from the water system; a water service connection.

“Water service connection” means the connection including service pipes, meters and appurtenances through which water delivery is made to an individual occupancy.

“Water system” means the water facilities and the entire physical plant of the water resources division of the city public works department, up to user’s meter. (Ord. 578 §2, 1995)

 

13.50.020 Purpose of chapter—Rates and charges—Payment thereof as conditions to obtaining water.
A.    Rules as set forth herein are adopted to govern the general operation of the Jackson water system to provide an efficient and commercial water supply.

B.     The city council shall adopt by resolution or ordinance, rates, fees, charges and administrative and operating regulations to further the purposes of this chapter, and which do not conflict with the provisions herein.

C.     The payment of rates, fees and charges as set forth and adopted by resolution or ordinance of the city council pursuant to the provisions of this chapter are adopted as conditions to obtaining water and other services from the Jackson water system.

 

13.50.030 Fire precautions.
In case of fire, or alarm of fire, should circumstances warrant:

A.    The water system shall have the right to shut off water from any customer or number of customers without notice and to keep it shut off as long as necessary;

B.     The fire chief or incident command officer shall have the authority, should the need arise, to request the setting of gates and valves in water mains to secure the greatest possible pressure at the points required. When the need for such changes has passed, the requesting fire officer shall notify the superintendent in order that the system may be restored to its normal operating status. (Ord. 578 §2, 1995)

 

13.50.040 Unauthorized tampering with water pipes or distribution system.
No person except an authorized employee of the water system shall open or close any valve or tap, or modify any regulator on water system, or insert tees, stopcocks or ferrules therein. Where service pipes are found disconnected at the corporation stop, they shall be reconnected only by an authorized employee of the water system. (Ord. 578 §2, 1995)

13.50.050 Right of entry to customer’s premises.
Provided that an inspection warrant is obtained when necessary, authorized employees of the water system or its duly authorized agents shall at all reasonable times have the right of ingress and egress to a customer’s premises for any purposes reasonably associated with providing services to the customer, conservation of water, or inspection of the water system.

 

13.50.060 Notice required for removal or displacement of water facilities for construction or street work.
All persons engaged in construction or street work shall give at least ten days’ written notice to the water system for removal or displacement of water system facilities that may interfere or conflict with street work and any damage resulting to such facilities from such failure to give notice shall be charged against the person engaged in such work. All costs involved in the removal or displacement of water facilities shall be paid by the person engaged in such work, except where provisions of city permits or contracts state otherwise. (Ord. 578 §2, 1995)

 

13.50.070 Liability of water system for damages.
The city shall not be liable for damages resulting from:

A.    Any interruption of service or damage caused by spigots, valves or other equipment or fixtures that are open when water is turned on, whether when water is turned on originally or when turned on after a temporary shutoff;

B.     Any increase or decrease in delivery pressure. (Ord. 578 §2, 1995)

 

13.50.080 Conditions of service.
A.    Every person accepting delivery of water from the water system shall be considered as having expressed his or her consent to be bound by this chapter and the administrative or operating regulations adopted pursuant to this chapter. Whenever any of the provisions of this chapter and administrative regulations are violated, the city reserves the right to discontinue water service for noncompliance. Unless otherwise provided, the water system shall discontinue water service if the customer fails to comply within five days after the date of written notice of violation. If such noncompliance affects matters of health or safety, or affects the operation, maintenance or other costs of the water system, water service may be discontinued immediately without prior notice.

B.     Water service shall not be resumed unless and until all unpaid fees and charges are paid, and other requirements of this chapter and administrative regulations are fulfilled.

C.     Without limiting the foregoing, all users shall comply with Section 13.55.030, whether or not a formal drought or water shortage has been declared. (Ord. 709 §2, 2019; Ord. 578 §2, 1995)

 

13.50.090 Permission for selling water.
It is unlawful for any person or entity other than the water system to sell water within the corporate limits and service area of the city without having first received authorization to do so by resolution of the city council. Bottled water and vending machines are exempted from this provision. (Ord. 578 §2, 1995)

 

 

13.50.100 Application for service and required payment.
A.    Before water shall be supplied to any premises, the customer shall make written application to the city for water service on a form provided by the city. The default customer shall be the owner of the prop-

 

 

erty as shown on the latest Amador County secured assessment roll. However, to the extent required by law or permitted by the city, tenants may obtain service subject to Section 13.50.130.

B.     New applications for service shall be accompanied by a deposit as set forth in the administrative regulations. Deposits, less any amount for unpaid fees and charges, shall be returned upon discontinuance of service. The administrative rules and regulations shall provide for the establishment of credit ratings to minimize or eliminate the need for deposits in appropriate cases.

C.     Receipt of any application shall not obligate the water system to provide service until the application is approved and all deposits received.

 

13.50.110 Refusal of service.
The city shall have the right to refuse to furnish water or may discontinue water service to any premises for the following reasons:

A.    The requested water service demand may be detrimental or injurious to the water service of other customers;

B.     The distribution facilities are inadequate to supply the requested water service demand;

C.     The premises are not cleared for occupancy by the issuance of: (1) a certificate of occupancy; (2) a final sign-off of the building permit; or (3) planning and zoning clearance or use permit authorizing the activity or occupancy proposed. (Ord. 578 §2, 1995)

 

Division II. Water Services
13.50.120 Using water without making prior applications.
A person taking possession or occupancy of premises and water without having made application for water service shall be held liable for all water used from the date of the last recorded meter reading. If application for service is not made within seven calendar days after notification to do so or if accumulated water bills are not paid upon presentation, the water service shall be discontinued without further notice. (Ord. 578 §2, 1995)

 

13.50.130 Liability for service.
Upon commencement of water service, the applicant shall be liable for all water delivered through that particular service and all other charges applicable to such service. When two or more persons jointly make application for service, they shall receive a single periodic bill, but shall be jointly and individually liable for payment of all charges incurred. Moreover, any delinquency may be collected on the latest Amador County secured assessment roll in the manner permitted by law.

 

13.50.140 Discontinuance of service.
Requests to discontinue water service shall be submitted at the commercial office and shall stipulate a definite date, the same being a working day, during which water service shall be discontinued, and a proper forwarding address at which the customer will receive a closing bill. After effective date of discontinuance, all water use charges shall cease for the period during which service shall be shut off, providing the shutoff is for a period not less than one month. No credit shall be allowed on shutoffs for a period of less than one month. (Ord. 578 §2, 1995)

 

13.50.150 Present or former customer owing bills.
When the applicant for water service is a customer or former customer who has failed to pay bills for previous water service or charges for any other service received from the water system, the city shall refuse water service to the applicant until all legally collectable outstanding bills or charges are paid and may also require a cash deposit as a guarantee for the payment of future bills.

 

13.50.160 Changes in customer’s facilities.
Customers making any change in the size, character or extent of the structure or facilities on their premises utilizing the water service, shall notify the water department not less than sixty days before making such change. Where the water department determines that the proposed changes will result in a significant increase in water usage, the department may require increase in service. (Ord. 578 §2, 1995)

 

13.50.180 Facility participation charges—New construction.
Facility participation charges, as set by resolution of the city council, shall be paid to the city for all new connections to the system. Said facility participation charges shall represent and be for the purpose of each increment of new development and construction of new premises as new customers requiring service, paying its fair share of the existing system, replacing capacity consumed, and reimbursing acquisition and improvement cost obligations in place. Such charges shall be due prior to issuance of any building permit. Said funds collected shall be held and accounted for in a separate fund, the use of which shall be restricted to water treatment, storage and transmission facilities. (Ord. 578 §2, 1995)

 

13.50.190 Service connections—Standard.
The standard single-family residential water service shall be a three-fourth-inch service pipe and three-fourths by five­eighths inch meter, and the same shall be the minimum required to provide service to a single-family dwelling. (Ord. 578 §2, 1995)

 

13.50.200 Service connections—Location.
A.    Water service connections shall be installed only in public streets, easements or rights-of-way under the control of the water system.

B.     Where the premises to be served in front on more than one street, the city has the right to designate on which frontage the service connection shall be installed.

C.     New or relocated meters shall be installed in the public right-of-way behind and adjacent to the public sidewalk or as otherwise designated by city. All meters must be installed at the minimum distance of three feet from any driveway unless a variance is granted pursuant to Chapter 17.38 of this code. (Ord. 578 §2, 1995)

 

13.50.210 Service connections.
A single service connection shall not service more than one parcel, lot or premises. Separate lots and premises under a single ownership, control or management shall be supplied water through separate service connections, but billing shall be through a master meter and the property owner shall be liable for and responsible to pay all charges for service imposed by this chapter. The master meter billing method shall only apply to residential and residential/commercial combination accounts. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the city shall permit individual tenants in master meter situations to become individual customers to the extent required by law or permitted by the city.

 

13.50.215 Commencement of liability for charges for new buildings.
A.    Single-Family Residence. Liability for charges under this article shall commence with respect to new single-family residences upon issuance of a permit by the city building official or onset of water use, whichever occurs first.

B.     Multiple Buildings Include Duplexes. Liabilities for charges under this article shall commence with respect to new multiple buildings upon issuance of a building permit or onset of water use, whichever occurs first.

C.     Commercial and Industrial Buildings. Liabilities for charges under this article shall commence with respect to new commercial and industrial buildings upon issuance of a building permit or onset of water use, whichever occurs first. (Ord. 578 §2, 1995)

 

13.50.220 Service connections—Outside city.
Applications for new or revised water service connections to supply premises which are wholly or partly outside the city water service area shall not be accepted or approved nor ordered installed, unless the city council has approved such application. Before granting approval, the city council shall cause an investigation and obtain surety adequate to assure that:

A.    The provision of water service by the city will not conflict with the provisions of service by another water service agency;

B.     There will be full compliance with the provisions of this chapter and administrative regulations adopted pursuant to this chapter.

 

13.50.230 Connection charges—New meter and box.
Charges for meter and box are to be added to the charges for service installation and are held as a separate charge for the convenience of subdividers or contractors where all pipe is installed by the owner. (Ord. 578 §2, 1995)

 

13.50.240 Changes in location of meters and connections at expense of customers.
When a customer requests the relocation of an existing meter or service connection which is requested for the customer’s convenience, the relocation shall be at the customer’s expense. (Ord. 578 §2, 1995)

 

13.50.250 Title to connections—Transfer of service—Refunds.
A.    Title to all meters, service pipes and appurtenances used in providing a water service connection shall remain with the water system and the charges set forth are for connections and do not convey any right of title. The water service connection is for a water supply to the premises stipulated on the application and is not transferable to any other properties or premises.

B.     If a water service is discontinued or abandoned, there shall be no right or refund of connection charges, or credit in any manner, accrue to the applicant, customer or successor. (Ord. 578 §2, 1995)

 

13.50.260 Service connections requiring main extensions.
In no event shall a water service connection be installed unless a water main of adequate capacity and delivery pressure extends in a public street or right-of­way, across the entire frontage of the property to be served. Wherever as a condition of service a water main must be extended, the same shall be installed by the applicant in compliance with the provisions of this chapter. The inside diameter of every main to be installed shall not be less than eight inches unless otherwise determined by the city engineer. (Ord. 578 §2, 1995)

 

13.50.270 Water main extensions—Generally.
A.    When the city council determines it to be in the public interest for the city to extend water lines, in advance of development or for any other purpose, the city may proceed with such extensions to the extent and in the manner determined by the city council. Such extension may be installed at the cost of the city or pursuant to appropriate assessment district proceedings.

B.     If the city council determines at the time of ordering any such main extension that this section shall be applicable thereto, accurate records of the costs thereof shall be maintained together with an allocation of such costs to all parcels of property which will be served thereby. Such allocation shall be based on such formula as will result in such costs being apportioned to such parcels in proportion to the benefits thereof, severally and respectively. (Ord. 578 §2, 1995)

 

13.50.280 Water main extension—Special connection charges.
At the time of installation of any water service which will be served in whole or in part by a water main to which this section is applicable, the water system shall collect a special connection charge, in addition to all other charges and fees provided for by this chapter and administrative regulations. Such charge shall be in an amount equal to the total cost allocated to that parcel of property by the city as provided in Section 13.50.240 of this chapter.

 

13.50.290 Fees for plan checking and inspection.
A.    In addition to all other charges specified in other ordinances of the city, there shall be collected the following fees with respect to the plan checking, inspection and related services performed by the city with regard to permit applications for water connections to city’s systems:

1.     Plan Checking. A deposit in the amount determined by resolution or ordinance of the council shall be submitted at the same time the application, plans and specifications are filed with the city.

2.     Inspection. A deposit in the amount determined by resolution or ordinance of the council shall be submitted prior to commencement of construction of the water system.

B.     No checking of plans or specifications shall be commenced, no inspection undertaken until the respective deposit has been made. Upon completion of the plan checking, or upon completion of the inspection, the fee for such plan checking or such inspection shall be set by the city in the amount necessary to reimburse the city of the engineering fees and other costs incurred plus reimbursement for the time the city manager or his/her designee is devoted to such checking or inspection. Upon computation of the plan checking or inspection fee of the basis specified in this chapter, such fee shall be charged against the respective deposit required above. If the deposit exceeds the fee, a refund shall be made to the applicant. If the fee exceeds the deposit, the applicant shall pay the balance to the city within ten days after notice of such deficiency.

13.50.300 Fire service connections.
A.    When an application is made for fire service connections, such sprinkler and fire service installation must be approved by the fire chief. Each fire service shall be no less than four inches in diameter and shall have a detector check valve installed therein.

B.     Water furnished through fire services shall be used only for extinguishing fires or for authorized testing of the fire system. Whenever a consumer wishes to test, he or she shall notify the superintendent at least three working days in advance.

C.     If it is found that an unauthorized connection or use has been made, the customer shall be notified to discontinue such connection or use, and if the customer fails or refuses to do so, the water to such service shall be shut off and remain so until the fire service connection acquires compliance and approval. (Ord. 578 §2, 1995)

 

Division III. Temporary Service Connection
13.50.320 Deposit—Required.
A.    The applicant shall deposit, in advance, an amount as determined by resolution of the council to establish the desired service. Upon discontinuance of service, the actual cost of installing and removing the facilities required to furnish the service, exclusive of the cost of salvageable material, shall be determined and an adjustment made as an additional charge, refund or credit.

B.     If service is supplied through a fire hydrant, the applicant will be charged in accordance with the rate schedule established by resolution of the council. The charges will apply to installation and relocation of the connection and for water used.  (Ord. 578 §2, 1995)

 

13.50.330 Temporary service customers—Responsibility for meters and installation.
The customer shall use all possible care to prevent damage to the meter or to any other loaned facilities of the city which are involved in furnishing the temporary service from time of installation until removal, or until forty-eight hours’ notice in writing has been given to the city that the installation is no longer required. If the meter or other facilities are damaged, the cost of making repairs shall be paid by the customer. (Ord. 578 §2, 1995)

 

13.50.340 Temporary service from a fire hydrant.
If temporary service is supplied through a fire hydrant, a permit for the use of the hydrant shall be obtained from the city. It is specifically prohibited to operate the valve of any fire hydrant other than by the use of a spanner wrench designed for this purpose. All control of flow by the user shall be by use of the valve provided. (Ord. 578 §2, 1995)

 

13.50.350 Unauthorized use of hydrant.
Tampering with any fire hydrant for the unauthorized use of water therefrom, or for any other purpose, is a misdemeanor, punishable by law. (Ord. 578 §2, 1995)

 

13.50.360 Rates.
The rates for temporary service shall be as set forth in the resolution or ordinance of the council setting forth bulk water rates in effect at the time of use.

 

13.50.370 Credit.
The applicant shall pay the estimated cost of service in advance or shall be otherwise required to establish credit. (Ord. 578 §2, 1995)

 

13.50.375 Fire hydrants—Relocation.
Property owners and/or others desiring the removal or changes in location of a fire hydrant shall first make a request, in writing, of the water department. After consultation with the fire chief of the proposed removal or relocation, the superintendent shall prepare an estimate of cost of the proposed work. Before the water system can proceed with the work or order materials for same, the person requesting the removal or relocation must deposit the amount equal to the estimated cost with the finance officer. Upon completion of the work, the actual cost shall be compiled and any difference between the actual and estimated cost shall be billed or refunded for the applicant’s account. (Ord. 578 §2, 1995)

 

13.50.380 Use of water by contractors and other persons in construction work.
Contractors or any person, desiring to use water in construction work where connections must be made other than through a meter, shall in each and every case make written application for, and obtain a written permit for the same from the water system before connecting with any water main, standpipe or using water therefrom, and shall make the deposit, as shall hereafter be established by resolution or ordinance of this council deemed sufficient to cover the estimated cost of water to be used. Such permit shall be exhibited upon the work for which it has been issued during the full time the water is being used pursuant to such permit.

 

13.50.390 Fire hydrants—Operation.
To insure the safety of fire hydrants for fire protection, any person authorized to open fire hydrants shall use only an approved spanner wrench and shall replace the caps on the outlets when not in use. (Ord. 578 §2, 1995)

Division IV. Extension of Facilities
13.50.400 Plans.
Any applicant for water service which will require main extension shall install the same at his or her own cost and expense. Plans for such extension shall be submitted to and approved by the city engineer, and, shall be also subject to first acquiring an encroachment permit from the agency having jurisdiction over the streets and/or easements of record. (Ord. 578 §2, 1995)

 

13.50.410 Surety bond.
In the event the applicant installs water main extension facilities, he or she shall furnish the city a surety company bond in an amount equal to at least sixty percent of the city engineer’s estimate of the installation labor costs, to guarantee faithful performance by the applicant, and a separate surety company bond in an equal amount to guarantee claims of persons employed by the applicant and claims of persons who furnish materials, supplies and implements used by the applicant on such work. (Ord. 578 §2, 1995)

13.50.420 Evidence of title transfer to city.
When water main extension facilities are installed and upon presentation of proven evidence confirming the execution and delivery by the applicant of good and sufficient recordable documents evidencing transfer of title of the facilities to the city, water shall be furnished to the applicant’s property. (Ord. 578 §2, 1995)

 

Division V. Subdivisions
13.50.430 Application—Requirements.
A person desiring to provide a water system within a tract of land which he or she proposes to subdivide shall make written application therefor. The application shall state the number of the tract, the name of the subdivision and its location. It shall be accompanied by a copy of the tentative map, and of the plans, profiles and specifications for the street work, sanitary sewers, storm drains and other underground utilities. (Ord. 578 §2, 1995)

 

13.50.440 Investigation.
Upon receiving the application, the city manager or his/her authorized representative shall make an investigation and survey of the proposed subdivision and shall report his or her findings to the council, including a recommendation as to the facilities required and the estimated cost of the proposed water system therefor. To assist the city manager in making the investigation and report, the council may engage the services of a consulting engineer. The size, type and quality of materials shall be in accordance with the city’s standards and specifications in effect at the time of application. (Ord. 578 §2, 1995)

 

13.50.450 Specifications and construction.
Location of the lines shall be specified by the city. The actual construction will be done at the expense of and by the subdivider and inspected by the city manager or his/her authorized representative. Plans and engineering costs will be the responsibility of the property owner. Fire hydrants shall be located at locations designed by the city. (Ord. 578 §2, 1995)

 

13.50.460 Property of city.
All water mains, water service, and fire hydrant facilities installed by a subdivider shall become the property of the city and shall be conveyed to the city by a property instrument in writing at the time the facilities are compiled and accepted by the city. (Ord. 578 §2, 1995)

 

13.50.470 Service connections.
The subdivider shall, at his or her cost, provide and install the service connection to each house or proposed house in the tract, including the corporation stop, meter valve, and meter box, but not including the meter. No deposit will be required. Each connection shall be inspected by the water superintendent or his/her authorized representative. (Ord. 578 §2, 1995)

 

13.50.480 Costs and expenses.
All costs and expenses incurred by the city under this chapter, including the cost of investigation, inspection, legal and consulting engineer’s services, shall be paid to the city by the subdivider prior to final approval and acceptance of the facilities by the city. (Ord. 578 §2, 1995)

13.50.490 Further requirements.
In granting an application, the council may make whatever further requirements as may appear to it to be necessary. (Ord. 578 §2, 1995)

 

Division VI. Water Meters
13.50.500 Maintenance.
Where replacements or adjustments for any water meters are necessary by the act, neglect or carelessness of the owner or occupancy of any premises or anyone in their employ, any expense thereby caused to the water system shall be placed on the water bill and collected from the customer.

 

13.50.510 Testing.
Customers shall have the right to request a test to be made of the meter serving their premises upon paying an amount making all service charges current, in the manner provided by administrative regulations. If the results of the meter test determine that the meter is:

A.    Registering not more than three percent faster or slower than the actual quantity of water passing through it, the meter shall be retained by the water system.

B.     Registering more than three percent over registration, an accurate meter shall be installed and the water bills for the preceding three months adjusted to correct the error discovered.

C.     Registering more than two percent under registration, an accurate meter shall be installed, the deposit refunded and the customer billed for the amount of the undercharge for the preceding three months.

D.    In any event, the adjustment for overcharge or undercharge shall not exceed a period of three months from the date the customer requests a test or that during which it was measuring service to the customer, whichever is the lesser. (Ord. 578 §2, 1995)

 

13.50.520 Meters—Temporarily out—Distribution of meters.
A.    Whenever a meter cannot be read, or is temporarily obstructed or temporarily out of commission the customer shall be charged for an estimated amount of water used, based upon the customer’s consumption during the same season of the prior year if conditions were unchanged, or, upon a reasonable comparison with use of other customers during the same period receiving the same class of service under similar circumstances.

B.     Obstructing Water Meters. It is unlawful for anyone to enclose a water meter with a fence, wall, hedge, or otherwise obstruct access to water service meters. Upon the failure or refusal of the owner or customer to remove any such unlawful obstruction within a reasonable length of time, thirty days, unless prevented by extenuating circumstances, after written notification to do so, the superintendent may discontinue water service to the premises until the obstruction is removed or otherwise impose fines and penalties as provided in this code.

 

 

Division VII. Customer’s Equipment
13.50.530 Customer’s responsibility.
The customer shall, at his or her own risk and expense, furnish, install and keep in good and safe condition all equipment that may be required for receiving, controlling, applying and utilizing water, and the water system shall not be responsible for any loss or damage caused by the improper installation of such water equipment, or the negligence, want of proper maintenance or wrongful act of the customer or of any of his or her tenants, agents, employees, contractors, licensees or permittees installing, maintaining, using, operating or interfering with such equipment. The customer shall be responsible for determining the pressure operation limits of his or her fixtures and equipment and shall properly protect the same from a variance of water delivery pressures, including periods when for any reason whatsoever there is no water available. Furthermore, the customer shall ensure that he or she avoids any waste or misuse of water as prohibited in this chapter. (Ord. 709 §3, 2019; Ord. 578 §2, 1995)

 

13.50.540 Control valve.
The owner of premises to be served shall install a control valve on the house piping between the water meter and the first valve outlet on the premises. Prior to the issuance of a building permit to do work on any premises not having a control valve, a control valve shall be installed as provided in this section. When old premises, to which a service connection has previously been installed, are being altered, a control valve shall be installed by the owner, if such is not already provided. The customer shall not operate or tamper with the meter stop or valve in the meter box at any time. (Ord. 578 §2, 1995)

 

13.50.550 Pressure relief valve.
Each water heater shall be equipped with a suitable pressure relief valve of a type and nature required by the Uniform Plumbing Code and Building Code. (Ord. 578 §2, 1995)

 

Division VIII. Billing
13.50.560 Generally.
The procedure for rendering bills for water service, their payment and the consequences on nonpayment, unless otherwise provided elsewhere in this chapter, shall be governed by administrative regulations adopted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 578 §2, 1995)

 

13.50.570 Disputed bills.
In case of dispute as to payment of bill previously rendered, the customer will be required to present the paid receipt bill, cancelled check or other satisfactory evidence before adjustment or corrections shall be made. (Ord. 578 §2, 1995)

 

13.50.580 Billing period.
Bills for all metered service will be rendered monthly or bimonthly as determined by the city. Meters shall be read at approximately equal intervals for the preparation of periodic billing. Special reading shall be taken for opening or closing bills. (Ord. 578 §2, 1995)

 

13.50.590 Billing of separate meters.
Each meter on a customer’s premises shall be billed separately, and the readings of two or more meters will not be combined unless the water department shall, for operating convenience or necessity, install two or more meters in place of one. (Ord. 578 §2, 1995)

 

13.50.600 Back billing.
If a customer is found to be using water for which no bills have been issued, the water department shall install a meter and bill the customer for such past water use to the extent applicable.

 

13.50.610 Period of service less than billing period.
If the total period of service is less than the billing period, it shall be billed on the basis of fifteen-day increments or portions thereof. Current minimums will apply. However, in any case, if the quantity of water consumed is greater than that of the periodic minimum, the charges shall be calculated on the actual water consumption. (Ord. 578 §2, 1995)

 

13.50.620 When and where bills due and payable.
Bills are due and payable on presentation. Payment shall be made at the commercial office or other place or places designated by the city manager. The water system accepts no responsibility for nonreceipt of bills, except in circumstances which are under its direct control. (Ord. 578 §2, 1995)

 

13.50.630 Delinquent accounts.
All water bills become delinquent fifteen days following the billing date and if not paid by the delinquent date a ten percent delinquency charge will be charged and added to the notice. Such delinquencies shall also be subject to a penalty of not exceeding one and one-half percent per month for nonpayment of the charges and basic penalty. Reconnection shall be in accordance with administrative regulations.

 

13.50.640 Delinquent one-service locations.
If a customer receives service at more than one service location and the bill for any one of that customer’s accounts becomes delinquent and service is discontinued, service at all other locations may also be discontinued. (Ord. 578 §2, 1995)

 

13.50.650 Turning on water after shutoff.
When water service has been discontinued because of delinquency of payment of a water bill, the service shall not be turned on until all delinquent and turn-on charges have been paid and a cash deposit to reestablish credit has been made in accordance with administrative regulations. (Ord. 578 §2, 1995)

 

13.50.660 Unauthorized turn-on after delinquency.
If after a service is discontinued for delinquency in payment, service is resumed without authorization, the meter may be removed following which a reinstallation charge will be made for restoring service. Such charge is to be in addition to all charges and deposits and in accordance with administrative regulations. (Ord. 578 §2, 1995)

13.50.670 Adjustment to bill due to leaks or loss.
A.    Bill adjustments ordinarily will not be made because of excess delivery of water. However, when evidence clearly shows that such excessive delivery is due to concealed leaks in underground or unexposed pipes and not otherwise from wasteful use or due to the consumer’s acts, omissions or negligence, adjustments will be considered upon request.

B.     If it is determined by the city that an adjustment is warranted, the water department shall determine the amount of excess delivery by calculating the average bill in accordance with their standard method. Maximum of one­half of the excessive delivery may be allowed. Any adjustment must be first approved by the finance officer.

C.     An adjustment will only be made after repairs have been made and it is certain such leak or loss will not again occur. No adjustment or allowance will be made covering more than the single billing period in which the same is requested. Not more than one adjustment or allowance shall be made to the same customer for the same premises in any twelve-month period. (Ord. 578 §2, 1995)

 

13.50.680 Outside rates.
Every customer being supplied water from the water system to premises outside the city limits shall pay water rates and charges which represent full cost recovery by the city, which is to be one hundred fifty percent of the rates and charges established for the purpose of this chapter for water users within the corporate limits of the city. (Ord. 578 §2, 1995)

 

13.50.690 Violation—Penalty.
Whenever in this chapter or any rule or regulation created under the authority of this chapter an act is made or declared unlawful or prohibited any violation thereof shall constitute a misdemeanor or infraction as determined by the city.

 

Division IX. Rate Adjustment Procedures
13.50.700 Annual rate adjustment.
Annually, effective July 1st of each year, beginning July 1, 1997, the finance officer shall recompute the service charges and volume charges set forth in Section 13.50.020 or as subsequently adjusted, concurrent with the budget approval process. (Ord. 578 §2, 1995)

 

13.50.710 Notices to customers.
Notices from the city to a customer will normally be given in writing, and either delivered or mailed to him or her at his or her last known address. Where conditions warrant, and in emergencies, the city may resort to notification either by telephone or messenger. (Ord. 578 §2, 1995)

 

13.50.720 Notices from customers.
Notices from customers to the city may be given by him or her or his/her authorized representative in writing (1) at the principal offices of the city; (2) to the city manager; or (3) to an officer or agent duly authorized by the council to receive notices. (Ord. 578 §2, 1995)

Division X. Cross-Connection Control
13.50.730 Responsibility.
The city manager or his/her designated agent shall be responsible for the protection of the public potable water distribution system from contamination or pollution due to the backflow of contaminants or pollutants through the water service connection. If, in the judgement of the city manager, an approved backflow prevention assembly is required (at the consumer’s water service connection) for the safety of the water system, the city manager or his/her designated agent shall give notice in writing to said consumer to install such an approved backflow prevention assembly(s) at a specific location(s) on his or her premises. The consumer shall immediately install such an approved backflow prevention assembly(s) at the consumer’s own expense; and, failure, refusal or inability on the part of the consumer to install, have tested and maintain said assembly(s), shall constitute grounds for discontinuing water service to the premises until such requirements have been satisfactorily met. Provided, however, that the requirements mandated by this chapter shall not take effect until January 1st, 1996. (Ord. 578 §2, 1995)

 

13.50.740 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meaning respectively ascribed to them by this section:

Approved.

1.     The term “approved” as herein used in reference to a water supply means a water supply that has been approved by the health agency having jurisdiction.

2.     The term “approved” as herein used in reference to an air gap, a double check valve assembly, a reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly or other backflow prevention assemblies or methods means approved by the administrative authority having jurisdiction.

“Auxiliary water supply” means any water supply on or available to the premises other than the purveyor’s approved public water supply will be considered as an auxiliary water supply. These auxiliary waters may include water from another purveyor’s public potable water supply or any natural source(s) such as a well, spring, river, stream, harbor, etc., or used waters or industrial fluids. These waters may be contaminated or polluted or they may be objectionable and constitute an unacceptable water source over which the water purveyor does not have sanitary control.

“Backflow” means the undesirable reversal of flow of water or mixtures of water and other liquids, gases or other substances into the distribution pipes of the potable supply of water from any source or sources. See terms “back siphonage” and “backpressure.”

“Backflow preventer” means an assembly or means designated to prevent backflow.

1.     “Air gap” means a physical separation between the free flowing discharge end of a potable water supply pipeline and an open or nonpressure receiving vessel. An “approved air gap” shall be at least double the diameter of the supply pipe measured vertically above the overflow rim of the v vessel—in no case less than an inch (2.54 cm).

2.     “Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly” means an assembly containing two independently acting approved check valves together with a hydraulically operating, mechanically independent pressure differential relief valve located between the check valves and at the same time below the first check valve. The unit shall include properly located resilient seated test cocks and tightly closing resilient seated shutoff valve at each end of the assembly. This assembly is designed to protect against a nonhealth (i.e., pollutant) or a health hazard (i.e., contaminant). This assembly shall not be used for backflow protection of sewage or reclaimed water.

3.     “Double check valve backflow prevention assembly” means an assembly composed of two independently acting, approved check valves, including tightly closing resilient seated shutoff valves attached at each end of the assembly and fitted with properly located resilient seated test cocks. This assembly shall only be used to protect against a nonhealth hazard (i.e., pollutant).

“Contamination” means an impairment of the quality of the water which creates an actual hazard to the public health through poisoning or through the spread of disease by sewage, industrial fluids, waste, etc.

“Cross-connection” means any unprotected actual or potential connection or structural arrangement between a public or a consumer’s potable water system and any other source or system through which it is possible to introduce into any part of the potable system any used water, industrial fluid, gas, or substance other than the intended potable water with which the system is supplied. Bypass arrangements, jumper connections, removable sections, swivel or changeover devices and other temporary or permanent devices through which or because of which backflow can or may occur are considered to be cross-connections.

1.     The term “direct cross-connection” means a cross­connection which is subject to both backsiphonage and backpressure.

2.     The term “indirect cross-connection” means a cross-connection which is subject to backsiphonage only.

Cross-connection, Controlled. “Controlled cross-connection” means a connection between a potable water system and a nonpotable water system with an approved backflow prevention assembly properly installed and maintained so that it will continuously afford the protection commensurate with the degree of hazard.

Hazard, Degree of. “Degree of hazard” means either a pollution (nonhealth) or contamination (health) hazard and is derived from the evaluation of conditions within a system.

1.     Hazard, Health. “Health hazard” means an actual or potential threat of contamination of a physical or toxic nature to the public potable water system or the consumer’s potable water system that would be a danger to health.

2.     Hazard, Plumbing. “Plumbing hazard” means an internal or plumbing type cross-connection in a consumer’s potable water system that may be either a pollutional or a contamination type hazard. This includes, but is not limited to, cross-connections to toilets, sinks, lavatories, wash trays and lawn sprinkling systems. Plumbing type cross­connections can be located in many types of structures including homes, apartment houses, hotels and commercial or industrial establishments. Such a connection, if permitted to exist, must be properly protected by an appropriate type of backflow prevention assembly.

3.     Hazard, Pollutional. “Pollutional hazard” means an actual or potential threat to the physical properties of the water system or the potability of the public or the consumer’s potable water system but which would not constitute a health or system hazard, as defined. The maximum degree or intensity of pollution to which the potable water system could be degraded under this definition would cause a nuisance or be aesthetically objectionable or could cause minor damage to the system or its appurtenances.

4.     Hazard, System. “System hazard” means an actual or potential threat of severe danger to the physical properties of the public or the consumer’s potable water system or of a pollution or contamination which would have a protracted effect on the quality of the potable water in the system.

“Industrial fluids” means any fluid or solution which may be chemically, biologically or otherwise contaminated or polluted in a form or concentration which would constitute a health, system, pollutional or plumbing hazard if introduced into an approved water supply. This may include, but not be limited to: polluted or contaminated used waters; all types of process waters and “used waters” originating from the public potable water system which may deteriorate in sanitary quality; chemicals in fluid form; plating acids and alkalies; circulated cooling water connected to an open cooling tower and/or cooling waters that are chemically or biologically treated or stabilized with toxic substances; contaminated natural waters such as from wells, springs, streams, rivers, bays, harbors, seas, irrigation canals or systems, etc.; oils, gases, glycerin, paraffins, caustic and acid solutions and other liquid and gaseous fluids used industrially, for other processes, or for firefighting purposes.

“Pollution” means an impairment of the quality of the water to a degree which does not create a hazard to the public health but which does adversely and unreasonably affect the aesthetic qualities of such waters for domestic use.

Service Protection. “Service protection” means the appropriate type or method of backflow protection at the service connection, commensurate with the degree of hazard of the consumer’s potable water system.

Water Commissioner or Health Official. The city manager is invested with the authority and responsibility for the implementation of an effective cross-connection control program and for the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter.

Water, Nonpotable. “Nonpotable water” means a water supply which has not been approved for human consumption by the health agency having jurisdiction.

Water, Potable. “Potable water” means any public potable water supply which has been investigated and approved by the health agency. The system must be operating under a valid health permit. In determining what constitutes an approved water supply, the health agency has final judgment as to its safety and potability.

Water—Service connection. “Service connection” means the terminal end of a service connection from the public potable water system (i.e., where the water purveyor may lose jurisdiction and sanitary control of the water at its point of delivery to the consumer’s water system). If a water meter is installed at the end of the service connection, then the service connection shall mean the downstream end of the water meter.

Water, Used. “Used water” means any water supplied by a water purveyor from a public potable water system to a consumer’s water system after it has passed through the service connection and is no longer under the control of the water purveyor. (Ord. 578 §2, 1995)

 

13.50.750 Requirements.
A.    Water System.

1.     The water system shall be considered as made up of two parts: the water purveyor’s system and the consumer’s system.

2.     Water purveyor’s system shall consist of the source facilities and the distribution system; and shall include all those facilities of the water system under the complete control of the purveyor, up to the point where the consumer’s system begins.

3.     The source shall include all components of the facilities utilized in the production, treatment, storage and delivery of water to the distribution system.

4.     The distribution system shall include the network of conduits used for the delivery of water from the source to the consumer’s system.

5.     The consumer’s system shall include those parts of the facilities beyond the termination of the water purveyor’s distribution system which are utilized in conveying potable water to points of use.

B.     Policy.

1.     No water service connection to any premises shall be installed or maintained by the water purveyor unless the water supply is protected as required by California state laws and regulations and this chapter. Service of water to any premises shall be discontinued by the water purveyor if a backflow prevention assembly required by this chapter is not installed, tested and maintained, or if it is found that a backflow prevention assembly has been removed, bypassed, or if an unprotected cross-connection exists on the premises. Service will not be restored until such conditions or defects are corrected.

2.     The consumer’s system should be open for inspection at all reasonable times to authorized representatives of the city to determine whether unprotected cross­connections or other structural or sanitary hazards, including violations of these regulations, exist. When such a condition becomes known, the city manager shall deny or immediately discontinue service to the premises by providing for a physical break in the service line until the consumer has corrected the condition(s) in conformance with the statutes relating to plumbing and water supplies and the regulations adopted pursuant thereto.

3.     An approved backflow prevention assembly shall also be installed on each service line to a consumer’s water system at or near the property line or immediately inside the building being served; but, in all cases, before the first branch line leading off the service line wherever the following conditions exist:

a.     In the case of premises having an auxiliary water supply which is not or may not be of safe bacteriological or chemical quality and which is not acceptable as an additional source by the health officer, the public water system shall be protected against backflow from the premises by installing an approved backflow prevention assembly in the service line commensurate with the degree of hazard.

b.     In the case of premises on which any industrial fluids or any other objectionable substance is handled in such a fashion as to create an actual or potential hazard to the public water system, the public system shall be protected against backflow from the premises by installing an approved backflow prevention assembly in the service line commensurate with the degree of hazard. This shall include the handling of process waters and waters originating from the water purveyor’s system which have been subject to deterioration in quality.

c.     In the case of premises having: (1) internal cross-connections that cannot be permanently corrected or protected against, or (2) intricate plumbing and piping arrangements or where entry to all portions of the premises is not readily accessible for inspection purposes, making it impracticable or impossible to ascertain whether or not dangerous cross-connections exist, the public water system shall be protected against backflow from the premises by installing an approved backflow prevention assembly in the service line.

B.     Policy. The type of protective assembly required shall depend upon the degree of hazard which exists as follows:

1.     In the case of any premises where there is an auxiliary water supply as stated in this section and it is not subject to any of the following rules, the public water system shall be protected by an approved air gap or an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly.

2.     In the case of any premises where there is water or substance that would be objectionable but not hazardous to health, if introduced into the public water system, the public water system shall be protected by an approved double check valve backflow prevention assembly.

3.     In the case of any premises where there is any material dangerous to health which is handled in such a fashion as to create an actual or potential hazard to the public water system, the public water system shall be protected by an approved air gap or an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly. Examples of premises where these conditions will exist include sewage treatment plants, sewage pumping stations, chemicals manufacturing plants, hospitals, mortuaries and plating plants.

4.     In the case of any premises where there are unprotected cross-connections, either actual or potential, the public water system shall be protected by an approved air gap or an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly at the service connection.

5.     In the case of any premises where, because of security requirements or other prohibitions or restrictions, it is impossible or impractical to make a complete in-plant cross-connection survey, the public water system shall be protected against backflow from the premises by either an approved air gap or an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly on each service to the premises.

D.    Any backflow prevention assembly herein shall be a make, model and size approved by the city manager or his/her designated agent. The term “approved backflow prevention assembly” means an assembly that has been manufactured in full conformance with the standards established by the American Water Works Association entitled:

AWWA/ANSI CSl0-92 Standard for Double Check Valve Backflow Prevention Assemblies;

AWWA/ANSI CSll-92 Standard for Reduced Pressure Principle Backflow Prevention Assemblies;

and, have met completely the laboratory and field performance specifications of the Foundation for Cross-Connection Control and Hydraulic Research of the University of Southern California (USCFCCCHR) established:

Specifications of Backflow Prevention Assemblies—Section 10 of the most current edition of the Manual of Cross-Connection Control.

Said AWWA and USCFCCCHR standards and specifications have been adopted by the city. Final approval shall be evidenced by a “Certificate of Compliance” for the said AWWA standards; or “Certificate of Approval” for the said CTSCFCCCHR Specifications; issued by an approved testing laboratory.

The following testing laboratory has been qualified by the city to test and approve backflow prevention assemblies:

Foundation for Cross-Connection Control and Hydraulic Research

University of Southern California KAP-200 University Park MC-2531 Los Angeles, California 90089-2531

Testing laboratories other than the laboratory listed above will be added to an approved list as they are qualified by the city manager or his/her designated agent.

Backflow preventers which may be subjected to backpressure or backsiphonage that have been fully tested and have been granted a Certificate of Approval by said qualified laboratory and are listed on the laboratory’s current list of approved backflow prevention assemblies may be used without further test or qualification.

E.     It shall be the duty of the consumer at any premises where backflow prevention assemblies are installed to have a field test performed by a certified backflow prevention assembly tester upon installation and at least once per year. In those instances where the city manager or his/her designated agent deems the hazard to be great enough he or she may require field tests at more frequent intervals. These tests shall be at the expense of the water user and shall be performed by water department personnel or by a certified tester approved by the city. It shall be the duty of the city manager to see that these tests are made in a timely manner. The consumer shall notify the city in advance when the tests are to be undertaken so that an official representative may witness the field tests if so desired. These assemblies shall be repaired, overhauled or replaced at the expense of the consumer whenever said assemblies are found to be defective. Records of such tests, repairs and overhaul shall be kept and made available to the city manager.

F.     All presently installed backflow prevention assemblies which do not meet the requirements of this section but were approved devices for the purposes described herein at the time of installation and which have been properly maintained, shall, except for the testing and maintenance requirements, be excluded from the requirements of these rules so long as they will satisfactorily protect the water purveyor’s system. Whenever the existing device is moved from the present location or requires more than minimum maintenance or when the city manager finds that the maintenance constitutes a hazard to health, the unit shall be replaced by an approved backflow prevention assembly meeting the requirements of this section.

G.    The city manager or his/her designated agent is authorized to make all necessary and reasonable rules and policies with respect to the enforcement of this chapter. All such rules and policies shall be consistent with the provisions of this chapter and shall be effective upon adoption. (Ord. 578 §2, 1995)

 

 

Chapter 13.55 WATER CONSERVATION MEASURES
13.55.010 Purpose.
The following regulations are intended as design guidelines for all commercial and industrial projects utilizing fresh water. (Ord. 661, 2009; Ord. 554, 1993)

 

13.55.020 General provisions.
A.    A minimum of seventy-five percent of the plants selected shall be drought tolerant, as listed in either of the following two sources:

1.     “Drought Tolerant Landscape” for Amador County, published by Amador Water Agency; and/or

2.     “New Western Garden Book” list of Drought Tolerant Plants, published by Sunset Magazine.

B.     Proposed turf and/or nondrought tolerant plants areas shall be limited to a maximum of twenty-five percent of the total landscaped area.

C.     Turf shall not be allowed within a city parkway strip or right-of-way, in landscaped areas less than eight feet in width, and on berms.

D.    Turf and/or nondrought tolerant plant material shall be grouped together.

E.     The irrigation system shall incorporate multiple water lines in order to separate drought-tolerant plants from nondrought-tolerant plant material. Minimum water consumption shall be the primary objective in the design of the irrigation system, which should include (but not limited to) drip emitters, bubbler heads, micro spray units, etc.

F.     An electric control box shall operate the irrigation system, and shall have the capability to accept ground moisture sensors and/or automatic rain shut-off devices.

G.    Ground moisture sensors and/or automatic rain shut-off devices are strongly recommended accessories for the irrigation system.

H.    A minimum of two inches of mulch or secure synthetic mulch membrane shall be added to the entire landscaped ground surface in all non-turf landscape areas.

I.      Open water bodies (including, but not limited to, ponds, decorative fountains, basins, reflective pools, and spray/mist fountains, etc.) are not recommended as landscaping features. (Ord. 661, 2009; Ord. 554, 1993)

 

13.55.030 Water use regulations.
The following regulations and uses of water must be adhered to by any person, business, entity, association, institution or any other user of water provided by the City of Jackson:

A.    The application of potable water to outdoor landscapes in a manner that causes runoff such that water flows onto adjacent property, non-irrigated areas, private and public walkways, roadways, parking lots, or structures is prohibited.

B.     Permitting a hydrant, tap, cock, or valve connected with the water system to leak into the ground or into any sink, bowl, toilet, or tub connected with a sewer or cesspool.

C.     Failing to repair any water leak after being informed of the same by the city and provided a reasonable time to repair. Thirty days is presumptively reasonable. The city may determine that a leak exists by reference to changes in historic water usage or where a property has higher average water use than similar properties or uses.

D.    Allowing water, at or as a result of its point of use, to pond deeper than one-quarter inch on any paved or unpaved surface. This subsection shall not apply to swimming pools, fountains or other similar decorative or recreational water features. Ponding is prohibited whether it occurs on the responsible party’s property or adjacent public or private property. (Ord. 709 §4, 2019; Ord. 695 §1, 2016)

Title 14 BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION
Chapter 14.04 UNIFORM CODES
Chapter 14.12 CONSTRUCTION BOARD OF APPEALS
Chapter 14.16 ACCESSIBILITY BOARD OF APPEALS

Chapter 14.04 UNIFORM CODES
14.04.010 Adoption of Codes and related appendices.
A.    The 2019 Edition of the California Administrative Code contained in Part 1 of Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations is hereby adopted by reference as the Administrative Code of the City of Jackson;

B.     The 2019 Edition of the California Building Code contained in Part 2, Volume 1 and Volume 2, of Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations, which incorporates and amends the 2018 Edition of the International Building Code published by the International Code Council, including Chapter 1, is hereby adopted by reference as the Building Code of the City of Jackson;

C.     The 2019 Edition of the California Residential Code contained in Part 2.5 of Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations, which incorporates and amends the 2018 Edition of the International Residential Code as published by the International Code Council, including Chapter 1, is hereby adopted by reference as the Residential Code of the City of Jackson;

D,    The 2019 Edition of the California Electrical Code contained in Part 3 of Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations, which incorporates and amends the 2017 Edition of the National Electric Code published by the National Fire Protection Association, including Chapter 1, is hereby adopted by reference as the Electrical Code of the City of Jackson;

E.     The 2019 Edition of the California Mechanical Code contained in Part 4 of Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations, which incorporates and amends the 2018 Edition of the Uniform Mechanical Code published by the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials, including Chapter 1, is hereby adopted by reference as the Mechanical Code of the City of Jackson;

F.     The 2019 Edition of the California Plumbing Code contained in Part 5 of Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations, which incorporates and amends the 2018 Edition of the Uniform Plumbing Code published by the International Association of Plumbing and Plumbing Officials, including Chapter 1, is hereby adopted as the Plumbing Code of the City of Jackson;

G.    The 2019 Edition of the California Energy Code contained in Part 6 of Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations is hereby adopted by reference as the Energy Code of the City of Jackson;

H.    The 2019 Edition of the California Historical Building Code contained in Part 8 of Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations is hereby adopted by reference as the Historical Building Code of the City of Jackson;

I.      The 2019 Edition of the California Fire Code contained in Part 9 of Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations, which incorporates and amends the 2018 Edition of the International Fire Code as published by the International Code Council, including Chapter 1, is hereby adopted as the Fire Code of the City of Jackson;

J.      The 2019 Edition of the California Existing Building Code contained in Part 10 of Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations is hereby adopted by reference as the Existing Building Code of the City of Jackson;

K.    The 2019 Edition of the California Green Building Standards Code contained in Part 11 of Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations is hereby adopted by reference as the Green Building Standards Code of the City of Jackson;

L.     The 2019 Edition of the California Referenced Standards Code contained in Part 12 of Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations is hereby adopted by reference as the Referenced Standards Code of the City of Jackson;

M.    The 2018 Edition of the International Property Maintenance Code as published by the International Code Council is hereby adopted by reference as the Property Maintenance Code of the City of Jackson;

N.    The 2018 Edition of the Uniform Swimming Pool, Spa and Hot Tub Code as published by the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials is hereby adopted by reference as the Swimming Pool Code of the City of Jackson;

O.    The 1997 Edition of the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings, published by the International Conference of Building Officials, is hereby adopted by reference as the Dangerous Buildings Code of the City of Jackson;

P.     The 1997 Edition of the Uniform Housing Code, published by the International Conference of Building Officials, as referenced and adopted by the California Department of Housing and Community Development in Title 25 of the California Code of Regulations pursuant to Sections 17958, 17958.5, 17958.7, 17958.9 and 17959 of the Health and Safety Code is hereby adopted by reference as the Housing Code of the City of Jackson;

Q.    The 1997 Edition of the Uniform Building Security Code, published by the International Conference of Building Officials, is hereby adopted by reference as the Security Building Code of the City of Jackson;

R.     The above-identified codes in this Section 14.04.010 (hereinafter collectively referred to as the “Uniform Codes”) are adopted for the purpose of prescribing regulations for the erection, construction, modification, repair, maintenance, demolition, use and occupancy of buildings and structures. One copy of each of the Uniform Codes shall be maintained for use and examination of the public in the office of the building official. (Ord. 713 §3, 2020; Ord. 700 §3, 2017)

 

14.04.020 Violation of Codes—Penalties.
A.    Violation of any provision of the Uniform Codes shall subject the violator to any or all of the following: suit for civil remedy or criminal penalty.

B.     The criminal penalty for the first or second offense shall be punishable as an infraction as defined by the Penal Code, as amended from time to time. The criminal penalty for a third offense or more, shall be punishable as a misdemeanor as defined by the Penal Code, as amended from time to time. (Ord. 713 §4, 2020; Ord. 700 §4, 2017)

14.04.030 Amendments to California Building Code.
The provisions of this Section 14.04.030 shall constitute local amendments to the cross-referenced provisions of the 2019 Edition of the California Building Standards Code, Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations, and shall be deemed to amend the cross-referenced section in said Code with the respective provisions set forth in this Section 14.04.030.

A.    Section 1608A.1 of the California Building Code is amended to add the following sentence at the end of the subsection as follows:

(1)    The snow load for the City of Jackson shall be 20 pounds per square foot.

(Ord. 713 §5, 2020; Ord. 700 §5, 2017)

 

14.04.040 Amendments to California Plumbing Code.
The provisions of this Section 14.04.040 shall constitute local amendments to the cross-referenced provisions of the 2013 Edition of the California Plumbing Code and shall be deemed to amend the cross-referenced section in said Code with the respective provisions set forth in this Section 14.04.040.

A.    Section 504.7 is added as follows:

504.7 All domestic solar water heating systems shall be provided with an over-temperature safety protection device, such as a tempering valve, constructed, listed and installed in accordance with nationally recognized applicable standards.

 

14.04.050 Fees.
Fees shall be set by resolution of the city council as amended from time to time. (Ord. 676, 12/13)

Chapter 14.12 CONSTRUCTION BOARD OF APPEALS
14.12.010 Created—Purpose.
In order to provide for reasonable interpretation of the building, electrical and plumbing laws of the city and to determine the suitability of alternate materials and methods of construction, there is created a construction board of appeals. (Ord. 380 §1, 1976)

 

14.12.020 Membership—Terms.
A.    The construction board of appeals shall consist of five commissioners and one alternate, appointed by the mayor and ratified by the city council, to serve voluntarily, to be selected from persons who are not employees of the city, but who are qualified by experience and training to pass on matters pertaining to the building and construction codes and regulations of the city.

B.     Commissioners shall be appointed to serve at the pleasure of the city council. The alternate shall be called to serve at any board meeting where one commissioner is absent or has a personal conflict of interest and is thereby unable to serve. The building official shall be an ex officio member and shall act as secretary to the board. (Ord. 477 §3, 1982; Ord. 380 §2, 1976)

 

14.12.030 Powers.
The construction board of appeals shall adopt reasonable rules for the hearing of appeals and the conducting of its investigations, and it shall establish procedures to be followed by the secretary of the board. The board shall select a chairman, and may take action only if a quorum of three regular members is present and such action is voted upon and approved by a majority of the members present. (Ord. 380 §3, 1976)

 

14.12.040 Appeals.
Persons aggrieved by interpretations given to provisions of building, electrical, or plumbing laws by those responsible for their enforcement may appeal such interpretations to the construction board of appeals. Appeals must be in writing, and shall specify in detail the matter on which the appeal is taken. The construction board of appeals shall meet promptly within fifteen days from the date that the written appeal is filed with the secretary of the board.

Where the application or interpretation of a provision in the law is uncertain or ambiguous, the board may advise the city council to affirm, reject, or modify such contested interpretation and may, by resolution, recommend reasonable guidelines for the interpretation and enforcement of such provisions. (Ord. 380 §3, 1976)

 

14.12.070 Alternate materials and methods of construction—Recommendations.
The construction board of appeals shall formulate and recommend to the city council rules and regulations concerning the use of alternate materials and/or methods of construction as are necessary to supplement pro­ visions of the building, electrical and plumbing laws. The board may take such action on its own motion or upon the request of any interested party. (Ord. 380 §3, 1976)

 

14.12.080 Interpretations and recommendations—Publication and adoption required when.
An interpretation of code provisions or rules and regulations concerning the use of alternate materials or methods of construction which are voted upon and approved by the city council shall be published in the official newspaper of the city within ten days of their adoption and shall not be effective until ten days after date of publication. (Ord. 380 §3, 1976)

 

14.12.090 Objections to city council proceedings—Final decision.
A.    Upon receiving from the construction board of appeals any recommendation or resolution to take a particular course of action, the city council shall give the greatest weight of authority to such findings or recommendation in rendering their final decision on the matter.

B.     Any interested person having any objection or feeling aggrieved at any proceeding taken by the city council in sustaining or modifying such recommendation from the board must bring an action in a court of competent jurisdiction within thirty days after the action of the city council in such matter, otherwise all objections will be deemed waived. (Ord. 390, 1976)

Chapter 14.16 ACCESSIBILITY BOARD OF APPEALS
14.16.010 Creation.
Pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 19957.5, there is hereby created and established an Accessibility Board of Appeals.

 

14.16.020 Composition.
The Accessibility Board of Appeals shall consist of five members meeting the qualifications and requirements of Health and Safety Code Section 19957.5, as it may be amended. Unless amended, the Accessibility Board of Appeals shall consist of:

A.    Two physically handicapped members;

B.     Two members with construction experience; and

C.     One member from the general public.

 

14.16.030 Appointment and removal.
Members of the Accessibility Board of Appeals shall be appointed by a majority vote of the city council. Members of the Accessibility Board of Appeals may be removed at anytime, with or without cause, by a majority vote of the city council.

 

14.16.040 Terms of members.
Of the members first appointed to the Accessibility Board of Appeals, two members shall be appointed for a term of two years and three members shall be appointed for a term of four years. Successors in office shall serve for a term of four years, except that if a vacancy on the board shall occur other than by an expiration of a term of office, it shall be filled for the unexpired portion of term. Each term shall begin on January 1st and shall end on December 31st but shall continue to be staggered as provided above.

 

14.16.050 Jurisdiction.
Pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 19957.5(c), the Accessibility Board of Appeals shall be responsible for hearing written appeals related to the enforcement and implementation of accessibility requirements contained in the California Building Standards Code and/or adopted or established pursuant to Part 5.5 of Division 13 of the Health and Safety Code.

14.16.060 Powers and duties.
The Accessibility Board of Appeals shall have the power to approve, ratify, amend, modify, remand or reverse any decision of the city building official subject to Section 14.16.050. All such decisions shall be in writing. The decision of the Accessibility Board of Appeals shall be final in the absence of fraud or prejudicial abuse of discretion.

 

14.16.070 Procedure.
The Accessibility Board of Appeals shall hold meetings at the request of the building official. The board shall adopt rules for the conduct of its meetings in accordance with law and prepare and maintain a public record of its transaction of business which shall include its findings and determinations on matters within its jurisdiction. The Accessibility Board of Appeals shall not be bound by strict rules of evidence when conducting hearings within its jurisdiction but shall ensure all persons are provided applicable due process. The Accessibility Board of Appeals shall ensure its meetings and hearings comply with the applicable rules and standards set forth in the California Building Standards Code or Health and Safety Code. (Ord. 674, 10/12)

Title 15 RESERVED

Title 16 RESERVED

Title 17 DEVELOPMENT CODE
Article I. Development Code Enactment and Applicability
Article II. Zoning Districts and Allowable Land Uses
Article III. Site Planning and General Development Standards
Article IV. Land Use and Development Permit Procedures
Article V. Subdivisions
Article VI. Development Code Administration
Article VII. Development Code Definitions

Article I. Development Code Enactment and Applicability
Chapter 17.01 PURPOSE AND EFFECT OF DEVELOPMENT CODE
17.01.010 Title.
This Title is and may be cited as the City of Jackson Zoning and Development Code, Title 17 of the City of Jackson Municipal Code, hereafter referred to as “this Development Code.”

 

17.01.020 Purposes of Development Code.
This Development Code carries out the policies of the City of Jackson General Plan by classifying and regulating the uses of land and structures within the City of Jackson. This Development Code is adopted to protect and to promote the public health, safety, comfort, convenience, prosperity, and general welfare of residents, and businesses in the City. Additional purposes of this Development Code are to:

A.    Implement the General Plan by encouraging the uses of land designated by the General Plan;

B.     Provide standards for the orderly growth and development of the City that will maintain its established historic, small town, and open space characteristics;

C.     Enhance and maintain the relationship between the citizens of the City of Jackson, our environment, and the City’s many attributes essential for a continued high quality of life;

D.    Encourage growth in a manner that does not detract from the City’s attributes or negatively impact the environment;

E.     Require high quality planning and design for development, that enhances the visual character of the City, avoids conflicts between land uses, and preserves the scenic qualities of the City by maintaining adequate open space;

F.     Create a comprehensive and stable pattern of land uses consistent with the limitations of the Resource Constraints and Priority Allocation Ordinance; and

G.    Provide regulations for the subdivision of land in compliance with the Subdivision Map Act, Title 7, Section 4, Division 2 of the California Government Code.

 

17.01.030 Authority, Relationship to General Plan.
A.    This Development Code is enacted based on the authority vested in the City of Jackson by the State of California, including, but not limited to, the State Constitution; Sections 65800 and subsequent sections of the California Government Code; the California Environmental Quality Act; Subdivision Map Act; and the Health and Safety Code.

B.     This Development Code is the primary tool used by the City of Jackson to carry out the goals, objectives, and policies of the Jackson General Plan. The Jackson City Council intends that this Development Code be consistent with the Jackson General Plan, and that any land use, subdivision, or development approved in compliance with this Development Code will also be consistent with the Jackson General Plan.

 

17.01.040 Applicability of the Development Code.
This Development Code applies to all land uses, structures, subdivisions, lot line adjustments, and development within the City of Jackson, as follows:

A.    New land uses or structures, changes to land uses or structures. It shall be unlawful, and a violation of this Development Code, for any person to establish, construct, reconstruct, alter, or replace any use of land or structure, except in compliance with the requirements of Section 17.02.020 (Requirements for Development and New Land Uses), and Chapter 17.130 (Nonconforming Uses, Structures, and Parcels).

B.     Issuance of construction permits. No building, grading, or other construction permit, temporary or final certificate of occupancy, or final building inspection may be issued or granted by the Building Department unless:

1.     The proposed land use and/or structure satisfies the requirements of subsection A above;

2.     The City Engineer determines that the parcel was legally created in compliance with the Subdivision Map Act and Article V (Subdivisions), as applicable at the time the parcel was created, or Chapter 17.86 (Lot Line Adjustments); and

3.     All conditions and requirements of any applicable land use permit have been met or guaranteed by security approved by the City of Jackson.

C.     Subdivision of land. Any subdivision of land proposed within the City of Jackson after the effective date of this Development Code shall be consistent with the general development requirements of Article II (Zoning Districts and Allowable Land Uses), the subdivision requirements of Article V (Subdivisions), and all other applicable requirements of this Development Code. Lot line adjustments shall comply with Chapter 17.86 (Lot Line Adjustments).

D.    Occupancy of a site, structure, or vehicle for dwelling purposes. No land, structure, or vehicle shall be used for living or dwelling purposes for more than two weeks in any calendar year unless the land, structure, or vehicle is approved for occupancy for dwelling purposes in compliance with this Development Code.

E.     Continuation of an existing land use. An existing land use is lawful and not in violation of the Jackson Municipal Code only when operated and maintained in compliance with all applicable provisions of this Development Code or, where applicable, Chapter 17.130 (Nonconforming Uses, Structures, and Parcels). However, the requirements of this Development Code are not retroactive in their effect on a land use that was lawfully established before the effective date of this Development Code or any applicable amendment.

F.     Effect of Development Code changes on projects in progress. The enactment of this Development Code or amendments to its requirements may impose different standards on new land uses than those that applied to previous development (For example, this Development Code or a future amendment could require more off-street parking spaces for a particular land use than former Jackson Zoning Ordinance provisions). The following provisions determine how the requirements of this Development Code apply to land use permit and subdivision applications for projects in progress at the time requirements are changed.

1.     Projects with pending applications. All applications that have been determined by the City Planner to be complete in compliance with Section 17.70.060 (Initial Application Review/Environmental Assessment) before the effective date of this Development Code or any amendment, will be processed according to the requirements in effect when the application was accepted as complete, provided that the applicant complies with all requests for information, and proceeds with any necessary arrangements for the preparation and completion of environmental documents, within 90 days of a written request from the City. Applications for land use permit or Tentative Map extensions of time (see Sections 17.84.050 and 17.96.150, respectively) shall be consistent with the requirements of this Development Code that are in effect when the time extension application is accepted as complete.

2.     Approved projects. Any approved development for which construction has not begun as of the effective date of this Development Code or amendment, may still be constructed as approved, as long as all of the following standards are met:

a.     Required Building Permits have been obtained before the expiration of any applicable land use permit (Section 17.84.050, Time Limits, Phasing, and Extensions) or, where applicable, before the expiration of any approved time extension granted under Section 17.84.050;

b.     Construction is determined by the City Planner to be diligently pursued before the expiration of any applicable land use permit (Section 17.84.050, Time Limits, Phasing, and Extensions) or, where applicable, before the expiration of any approved time extension granted under Section 17.84.050. For the purposes of this Section, diligent pursuit shall require, at a minimum, completion of all on-site grading in compliance with an approved grading plan or, if no grading is required, the installation of the foundation for all structures on the parcels;

c.     The use of the property including the construction of all buildings and structures and other features of the project as shown on the approved permit shall be completed before the expiration of any applicable land use permit (Section 17.84.050, Time Limits, Phasing, and Extensions) or, where applicable, before the expiration of any approved time extension granted under Section 17.84.050;

d.     The use of the property including the construction of all buildings and structures and other features of the project as shown on the approved permit shall comply with the requirements of the Development Code in effect at the time of the approved land use permit; and

e.     The City Planner or his/her designee may approve minor changes to the project based on compliance with the requirements and standards of this Development Code if the changes:

(1)    Do not involve a feature of the project that was specifically addressed or was a basis for findings in a negative declaration or environmental impact report (EIR) for the project;

(2)    Do not involve a feature of the project that was specifically addressed or was a basis for conditions of approval for the project or that was a specific consideration by the review authority in the approval of the permit; and

(3)    Do not involve a substantial change to the site plan or the building design.

For example, the City Planner may approve minor changes to the number, design, and/or specifications of parking spaces if such changes are consistent with the parking requirements of this Development Code, parking was not specifically identified in the staff report as an issue for discussion, and parking was not specifically considered by the review authority as an issue for discussion or deliberation. The City Planner shall prepare an administrative report for the Planning Commission explaining any project minor changes.

3.     Approved projects not requiring construction. Any approved land use not requiring construction that has not been established as of the effective date or amendment, may still be established in compliance with its approved permit, as long as all of the following standards are met:

a.     The use of the property as shown on the approved permit shall be established before the expiration of any applicable land use permit (Section 17.84.050, Time Limits, Phasing, and Extensions) or, where applicable, before the expiration of any approved time extension granted under Section 17.84.050;

b.     The use of the property as shown on the approved permit shall comply with the requirements of the Development Code in effect at the time of the approved land use permit; and

c.     The City Planner may approve minor changes to the project based on compliance with the requirements and standards if the changes:

(1)    Do not involve a feature of the project that was specifically addressed or was a basis for findings in a negative declaration or environmental impact report (EIR) for the project;

(2)    Do not involve a feature of the project that was specifically addressed or was a basis for conditions of approval for the project or that was a specific consideration by the review authority in the approval of the permit; and

(3)    Do not involve a substantial change to the site plan or the building design.

4.     Approved subdivisions not yet recorded. Any approved subdivision for which a Parcel or Final Map has not been recorded as of the effective date or amendment, may still have a Parcel or Final Map recorded in compliance with the approved Tentative Map, as long as recordation occurs before the expiration of the Tentative Map (Section 17.96.130, Tentative Map Time Limits) or, where applicable, before the expiration of any approved time extension granted under Section 17.96.150 (Extensions of Time for Tentative Maps).

5.     Projects under construction. A structure that is under construction on the effective date or any amendment, need not be changed to satisfy any new or different requirements of this Development Code, provided that the approved use of the site shall be established, including the completion of all structures and other features of the project as shown on the approved permit, before the expiration of any applicable land use permit, or time extension granted in compliance with Section 17.84.050 (Time Limits, Phasing, and Extensions).

G.    Other requirements may still apply. Nothing in this Development Code eliminates the need for obtaining any other permits required by the City, or any permit of this Development Code, approval or entitlement required by other provisions of the Municipal Code or the regulations of any City department, or any County, regional, State, or Federal agency.

H.    Conflicting permits and licenses to be void. All permits or licenses shall be issued by the City in compliance with the provisions of this Development Code. Any permit or license issued in conflict with shall be void.

 

17.01.050 Responsibility for Administration.
This Development Code shall be administered by the Jackson City Council, Planning Commission, City Manager, City Planner, Engineer, and Building Department, in compliance with Chapter 17.120 (Administrative Responsibility) of this Development Code.

 

17.01.060 Partial Invalidation of Development Code.
If any portion is for any reason held to be invalid, unconstitutional or unenforceable by a court of competent jurisdiction, these decisions shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this Development Code. The Jackson City Council hereby declares that this Development Code and each article, chapter, section, subsection, paragraph, subparagraph, sentence, clause, phrase and portion thereof would have been adopted irrespective of the fact that one or more portions of this Development Code may be declared invalid, unconstitutional or unenforceable.

 

 

Chapter 17.02 DEVELOPMENT AND LAND USE APPROVAL REQUIREMENTS
17.02.010 Purpose of Chapter.
This Chapter describes the general requirements for the approval of proposed development and new land uses by the City. Land use permit requirements for specific land uses are established by Articles II (Zoning Districts and Allowable Land Uses) and III (Site Planning and General Development Standards).

 

17.02.020 Requirements for Development and New Land Uses.
No use of land or structures shall be established, constructed, reconstructed, altered, allowed or replaced unless the use of land or structures complies with the following requirements:

A.    Allowable use. The land use shall be identified by Article II (Zoning Districts and Allowable Land Uses) as being allowable in the zoning district applied to the site.

B.     Permit requirements. Any land use permit required shall be obtained before the proposed use is constructed, otherwise established or put into operation, unless the proposed use is listed in Section 17.02.030 (Exemptions from Land Use Permit Requirements). The land use permit requirements are established by Article II (Zoning Districts and Allowable Land Uses).

C.     Development standards. The use and/or structures shall comply with all other applicable requirements of this Development Code, including the development standards of Article II (Zoning Districts and Allowable Land Uses), and the provisions of Article III (Site Planning and General Development Standards).

D.    Legal parcel. The use and/or structures shall only be established on a parcel of land which has been legally created in compliance with the Subdivision Map Act, Article V (Subdivisions), and Chapter 18.86 (Lot Line Adjustments), as applicable at the time the parcel was created.

E.     Previous approvals and agreements. The use and/or structures shall comply with applicable provisions and requirements of any of the following permits, entitlements or agreements:

1.     Conditions of Approval. Any conditions of approval imposed by any land use permit previously granted by the City and still in effect;

2.     Development Agreements. Any Development Agreement approved by the City in compliance with Chapter 17.150 (Development Agreements) and still in effect;

3.     Planned Developments. Any conditions of approval or other provisions imposed by a Planned Development previously approved by the City and still in effect; and

4.     Subdivisions. Any conditions of approval, restrictions, or other provisions imposed by a subdivision map previously approved by the City and recorded in the Amador County Recorders Office.

17.02.030 Exemptions from Land Use Permit Requirements.
The land use permit requirements do not apply to the activities, uses of land and/or structures identified by this Section, which are allowed in all zoning districts subject to compliance with this Section.

A.    General requirements for exemption. The activities, uses of land and/or structures identified by following subsection B are exempt from the land use permit requirements only when:

1.     The activity or use is established and operated in compliance with all applicable development standards of Articles II (Zoning Districts and Allowable Land Uses) and III (Site Planning and General Development Standards);

2.     Any permit or approval required by regulations other than in this Development Code is obtained in compliance with Section 17.02.050 (Additional Permits or Approvals May Be Required); and

3.     The activity or use will not result in any exterior improvements, modifications, or alterations to structures located in the Historic Corridor.

B.     Exempt activities and uses. The following activities, uses of land and/or structures are exempt from the land use permit requirements when in compliance with subsection A above.

1.     Electrical facilities. The location or construction of facilities for production or generation of electrical energy, electrical substations in an electrical transmission system which receives electricity at less than 100,000 volts, and electrical distribution lines of less than 100,000 volts, in compliance with Government Code Section 53091 and Public Resources Code Section 12808.5.

2.     Governmental activities. Activities of the State or an agency of the State, or the Federal Government on land owned or leased by a governmental agency.

3.     Interior remodeling. Interior alterations that do not increase the number of rooms or the gross floor area within the structure, change the permitted use of the structure, or otherwise intensify the use.

4.     Nonresidential repairs and maintenance. Ordinary repairs and maintenance for uses and structures other than residential uses and structures, if:

a.     The work does not result in any change in the approved land use of the site or structure, or the addition to, enlargement or expansion of the structure;

b.     Any exterior repairs employ the same or similar materials and design as the original;

c.     Any exterior repairs comply with any previous design approval; and

d.     All repairs and maintenance comply with applicable provisions of Chapter 17.130 (Nonconforming Uses, Structures, and Parcels).

5.     Residential activities, uses and structures.

a.     Decks, paths and driveways. Residential decks, platforms, on-site paths, and driveways that are not required to have a Building Permit or Grading Permit by Title 15 (Building and Construction) of the Municipal Code, and are not over 18 inches above natural grade and not over any basement or story below.

b.     Fences and walls. Residential fences and walls are exempt from land use permit requirements as provided by Section 17.30.070 (Fences, Walls, and Hedges).

c.     Multifamily residential repairs and maintenance. Ordinary repairs and maintenance for residential uses and structures other than single-family uses and structures, if:

(1)    The work does not result in any change in the approved land use of the site or structure, or the addition to, enlargement or expansion of the structure;

(2)    Any exterior repairs employ the same or similar materials and design as the original;

(3)    Any exterior repairs comply with any previous design approval; and

(4)    All repairs and maintenance comply with applicable provisions of Chapter 17.130 (Nonconforming Uses, Structures, and Parcels).

d.     Single-family residential repairs and maintenance. Ordinary repairs and maintenance for single family residential uses and structures, if:

(1)    The work does not result in any change in the approved land use of the site or structure;

(2)    The work does not result in an addition, enlargement or expansion of the structure; and

(3)    All repairs and maintenance comply with applicable provisions of Chapter 17.130 (Nonconforming Uses, Structures, and Parcels).

e.     Small residential accessory structures. Portable storage sheds and other small structures in residential zoning districts that are:

(1)    Exempt from building and grading permit requirements in compliance with Title 15 (Building and Construction) of the Municipal Code;

(2)    Less than 120 square feet in roof area; and

(3)    In compliance with the setback requirements of Article II (Zoning Districts and Allowable Land Uses), and with any applicable setback requirements in Section 17.30.120 (Setback Requirements and Exceptions).

f.      Spas, hot tubs, and fish ponds. Portable spas, hot tubs, fish ponds, etc., shall comply with the side and rear setback requirements established by Article II (Zoning Districts and Allowable Land Uses) for the applicable zoning district where applicable unless they do not:

(1)    Exceed 120 square feet in total area, including related equipment;

(2)    Contain more than 2,000 gallons of water; and

(3)    Exceed three feet in depth.

g.     Greenhouses, playhouses and tree houses. Greenhouses, playhouses and tree houses that do not exceed 120 square feet in total area shall comply with the front, side, and rear setback requirements established by Article II (Zoning Districts and Allowable Land Uses) for the applicable zoning district where applicable.

6.     Solar collectors. The addition of solar collection systems to the roofs of existing structures, provided that the collectors are located in compliance with Section 17.30.140 (Solar Access and Solar Equipment Guidelines).

7.     Utility infrastructure. The erection, construction, alteration, or maintenance by a public utility or public agency of underground or overhead utilities (i.e., water, gas, electric, telecommunication, supply or disposal systems, including wires, mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, fire-alarm boxes, police call boxes, traffic signals, hydrants, etc.), shall be permitted in any zoning district. This does not include structures, electrical substations which receive electricity at 100,000 volts or greater, and electrical distribution lines of 100,000 volts or greater. Satellite, cellular telephone, wireless communications, and other antennas are subject to Section 17.58.025 (Telecommunications Facilities).

8.     Water facilities. The location or construction of facilities for the production, generation, storage, or transmission of water, in compliance with Government Code Section 53091.

 

17.02.040 Temporary Uses.
Requirements for establishing a temporary use (e.g., construction yards, seasonal sales lots, special events, temporary office trailers, etc.) are in Chapter 17.80 (Temporary Use Permits).

 

17.02.050 Additional Permits or Approvals May be Required.
An allowed land use that is exempt from a land use permit, or has been granted a land use permit, may still be required to obtain other issued permits before the use is constructed, or otherwise established and put into operation. Nothing in this Chapter shall eliminate the need to obtain any permits or approvals required by:

A.    Other provisions of the Municipal Code, including: Building Permits, Grading Permits, or other construction permits if they are required by Title 15; any Encroachment Permit required by Title 13; or subdivision approval if required by Article V (Subdivisions);

B.     Amador County, any special district, or any regional, State or Federal agency.

The applicant shall obtain all necessary permits before starting work or establishing new uses.

 

 

Chapter 17.03 INTERPRETATION OF CODE PROVISIONS
17.03.010 Purpose of Chapter.
This Chapter provides rules for resolving questions about the meaning or applicability of any part of this Development Code. The provisions of this Chapter are intended to ensure the consistent interpretation and application of the provisions and the General Plan.

 

17.03.020 Rules of Interpretation.
A.    Authority. The City Planner is assigned the responsibility and authority to interpret the requirements of this Development Code.

B.     Language.

1.     Abbreviated titles and phrases. For the purpose of brevity, the following phrases, personnel and document titles are shortened hereafter in the Development Code. The City of Jackson is referred to hereafter as the “City.” The City of Jackson Development Code is referred to hereafter as “Development Code.” “Buildings and structures” are referred to hereafter as “structures.”

2.     Terminology. When used in the Development Code, the words “shall,” “must,” “will,” “is to,” and “are to” are always mandatory. “Should” is not mandatory but is strongly recommended; and “may” is permissive. The present tense includes the past and future tenses; and the future tense includes the present. The singular number includes the plural number, and the plural the singular, unless the natural construction of the word indicates otherwise. The words “includes” and “including” shall mean “including but not limited to....” When used to describe the applicability of two or more requirements of this Development Code, the word “or” shall mean that compliance with any of the series is sufficient, and the words “and,” and “and/or” shall mean that compliance with all of the series is required.

3.     Number of days. Whenever a number of days are specified in the Development Code, or in any permit, condition of approval, or notice issued or given as provided in the Development Code, the number of days shall be construed as calendar days. Time limits will extend to the following working day where the last of the specified number of days falls on a weekend or holiday.

4.     State law requirements. Where the Development Code references applicable provisions of State law (for example, the California Government Code, Subdivision Map Act, Public Resources Code, etc.), the reference shall be construed to be to the applicable State law provisions as they may be amended from time to time.

C.     Calculations—Rounding. Where provisions require calculations to determine applicable requirements, any fractional/decimal results of the calculations shall be rounded as provided by this subsection.

1.     Minimum lot area, maximum density. The fractional/decimal results of calculations of the number of parcels or residential units allowed through subdivision or a land use permit based on a minimum lot area or maximum density requirement shall be rounded down to the next lowest whole number. For example, the RH zoning district would allow a parcel to be proposed for development with up to 1 apartment residential unit per 2,000 square feet of site area, which would allow up to 21 dwelling units on a one acre (43,560 square foot) parcel (43,560/2,000 = 21.78, rounded down to 21).

2.     All other calculations. For all calculations required other than those described in subsection C.1 above or in another section stating the calculations for a specific development standard, the fractional/decimal results of calculations shall be rounded to the next highest whole number when the fraction/decimal is 0.5 or more, and to the next lowest whole number when the fraction is less than 0.5.

D.    Zoning Map boundaries. If there is uncertainty about the location of any zoning district boundary shown on the official Zoning Map, the following rules are to be used in resolving the uncertainty. (See also 17.06.040, Zoning District Regulations.)

1.     Where district boundaries approximately follow lot, alley, or street lines, the lot lines and street and alley centerlines shall be construed as the district boundaries.

2.     If a district boundary divides a parcel and the boundary line location is not specified by distances printed on the zoning map, the location of the boundary will be determined by using the scale appearing on the zoning map.

3.     Where a public street or alley is officially vacated or abandoned, the property that was formerly in the street or alley will be included within the zoning district of the adjoining property on either side of the centerline of the vacated or abandoned street or alley.

E.     Allowable uses of land. If a proposed use of land is not specifically listed in Article II, the use shall not be allowed, except as follows.

1.     Allowed by other section. The proposed use of land is specifically allowed by another section of this Development Code, e.g. home occupations allowed as an accessory use in all residential zoning districts by Section 17.58.120.

2.     Similar uses allowed.

a.     Similar use determination. The City Planner may determine that a proposed use not listed in Article II is allowable for the purpose of accepting a land use permit application for processing, and the review authority may approve an application for an unlisted use, if all of the following findings are made:

(1)    The characteristics of, and activities associated with, the proposed use are similar to those of one or more of the uses listed in the zoning district as allowable, and will not involve a higher level of activity or population density than the uses listed in the district;

(2)    The proposed use will meet the purpose/intent of the zoning district that is applied to the site; and

(3)    The proposed use will be consistent with the goals, objectives and policies of the General Plan and any Planned Development.

b.     Applicable standards and permit requirements. When the review authority determines that a proposed, but unlisted, use is similar to a listed use, the proposed use will be treated in the same manner as the listed use in determining where it is allowed, what permits are required and what other standards and requirements apply.

c.     Planning Commission determination. The City Planner may forward questions about similar uses directly to the Planning Commission for a determination at a public meeting. Any decision of the Planning Commission shall be in writing.

F.     Minimum requirements. When the regulations are being interpreted and applied, all provisions shall be considered to be minimum requirements, unless stated otherwise (e.g., height limits and site coverage requirements for structures, and the numbers and size of signs allowed are maximums, not minimums).

G.    Conflicting requirements.

1.     Development Code provisions. In the event of any conflict between the zoning district regulations of Article II and the provisions of Article III (Site Planning and General Development Standards), the provisions of Article III shall control.

2.     Development Code and Municipal Code provisions. If conflicts occur between requirements of this Development Code, or between the Development Code and other regulations of the City, the most restrictive shall control.

3.     Development Agreements, Specific Plans, Planned Developments. If conflicts occur between the Development Code and the requirements and standards adopted as part of any Development Agreement, Specific Plan, or Planned Development, the requirements of the Development Agreement, Specific Plan, or Planned Development shall control.

4.     Development Code and Subdivisions. If conflicts occur between the requirements of this Development Code and any conditions of approval, restrictions, or other provisions imposed by a subdivision map, the conditions of approval, restrictions, and provisions of the subdivision map shall control unless the City Planner finds (a) the conditions of approval, restrictions, or other provisions of the subdivision map would be detrimental to the public health, safety, or welfare of the City or injurious to property or improvements in the vicinity; or (b) the characteristics and circumstances of the property and surrounding area and/or the project have substantially changed and clearly demonstrate that the conditions of approval, restrictions, or other provisions of the subdivision map are no longer necessary. In these cases, the requirements of the Development Code shall prevail.

5.     Private agreements. This article applies to all land uses and development regardless of whether it imposes a greater or lesser restriction on the development or use of structures or land than a private agreement or restriction, without affecting the applicability of any agreement or restriction. The City shall not enforce any private covenant or agreement unless it is a party to the covenant or agreement, or unless enforcement rights have been provided to the City in the covenant or agreement, provided that the City shall be under no obligation to enforce any covenant or agreement.

 

17.03.030 Procedures for Interpretations.
If the City Planner determines that the meaning or applicability of any of the requirements of this Development Code are subject to interpretation generally or as applied to a specific case, the City Planner may issue an official interpretation. Interpretations may also be requested in compliance with this Section.

A.    Request for interpretation. A request shall be written, specifically state the provision(s) in question, and provide any information to assist in their review.

B.     Record of interpretations. Official interpretations shall be:

1.     In writing, and shall quote the provisions being interpreted, and explain their meaning or applicability in the particular or general circumstances that caused the need for interpretation; and

2.     Distributed to the City Council, Planning Commission, City attorney, City Manager and Department staff.

Any provisions that are determined by the City Planner to need refinement or revision should be corrected by amending as soon as is practical. Until amendments can occur, the City Planner will maintain a complete record of all official interpretations, available for public review, and indexed by the number of the Section that is the subject of the interpretation.

C.     Appeals and referral. Any interpretations by the City Planner may be appealed to the Planning Commission as provided by Chapter 17.140 (Appeals). The City Planner may also refer any interpretation to the Commission for a determination.

Article II. Zoning Districts and Allowable Land Uses
Chapter 17.06 ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS, ADOPTION OF ZONING MAP
17.06.010 Purpose of Chapter.
This Chapter establishes the zoning districts applied to property within the City, determines how the zoning districts are applied on the Zoning Map, and provides general permit requirements for development and new land uses.

 

17.06.020 Zoning Districts Established.
The City of Jackson shall be divided into zoning districts which implement the General Plan. The zoning districts shown in Table 2-1 are hereby established, and shall be shown on the official Zoning Map (Section 17.06.030 - Zoning Maps Adopted).

 

17.06.030 Zoning Maps Adopted.
The City Council hereby adopts the City of Jackson Zoning Map (hereafter referred to as the “Zoning Map”), which is on file with the Department.

A.    Inclusion by reference. The Zoning Map, together with all legends, symbols, notations, references, zoning district boundaries, and other information on the maps, has been adopted by the City Council in compliance with Government Code Sections 65800 et seq., and is hereby incorporated into this Development Code by reference as though it were fully included here.

B.     Zoning district boundaries. The boundaries of the zoning districts established by Section 17.06.020 (Zoning Districts Established) shall be shown upon the Zoning Map.

C.     Relationship to General Plan. The Zoning Map shall implement the General Plan, specifically including the Land Use Designation Map.

D.    Map amendments. Amendments to the Zoning Map shall follow the process established in Chapter 17.160 (General Plan, Zoning Map, and Development Code Amendments).

E.     Zoning Map interpretation. The Zoning Map shall be interpreted in compliance with Section 17.03.020(D) (Rules of Interpretation - Zoning Map Boundaries).

 

 

TABLE 2-1 ZONING DISTRICTS

General Plan Zoning Map Symbol

Zoning District Name

Residential Districts

 

RS

Residential Suburban

RL

Residential Low Density

RSF

Residential Single Family

RD

Residential Duplex

RM

Residential Medium Density

RH

Residential High Density

Commercial and Industrial Districts

 

PO

Professional Office

HC

Historic Commercial

LC

Limited Commercial

C

Commercial

I

Industrial/Manufacturing

Special Purpose Zoning Districts

 

P

Public/Institutional

R

Recreational

OS

Open Space

Overlay Zoning Districts

 

(pd)

Planned Development

(hc)

Historic Corridor

(cf)

Creek/Floodplain

(vc)

Visual Corridor

 

17.06.040 Zoning District Regulations.
A.    Purpose. Chapters 17.07 through 17.20 determine which land uses are allowed in each zoning district established by Section 17.06.020 (Zoning Districts Established), what land use permit is required to establish each use, and the basic development standards that apply to allowed land uses in each zoning district.

B.     Determination of allowable land uses and permit requirements. The uses of land allowed by this Development Code in each zoning district are identified in Chapter 17.07 (Residential Zoning District), Chapter 17.12 (Commercial, Office, and Industrial Zoning Districts), and Chapter 17.16 (Special Purpose Zoning Districts), together with the type of land use permit required for each use.

1.     Permit requirements. Table 2-1 provides for land uses that are subject to all applicable provisions of this Development Code, and:

a.     Permitted subject to first obtaining:

(1)    A Zoning Clearance (Chapter 17.72), for projects involving:

(a)    For nonresidential projects, a change in land use, new structures or additions, with a gross floor area of less than 7,500 square feet;

(b)    For nonresidential projects in the Historic Commercial and Industrial zoning districts, a change in land use, new structures or additions to existing structures, with a gross floor area of less than 5,000 square feet;

(c)    For residential projects, a change in land use, new structures or additions to existing structures with 10 or less residential units; and

(d)    A change in land use, new structures, additions to existing structures, new improvements, or additions to existing improvements with site disturbance (grading, impervious surfaces, and/or the removal of natural vegetation) of less than 26,000 square feet.

(2)    A Development Permit (Chapter 17.74) for projects involving:

(a)    For nonresidential projects, a change in land use, new structures or additions to existing structures, with a gross floor area of 7,500 square feet or more;

(b)    For nonresidential projects in Historic Commercial and Industrial zoning districts, a change in land use, new structures or additions to existing structures with a gross floor area of 5,000 square feet or more;

(c)    For residential projects, a change in land use, new structures or additions to existing structures with 11 or more residential units; and/or

(d)    A change in land use, new structures, additions to existing structures, new improvements, or additions to existing improvements with site disturbance (grading, impervious surfaces, and/or the removal of natural vegetation) of 26,000 square feet or more.

2.     Uses not listed. Land uses that are not listed in the tables or are not shown in a particular zoning district are not allowed, except as otherwise provided by Section 17.03.020(E) (Rules of Interpretation - Allowable Uses of Land), Section 17.02.030 (Exemptions from Land Use Permit Requirements), or by obtaining a conditional use permit per Section 17.76 (Use Permits and Minor Use Permits).

3.     Commercial marijuana activity and other illegal uses. Notwithstanding any provision of this Code to the contrary, any land use that cannot be conducted or carried out without being in violation of State or Federal law or this Code, expressly including, but not limited to, medical marijuana dispensaries and any commercial marijuana activity, shall be prohibited in all planning areas and zoning districts within the City.

C.     Standards for parcels with multiple zoning districts. The following standards apply to the proposed development, use, or subdivision of parcels that are or may be designated with more than one zoning district.

1.     Parcels proposed for merger. Where a Lot Line Adjustment or Tentative Map application proposes the merger of two or more parcels, so that a single parcel would be covered by two or more zoning districts, the application for adjustment or map approval shall be accompanied by an application for rezoning the lot into a single zoning district, in compliance with Chapter 17.160 (General Plan, Zoning Map, and Development Code Amendments).

D.    Conflicts between provisions. Rules for resolving conflicts between different Development Code provisions may be found in Section 17.03.020(G) (Rules of Interpretation - Conflicting Requirements). (Ord. 702 §4, 2017)

 

Chapter 17.07 RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS
17.07.010 Purpose of Chapter.
This Chapter provides regulations applicable to development and new land uses in the residential zoning districts established by Section 17.06.020 (Zoning Districts Established).

 

17.07.020 Purposes of Residential Zoning Districts.
The purposes of the individual residential zoning districts and the manner in which they are applied are as follows:

A.    RS (Residential Suburban) District. The “RS” zoning district is applied to lands for residential use, but with large lot sizes in order to promote and maintain the rural character of the area. The “RS” designation is also applied to areas characterized by terrain which is less suitable for higher residential densities. Minimum lot size is one acre. Population density and building intensity is one household and one single family dwelling per acre.

B.     RL (Residential Low Density) District. The “RL” zoning district is intended to provide a semi-rural residential land use. The minimum lot size is ½ acre. Population density and building intensity is one household and one single family dwelling unit per ½ acre.

C.     RSF (Residential Single Family) District. The “RSF” zoning district has been applied to areas in which urban services already exist or where they can easily be extended. The minimum lot size for “RSF” is 8,000 square feet. The population density and building intensity is one household and one single family dwelling per 8,000 square feet. When combined with the Planned Development (pd) designation the Planning Commission, at their discretion, may reduce the minimum lot size to 6,000 square feet as long as the following findings are made:

1.     Average slopes per lot are less than 15 percent;

2.     Surrounding transportation infrastructure can accommodate the increased density;

3.     Surrounding land uses are compatible with more dense single family residential; and

4.     Parking is adequate both on-site and on the street to accommodate both owners and guests.

D.    RD (Residential Duplex) District. The “RD” district is intended to be applied to properties predominately with duplexes, however, two detached residential units would also be allowed. The minimum lot size for “RD” development is 8,000 square feet. Population density and building intensity is one dwelling unit per 4,000 square feet of lot area.

E.     RM (Residential Medium Density) District. The “RM” zoning district is placed on lands where more intense residential uses, such as four-plexes, would be acceptable. The minimum parcel or lot size for “RM” development is 8,000 square feet with the building intensity limited to one dwelling unit per 3,000 square feet.

F.     RH (Residential High Density) District. The “RH” district is placed on lands which are suitable for multifamily housing. Minimum parcel or lot size is 4,000 square feet. The maximum allowable density and building intensity is one dwelling unit per 2,000 square feet.

 

17.07.030 Residential Zoning District Land Uses and Permit Requirements.
A.    General land use permit requirements. Tables 2-2, 2-3 and 2-4 identify the uses of land allowed by this Development Code in each residential zoning district, and the land use permit required to establish each use, in compliance with Section 17.06.040. (Zoning District Regulations).

Note: where the last column in the tables (“See Standards in Section”) includes a section number, the regulations in the referenced section apply to the use; however, provisions in other sections of this Development Code may also apply.

Table 2-2 identifies the uses of land allowed by this Development Code in the residential zoning districts, and the land use permit required to establish each use, in compliance with Section 17.06.040 (Zoning District Regulations).

 

TABLE 2-2 RESIDENTIAL ZONING ALLOWABLE LAND USES

Land Use

Allowable Uses

RS

1. Single family residential

 

2. Light farming except commercial rabbit, goat or hog farms, or commercial chicken or poultry ranches

 

3. No fur-bearing animals with the exception of cattle, horses, goats, and sheep

 

4. Crops and tree farming and the necessary buildings

 

With a Conditional Use Permit:

 

5. Guest ranches and summer camps

 

6. Riding academies and public stables

 

7. Animal hospital, commercial dairies and kennels

 

8. Private and public parks and recreation areas

 

9. 4-H or similar projects

RL

1. Single family residential

 

2. Accessory buildings incidental to a single family dwelling located on the same lot or parcel of land, including a private garage

RSF

1. Single family residential

 

2. Accessory buildings incidental to a single family dwelling located on the same lot or parcel of land, including a private garage

 

Land Use

Allowable Uses

RD

1. Any use permitted in the RSF zone

 

2. A two family dwelling or two one family dwellings

 

3. The accessory buildings necessary to use, located on the same lot or parcel of land

RM

1. Any use permitted in the RSF and RD zones

 

2. Three family dwelling, four family dwellings and bungalow courts

 

3. The accessory building necessary to such use located on the same lot or parcel of land

RH

1. Any use permitted in the RSF, RD and RM zones

 

2. Group dwellings, multiple family dwellings, apartment houses and, apartment hotels (including Single-Room Occupancy units)

 

3. The accessory building necessary to such use located on the same lot or parcel of land

 

4. Emergency Shelters (subject to the standards outlined in Chapter 17.58.130 of this Development Code)

 

17.07.035 Supportive and Transitional Housing.
Supportive and Transitional Housing as defined in Article VII—Development Code Definitions, shall be allowed in all residential zoning districts and are not subject to any restrictions (e.g., occupancy limit) not imposed on similar dwellings (e.g., single family home, apartments) in the same zone in which the supportive housing and transitional housing is located.

 

17.07.040 Residential Zoning District General Development Standards.
Subdivisions, new land uses and structures, and alterations to existing land uses and structures, shall be designed, constructed, and/or established in compliance with the requirements in Table 2-3, in addition to any other applicable requirements of this Chapter, and the development standards (e.g., landscaping, parking and loading, etc.) in Article III (Site Planning and General Development Standards).

Note: In accordance with Government Code Section 65852.3 the siting and permit process for manufactured housing in the same manner as a conventional or stick-built structure.

 

 

TABLE 2-3 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT GENERAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS

 

REQUIREMENT BY ZONING DISTRICT

Zoning District

RS

RL

RSF

RD

RM

RH

Minimum Lot Size

1 acre

½ acre

8,000 sq. ft.

8,000 sq ft.

8,000 sq. ft.

4,000 sq. ft.

Density

1 du/acre

1 du/½ acre

1 du/8,000 sq. ft. (4)

1 du/4,000 sq. ft.

1 du/3,000 sq. ft.

1 du/2,000 sq. ft.

Lot Width

 

 

 

 

 

 

Setbacks Required

Minimum setbacks required unless otherwise shown on the Zoning Map, Subdivision Map, or Planned Development. See 17.30.120 (Setback Requirements and Exceptions) for setback measurement, allowed projections into setbacks, and exceptions to required setbacks.

Front

25

25

10 or 15(1) (2)

10 or 15(1)

15

10

Side

5

5

5

5

5

5

Street Side Corner Lot

15

15

15

15

15

10

Rear

10

10

10

10

10

10

Between Structures

-

-

-

6 (2)

10 (3)

10 (3)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Building Height

2.5 stories and 35 feet

2.5 stories and 35 feet

2.5 stories and 35 feet

2.5 stories and 35 feet

2.5 stories and 35 feet

4 stories and 50 feet

(1)    RSF and RD front yard setbacks shall be a minimum of 10 feet for single-story structures and 15 feet for two-story structures. Driveway lengths must be a minimum of 25 feet.

(2)    RSF front yard setback shall be as established above except where lots comprising 40 percent or more of the frontage on one side of the street between intersecting streets are developed with buildings having an average front yard with a variation of not more than 10 feet, no building hereafter erected or structurally altered shall project beyond the average front yard line so established. In determining such front yard depth, buildings located more than 25 feet from the front property line or buildings facing a side street on a corner lot shall not be counted.

(2)    Six-foot setback between dwelling unit and accessory buildings.

(3)    Ten-foot setback between dwelling structures and six foot setback between dwellings and accessory buildings.

(4)    Per Section 17.07.020(C) (Purposes of Residential Zoning District) the RSF minimum lot size may be reduced to 6,000 square feet.

 

17.07.045 Personal Use and Cultivation of Marijuana.
The personal use, possession, purchase, transport or dissemination of marijuana shall be considered unlawful in all areas of the City to the maximum extent it is unlawful under California law. To the extent the City is required to allow the cultivation of marijuana for personal use under California law, the regulations set forth in this section shall apply.

A.    Personal Cultivation. For purposes of this section, cultivation means any activity involving the planting, growing, harvesting, drying, curing, grading, or trimming of marijuana, conducted by an individual strictly for that individual’s personal use, possession, processing, transporting, or giving away without any compensation whatsoever in accordance with this Code and State law, as applicable.

B.     Outdoor Cultivation. Outdoor cultivation is prohibited in all zoning districts of the City. No use permit, building permit, variance, or any other permit or entitlement, whether administrative or discretionary, shall be approved or issued for any such use or activity.

C.     Indoor Cultivation. Indoor cultivation of marijuana may only be conducted in residential zoning districts in the City inside a private residence, or inside an accessory building to a private residence located upon the grounds of a private residence that is fully enclosed and secure. All indoor cultivation shall be subject to the following minimum restrictions, which are intended to serve as the City’s reasonable regulations of residential indoor marijuana cultivation as provided by Health and Safety Code Section 11362.2(b)(1):

1.     Prior to conducting any cultivation, a person must first obtain and maintain a valid Residential Indoor Marijuana Cultivation (RIMC) permit. The City Manager or his/her designee may develop and issue application and processing guidelines for issuance of RIMC permits, and no RIMC permit shall be granted unless and until a person has fully complied with the application and processing requirements. The City Council is authorized to establish and set reasonable fees by resolution for issuance and renewal of RIMC permits.

2.     The cultivation must be conducted by a person that is 21 years of age or older, and marijuana cultivation areas shall not be readily accessible to persons under 21 years of age.

3.     The following chemicals may not be used or stored in the cultivation area, and if stored elsewhere in the residence must be stored in leak and fireproof containers sufficient to provide storage up to required safety standards:

a.     Explosive gases, including, but not limited to: Butane, Propane, Xylene, Styrene, Gasoline, Kerosene, Oxygen (O2), Carbon dioxide (CO2) or Hydrogen (H2).

b.     Dangerous poisons, toxins, or carcinogens, including, but not limited to: Methanol, Isopropyl Alcohol, Methylene Chloride, Acetone, Benzene, Toluene, or Tri-choro-ethylene.

4.     Cultivation is prohibited on properties used for any of the following:

a.     Day care or child care facilities;

b.     Youth centers;

c.     Group homes.

5.     Renters must obtain the prior written consent of their landlord or the property owner for any cultivation permitted under this section.

6.     Structures used for cultivation shall comply with all laws concerning building and construction of structures, including, without limitation and as applicable, the Development Code, the California Building Code, Electrical Code, and Fire Code, as adopted by the City of Jackson.

7.     Marijuana cultivation lighting shall not exceed a total of 1,200 watts for the cultivation area within the private residence.

8.     The indoor use of generators and/or the indoor use of gas products, including, without limitation, CO2, butane, propane, and natural gas shall be prohibited for the cultivation of marijuana.

9.     The private residence shall maintain a fully functional kitchen, bathroom, and bedroom facilities for use by occupants, and the private residence shall not be used primarily for marijuana cultivation.

10.   Any private residence or accessory building used for cannabis cultivation shall contain a lock on the entry door, which shall remain locked at all times, except when the accessory building is in use or occupied by a person over 21 years of age

11.   Marijuana cultivation activities, including marijuana plants and any equipment used for cultivation shall not be visible from a public right-of-way.

D.    Enforcement. Any violation of this section is declared to be a public nuisance and may be abated by the City pursuant to Chapter 8.16 of this Code. Additionally, a violation of this section shall either be a misdemeanor or an infraction at the discretion of the prosecuting attorney, except to the extent such conduct is immune from criminal liability pursuant to State law. This section is cumulative of any other remedy granted to the City by law, and shall not prohibit the City from abating violations of this section by any available administrative, civil or other non-criminal means.

E.     Applicability. No part of this section shall be construed to allow any conduct or activity relating to the cultivation, distribution, dispensing, sale, or consumption of marijuana that is otherwise illegal under local or state law, nor is it intended to give any person or entity independent legal authority to cultivate marijuana or operate a marijuana business. No provision of this article shall be deemed a defense or immunity to any action brought against any person by the Amador County District Attorney’s office, the Attorney General of the State of California or the United States of America. (Ord. 702 §6, 2017)

 

 

Chapter 17.12 COMMERCIAL, OFFICE, AND INDUSTRIAL ZONING DISTRICTS
17.12.010 Purpose of Chapter.
This Chapter provides regulations applicable to existing development and new land uses in the commercial, office, and industrial zoning districts established by Section 17.06.020 (Zoning Districts Established).

 

17.12.020 Purposes of Commercial, Office, and Industrial Districts.
The purposes of the individual commercial, office, and manufacturing/industrial zoning districts and the manner in which they are applied are as follows. Commercial land use designations are also hierarchical. Hierarchical means less intense commercial uses will be allowed in each designation. Residential uses will be allowed as specified in each designation. The standards in Table 2-3 will apply to any residential development in the Commercial, Office, and Industrial Zones.

The hierarchy from less to more intense is as follows: PO, LC, HC, C, and I.

A.    PO - Professional Office. The professional office designation is intended for low intensity “soft commercial” land uses such as medical and legal offices. Minimum parcel or lot size is 8,000 square feet. Dwelling units shall be allowed within this designation.

B.     LC - Limited Commercial. The “LC” designation is intended to accommodate existing business within predominately residential neighborhoods. Limited Commercial allows for any use allowed in the Commercial (C) designation with the exception of those which generate high volumes of traffic or noise. Minimum parcel or lot size is 8,000 square feet. Dwelling units are allowed in areas with the “LC” designation.

C.     HC - Historic Commercial. The “HC” designation is applied to the downtown area of the City where the bulk of the commercial activities are related to tourism and the buildings are historic. Proposed uses in the HC land use designation would include any use allowed in the Limited Commercial and Professional Office designations along with retail or wholesale stores or businesses not involving any kind of manufacture, processing or treatment of products other than that which is clearly incidental to the retail business conducted on the premises. Residential uses are allowed within this designation.

D.    C - Commercial. The “C” designation is applied to those areas of the City where retail, commercial and professional business services are acceptable. Minimum lot size is 8,000 square feet. Residential uses are allowed only with a Conditional Use Permit.

E.     I - Industrial. The industrial designation is intended for land which is suitable for manufacturing and light industrial uses. Residential uses may be allowed in an area designated industrial with a Conditional Use Permit. Minimum lot size is 8,000 square feet.

17.12.030 Commercial, Office and Industrial District Land Uses and Permit Requirements.
General land use permit requirements. Table 2-4 identifies the uses of land allowed by this Development Code in the commercial, office, and manufacturing/industrial zoning districts, and the land use permit required to establish each use, in compliance with Section 17.06.040 (Zoning District Regulations).

TABLE 2-4

COMMERCIAL, OFFICE, AND INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT ALLOWABLE LAND USES

Land use

Allowable uses

PO

1. Barber Shops

 

2. Beauty Salons

 

3. Child Care Facilities

 

4. Delicatessens with a seating capacity of 40 or less

 

5. Dentists Offices

 

6. Doctors Offices

 

7. Legal Services

 

8. Offices—Business or professional

 

9. Personal Services

 

10. Public utility business offices

 

11. Residential Uses (Single or Multi-Family).

 

12. Voice, video, and data transmission facilities

LC

1. Uses listed in the PO zone

 

2. Retail or wholesale stores or business under 3,000 square feet in size not involving any kind of manufacture, processing or treatment of products other than that which is clearly incidental to the retail business conducted on the premises and not more than 50 percent of the floor area of the building is used in the manufacture or treatment of products, and that such operations or products are not objectionable due to noise, odor, dust, smoke, vibration or other similar causes

 

3. Automobile parking areas

 

4. Child care facilities

 

5. Bakeries, employing not more than 10 persons on premises

 

6. Bars as part of a restaurant

 

7. Blueprinting and photostating shops

 

8. Bus terminals and taxi stands

 

9. Churches, temporary revivals

 

10. Cleaning and pressing establishments using non-inflammable and non-explosive cleaning fluid

 

11. Conservatories of music

 

12. Destination resorts and inns with a maximum of 12 rooms

 

13. Grocery, fruit and vegetable stores, supermarkets

 

14. Hardware stores

 

15. Hotels and Motels with less than 12 rooms

 

16. Interior decorating shops

 

17. Large Retail Establishments (LREs) under 20,000 square feet

 

18. Nurseries and flower or plant greenhouses

 

19. Performing arts facilities

 

20. Pet Stores

 

21. Plumbing shops

 

22. Radio and television stores

 

23. Recreational Centers

 

24. Residential Uses (Single or Multi-Family).

 

25. Restaurants, tea rooms, cafes, banquet rooms, and refreshments stands not including drive-through restaurants

 

26. Self-service laundries or launderettes

 

27. Tattoo and body art studios

 

28. Telephone and public utility buildings and business offices

 

29. Theaters, including drive-in theaters

 

30. Trade schools and recreation centers, other than amusement centers, which are not otherwise objectionable due to noise, odor, dust, smoke, vibrations, or other similar causes

 

31. Upholstery shops (not including auto and boat upholstery)

 

32. Wedding chapels

 

33. All types of storage facilities, including truck repair

 

With a Conditional Use Permit:

 

34. Arcades

 

35. Bars not associated with a restaurant

 

36. Liquor Stores

 

37. Pawn Shops

HC

1. Uses listed in the PO and LC zones

 

2. Retail or wholesale stores or business not involving any kind of manufacture or processing

 

3. Automobile parking areas

 

4. Bakeries

 

5. Banks

 

6. Bars as part of a restaurant

 

7. Bus terminals and taxi stands

 

8. Churches

 

9. Copy/fax/mail box stores

 

10. Dry Cleaning and pressing establishments using non-inflammable and non-explosive cleaning fluid

 

11. Department Stores

 

12. Appliance stores

 

13. Express offices

 

14. Furniture stores

 

15. Grocery stores

 

16. Hardware stores

 

17. Hotels

 

18. Interior decorating shops

 

19. Medical laboratories

 

20. Motels

 

21. Music stores and schools

 

22. Nurseries and flower shops

 

23. Pet stores

 

24. Plumbing shops

 

25. Radio and television stores

 

26. Radio and television stations

 

27. Residential Uses (Single or Multi-Family).

 

28. Restaurants

 

29. Theaters

 

30. Trade Schools

 

31. Utility Offices

 

With a Conditional Use Permit:

 

32. Arcades

 

33. Bars not associated with a restaurant

 

34. Child Care Facilities

 

35. Liquor Stores

 

36. Pawn Shops

C

1. Uses listed in the PO, LC, and HC zones

 

2. Retail or wholesale stores or business under 20,000 square feet without a conditional use permit not involving any kind of manufacture, processing or treatment of products other than that which is clearly incidental to the retail business conducted on the premises and not more than 50 percent of the floor area of the building is used in the manufacture or treatment of products, and that such operations or products are not objectionable due to noise, odor, dust, smoke, vibration or other similar causes

 

3. Arcades

 

4. Automobile parking areas

 

5. Automobile service stations, including super-service stations and repair garages

 

6. Bakeries, employing not more than 10 persons on premises

 

7. Banks

 

8. Bars

 

9. Blueprinting and photostating shops

 

10. Body and fender repair shops, auto painting shops

 

11. Bowling alleys

 

12. Bus terminals and taxi stands

 

13. Churches, temporary revivals

 

14. Cleaning and pressing establishments using non-inflammable and non-explosive cleaning fluid

 

15. Conservatories of music

 

16. Department stores

 

17. Destination resorts and inns

 

18. Electric appliance stores and repairs

 

19. Furniture stores

 

20. Grocery, fruit and vegetable stores, supermarkets

 

21. Hardware stores

 

22. Hotels

 

23. Interior decorating shops

 

24. Medical laboratories

 

25. Motels, auto courts and tourist courts

 

26. Music stores and music and vocal instructions

 

27. New and used car lots

 

28. Nurseries and flower or plant greenhouses

 

29. Performing arts facilities

 

30. Pet Stores

 

31. Plumbing shops

 

32. Radio and television stores

 

33. Recreational Centers

 

34. Restaurants, tea rooms, cafes, banquet rooms, and refreshments stands including drive-through restaurants

 

35. Self-service laundries or launderettes

 

36. Tattoo and body art studios

 

37. Telephone and public utility buildings and business offices

 

38. Television and radio studios

 

39. Theaters, including drive-in theaters

 

40. Trade schools and recreation centers, other than amusement centers, which are not otherwise objectionable due to noise, odor, dust, smoke, vibrations, or other similar causes

 

41. Upholstery shops (not including auto and boat upholstery)

 

42. Wedding chapels

 

43. All types of storage facilities, including truck repair

 

With a Conditional Use Permit:

 

44. Residential uses—all densities

 

45. Large Retail Establishments (LREs) over 20,000 square feet.

 

46. Pawn Shops

 

47. Building material storage yard, construction storage yard

 

48. Childcare Facilities

I

1. All uses allowed in the PO, LC, HC, and C zones

 

2. Assembly and storage of goods, materials, liquids and equipment (except storage of flammable or explosive matter)

 

3. Wholesale and storage warehouses

 

4. Manufacturing, process, fabricating, refining, repairing, packaging or treatment of goods, material, or produce by electric or solar power, oil, or gas (except operations involving fish fats and oils, bones and meat products, or similar substances commonly recognized as creating offensive conditions in the handling thereof)

 

5. Dyeing and dry-cleaning plants, rug cleaning plants, laundries

 

6. Cabinet shops, construction and material yards (except gravel, rock, and cement material yards)

 

7. Body and fender repair shops, auto painting shops

 

8. Cooperage and bottling works

 

9. Sheet metal shops, welding shops

 

10. Truck terminals

 

11. Upholstery shops

 

With a Conditional Use Permit:

 

12. Auto wrecking yards

 

13. Wholesale lumber yards

 

14. Pottery kilns and ceramic works of heavy industrial types

 

15. Concrete batching plants

 

16. Blacksmith shops, casing foundries

 

17. Building material storage yard, construction storage yard

 

18. Junk yard

 

17.12.040 Commercial, Office, and Industrial District General Development Standards.
Subdivisions, new land uses and structures, and alterations to existing land uses and structures, shall be designed, constructed, and/or established in compliance with the requirements in Table 2-4, in addition to any other applicable requirements of this Chapter, and the development standards (e.g., landscaping, parking and loading, etc.) in Article III (Site Planning and General Development Standards).

TABLE 2-5

COMMERCIAL, OFFICE, AND INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT

GENERAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS

 

REQUIREMENT BY ZONING DISTRICT

DEVELOPMENT FEATURE

PO

LC

HC

C

I

Minimum Lot Size

8,000 sq. ft.

8,000 sq. ft.

None

8,000 sq. ft.

8,000 sq. ft

Maximum Building footprint

20,000 sq. ft. (1)

20,000 sq. ft. (1)

5,000 sq. ft.

20,000 sq. ft. (1)

20,000 sq. ft. (1)

Front Yard Setback

10 ft.

10 ft.

None

10 ft.

10 ft.

Side Yard Setback

5 ft.

5 ft.

None

None

None

Rear Yard Setback

10 ft.

10 ft.

10 ft.

10 ft.

10.ft.

Site Coverage

70%

80%

100%

100%

100%

Height Limit

2 stories or 35 ft.

2 stories or 35 ft.

4 stories or 70 ft.

Wall height not greater than 30 ft. (2)

4 stories or 70ft.

(1)    Structures over 20,000 square feet may be allowed with a Conditional Use Permit obtained in accordance with Section 17.76 (Use Permits and Minor Use Permits) of this Development Code.

(2)    Wall height excludes architectural features. Exceptions to this development standard may be allowed by the Planning Commission if the overall architectural design is superior with a taller wall.

 

17.12.050 Commercial and Manufacturing District Performance Standards.
All land uses proposed in the Commercial, Office and Industrial zoning districts shall be operated and maintained so as to not be injurious to public health, safety or welfare, and shall comply with the following standards:

A.    Air emissions. No approved land use shall generate or cause any visible dust, gasses, or smoke to be emitted into the atmosphere, except in accordance with the air quality regulations of the Amador Air District and the California Air Resources Board or for the operation of motor vehicles on the site.

B.     Glare and heat. No direct or sky-reflected glare or heat, whether from floodlights or from high temperature processes (including combustion or welding or otherwise) shall be visible or felt at the property line.

C.     Ground vibration. No approved land use shall generate ground vibration perceptible without instruments at any point along or outside of the property line of the use, except for motor vehicle operations.

D.    Odor. No approved land use shall generate or emit any obnoxious odor or fumes perceptible at the property line.

 

 

 

Chapter 17.16 SPECIAL PURPOSE ZONING DISTRICTS
17.16.010 Purpose of Chapter.
This Chapter regulates development and new land uses in the special purpose zoning districts established by Section 17.06.020 (Zoning Districts Established).

 

17.16.020 Purposes of Special Purpose Zoning Districts.
The purposes of the individual special purpose zoning districts and the manner in which they are applied are as follows:

A.    P - Public and Institutional Zoning District applies to lands with public or quasi-public uses such as schools, hospitals, churches, and City and County offices.

B.     R - Recreation Zoning District is applied to lands where passive and/or active recreational facilities are to be located and protected from conflicting uses.

C.     OS - Open Space Zoning District intended to be undeveloped and left in a natural state. Some landscaped areas, pedestrian pathways and plazas may be allowed.

 

17.16.030 Special Purpose District Land Uses and Permit Requirements.
A.    General requirements. Table 2-6 identifies the uses of land allowed by this Development Code in each special purpose zoning district, and the land use permit required to establish each use, in compliance with Section 17.06.040(B). (Zoning District Regulations—Determination of allowable land uses and permit requirements).

 

17.16.040 Special Purpose District General Development Standards.
Subdivisions, new land uses and structures, and alterations to existing land uses and structures, shall be designed, constructed, and/or established in compliance with the requirements in Table 2-6, in addition to any other applicable requirements of this Chapter, and the development standards (e.g., landscaping, parking and loading, etc.) in Article III (Site Planning and General Development Standards).

 

 

TABLE 2-6 SPECIAL PURPOSE DISTRICT GENERAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS

 

Requirements by zoning district

DEVELOPMENT FEATURE

P

R

OS

Minimum Lot Size

8,000 square feet

Determined through the subdivision process

Determined through the subdivision process

Front Set Back

10 feet

—

—

Side Set Back

5 feet

—

—

Rear Set Back

10 feet

—

—

Site Coverage

70%

—

—

Height Limit

3 stories or 55 feet

—

—

Landscaping

As required by Chapter 17.40 (Landscape Standards)

Parking Requirements

As required by Chapter 17.50 (Parking Design Guidelines)

 

 

 

Chapter 17.20 OVERLAY ZONING DISTRICTS
17.20.010 Purpose of Chapter.
The overlay zoning districts established by this Chapter provide guidance for development and new land uses in addition to the standards and regulations of the primary zoning districts, where important site, neighborhood, or compatibility issues require particular attention in project planning.

 

17.20.020 Applicability.
The applicability of any overlay zoning district to specific sites is shown by the overlay Zoning Map symbol established by Section 17.06.020 (Zoning Districts Established), being appended as a suffix to the symbol for the primary zoning district on the Zoning Map (for example, RSF (pd)). The provisions of this Chapter apply to proposed land uses and development in addition to all other applicable requirements of this Development Code. In the event of any perceived conflict between the provisions of this Chapter and any other provision of this Development Code, this Chapter shall control.

 

17.20.030 Planned Development (pd) Overlay.
A.    Purpose. The Planned Development (pd) Overlay is intended to encourage planned developments with a mixture of land uses including different densities of residential units, professional office uses, commercial uses, and public and recreational uses.

B.     Applicability. The (pd) overlay is applied to lands that are presently largely undeveloped where planned unit developments or neighborhood developments are encouraged. The (pd) overlay may be combined with any residential, commercial, manufacturing/industrial, or special purpose zoning district established by Section 17.06.020 (Zoning Districts Established). The (pd) overlay is established and shown on the Zoning Map.

C.     Allowed land uses and development standards. Any land use normally allowed in the primary zoning district by this article may be allowed within the (pd) overlay subject to compliance with all applicable requirements of the primary zoning district, and all other applicable provisions of this Development Code.

D.    Permit requirements. Development and new land uses designated with a (pd) overlay shall require the Planning Commission approval of development plans that show how projects in these areas will conform to all general plan goals, policies, objectives and design guidelines.

 

17.20.040 Creek/Floodplain (cf) Overlay.
A.    Purpose. The Creek/Floodplain (cf) Overlay is intended for those areas of the City adjacent to the Jackson Creek or a tributary thereof where sensitivity and special attention is required in project design, including but not limited to setbacks from the creek, preservation of public access to the river corridor, and protection of natural environmental features such as riparian vegetation, wetlands, and wildlife habitat. The (cf) overlay area is delineated on the Federal Emergency Management Agency Flood Insurance Rate Map for the City of Jackson.

B.     Applicability. The (cf) overlay may be combined with any residential, commercial, manufacturing/industrial, or special purpose zoning district established by Section 17.06.020 (Zoning Districts Established).

C.     Allowed land uses and permit requirements. Any land use normally allowed as a permitted or conditional use in the primary zoning district by this article may be allowed within the (cf) overlay subject to the development standards.

D.    Development standards. Proposed development and new land uses within the (cf) overlay shall comply with the development standards of the primary zoning district, all other applicable provisions of this Development Code, and the following requirements:

1.     Setback requirements. Proposed development shall be set back from the Jackson Creek or any tributary thereof 100 year floodplain based on the unique topographic features of each site within the (cf) overlay zone. Specific setbacks shall be established through the project approval process.

2.     Allowed uses within required setbacks. The following uses are allowed within the setback areas required by subsection D.1:

a.     Paved or unpaved bike lanes and pedestrian/equestrian paths;

b.     Nature preserve; and

c.     Picnic tables.

3.     Revegetation requirements. In order to prevent bank erosion and restore wildlife habitat, a riparian revegetation program shall be required prior to approval of a new development project on property where past development practices have resulted in removal of most or all riparian vegetation from the creek bank. The riparian vegetation program shall be prepared by a qualified biologist or landscape architect, who shall determine the appropriate mix and density of species to restore wildlife values over time and protect from bank erosion.

 

17.20.050 Visual Corridor (vc) Overlay.
A.    Purpose. The creation of the Visual Corridor (vc) Overlay is to protect the scenic views enjoyed by everyone as they enter the City of Jackson from both the north and south of town.

B.     Applicability. The (vc) overlay may be combined with any residential, commercial, manufacturing/industrial, or special purpose zoning district established by Section 17.06.020 (Zoning Districts Established). The (vc) overlay is established, and shall be applied and shown on the Visual Corridor Map to those areas of the City with scenic views.

C.     Allowed land uses. Any land use normally allowed as a permitted use in the primary zoning district by Tables 2-3, 2-5, or 2-7 (Allowable Land Uses and Permit Requirements) may be allowed within the (vc) overlay zoning district. Land uses identified by Tables 2-3, 2-5, or 2-7 that require a conditional use permit shall be prohibited within the (vc) overlay district.

D.    Permit requirements. Development and new land uses within the (vc) overlay district shall obtain the land use permit required by this article for the primary zoning district.

E.     Development standards. Proposed development and new land uses within the (vc) overlay zoning district shall comply with the development standards of the primary zoning district, all other applicable provisions of this Development Code, any conditions of approval providing measures to preserve and protect existing resources, and the following requirements:

1.     The architectural style of structures within the (vc) overlay shall be compatible with historic structures in the Jackson area.

2.     The height of structures within the (vc) overlay shall not block the surrounding view shed’s points of interest (including but not limited to the Kennedy Wheels, the Serbian Orthodox Church, and the Kennedy Mine structures).

3.     Development within the (vc) overlay shall be clustered near roads (with appropriate set-backs) as much as feasible. This would maximize the amount of open space within the corridor.

4.     Development within the (vc) overlay shall be landscaped to minimize all structures’ visual impact to the greatest extent possible.

 

17.20.060 Historic Corridor (hc) Overlay.
A.    Purpose. The Historic Corridor (hc) overlay is intended to safeguard the City’s unique cultural heritage as embodied and reflected in the City’s architectural history and patterns of cultural development; to preserve diverse architectural styles, patterns of development, and design preferences reflecting phases of the City’s history; to protect and enhance the City’s attraction to tourists and visitors thereby stimulating business and industry; to identify as early as possible and resolve conflicts between the preservation of cultural resources and alternative land uses; to integrate the preservation of cultural resources into public and private land use management and development processes. Development standards for this district address new development, alterations and modifications to existing buildings and structures, demolition of historic buildings and structures, and the identification and protection of subsurface historic and archaeological resources.

B.     Applicability. The (hc) overlay may be combined with any residential, commercial, manufacturing/industrial, or special purpose zoning district established by Section 17.06.020 (Zoning Districts Established). The (hc) overlay is established, and shall be applied and shown on the Historic Corridor Map to those areas of the City with concentrations of historic buildings and structures that contribute to the City’s historic character.

C.     Allowed land uses. Any land use normally allowed in the primary zoning district may be allowed within the (hc) overlay.

D.    Permit requirements. Proposed development and new land uses within the Historic Corridor (hc) Overlay shall obtain the land use permits required by this article for the primary zoning district.

E.     Development standards. Proposed development and new land uses within the (hc) overlay shall comply with all applicable requirements of the primary zoning district, all other applicable provisions of this Development Code, and the applicable requirements of Chapter 17.26 (Historic Preservation Design Guidelines). Additionally, new construction or redevelopment within the Historic Corridor shall be consistent with the late nineteenth century character of the Jackson area and shall meet the following criteria:

1.     Reconstruction shall utilize same building footprint for structures built prior to 1940 unless a Conditional Use Permit is obtained by the Planning Commission.

2.     Design of redeveloped structures within the (hc) overlay shall be consistent with original historic structure.

F.     Demolition or destruction. No historic resource, or portion thereof, shall be relocated, moved, torn down, or demolished, except in compliance with the requirements of Chapter 17.83 (Demolition Review).

G.    Duty to keep in good repair. The owner, occupant, or other person in charge of an historic resource or an improvement, building, or structure in the (hc) overlay shall keep in good repair all of the exterior portions of such improvement, building, or structure, and all interior portions thereof whose maintenance is necessary to prevent deterioration and decay of any exterior architectural feature. All such improvements, buildings, or structures shall be preserved against such decay and be kept free from such structural defects through the prompt repair of any of the following:

1.     Facades and respective architectural elements which may fall and injure members of the public and property;

2.     Deteriorated or inadequate foundation, defective or deteriorated flooring or floor supports, deteriorated walls or other vertical structural supports;

3.     Members of ceilings, roofs, ceiling and roof supports, or other horizontal members which age, split, or buckle due to defective material or deterioration;

4.     Deteriorated or ineffective waterproofing of exterior walls, roofs, foundations, or floors, including broken windows or doors;

5.     Defective or insufficient weather protection for exterior wall covering, including lack of paint or weathering due to lack of paint or other protective covering; and

6.     Any fault or defect in the building which renders it not properly watertight or structurally unsafe.

 

 

Chapter 17.24 ARCHITECTURAL REGULATIONS
17.24.010 Purpose of Chapter.
The purpose of this Chapter is to ensure that the City of Jackson’s goals for attaining high quality development that is sensitive to the City’s unique character are met. Architectural regulations have been developed which will be used during the review of land use permit applications as additional criteria for project review.

 

17.24.020 Architectural Regulations.
The City Council shall adopt by resolution architectural regulations to be utilized in decision making by the appropriate review authority as specified in Chapter 17.70, Application, Processing, and Fees, and the architectural regulations. The architectural regulations shall include criteria for all aspects of structure and site design. The architectural regulations shall be made available to assist property owners, architects, contractors, and realtors in complying with this Chapter.

 

17.24.030 Applicability.
A.    The provisions of this Chapter apply to all projects (additions, remodeling, relocation, or new construction) in the City of Jackson. The design elements of each project (including site design, architecture, landscaping, signs, parking design) will be reviewed on a comprehensive basis. Design guidelines and standards in other Chapters of this Development Code dealing with signs, landscaping, and parking shall also be addressed whenever applicable.

B.     The review authority may interpret the architectural regulations with some flexibility in their application to specific projects, as not all design criteria may be workable/appropriate for each project. In some circumstances, one standard may be relaxed to facilitate compliance with another standard determined by the review authority.

Article III. Site Planning and General Development Standards
Chapter 17.30 GENERAL PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT AND USE STANDARDS
17.30.010 Purpose and Applicability.
A.    Purpose. The provisions of this Chapter expand the standards of Article II (Zoning Districts and Allowable Land Uses) by addressing the details of site planning and project design, to ensure that development, and new or modified land uses are of appropriate character and quality, considerate of the community’s natural resources, compatible with existing and future land uses, and consistent with the General Plan.

B.     Applicability—General standards. The provisions of this Chapter apply to all proposed development and new or modified land uses regardless of the applicable zoning district.

1.     These standards shall be considered in combination with the standards for each zoning district in Article II (Zoning Districts and Allowable Land Uses). If there is a conflict, the standards specific to the zoning district shall override these general standards.

2.     All new or modified structures and uses shall comply with all applicable provisions of this Chapter before construction and operation, unless specifically exempted by an applicable provision of this Development Code.

 

17.30.020 Access.
A.    General standard. Every structure and land use shall be provided adequate physical and legal access to a public street in the form of frontage upon the street, or permanent means of access to a public street by way of a public or private easement, or recorded (mutual) access agreement, as determined by the Site Plan Review Committee.

B.     Access and improvement specifications. The approval of proposed development shall require the applicant to improve the public street frontages of the site in compliance with the City of Jackson Public Improvements and Engineering Standards, including right-of-way width, and structural section, surfacing, and width of street improvements.

C.     Driveways. Access driveways shall be developed in compliance with the standards in Chapter 17.48 (Parking and Loading Standards). The site planning and design of proposed development shall minimize the lengths of driveways.

 

17.30.030 Air Emissions.
A.    Fugitive Dust Emissions. Land use activities that may create dust emissions (for example, construction and grading) shall be conducted to limit visible emission of fugitive dust at the point of its creation to less than 20% opacity. To ensure that this occurs, appropriate procedures shall include the following:

1.     Dust suppression plan. A dust suppression plan shall be required for all projects for which a grading plan is required;

2.     Scheduling. Grading activities shall be scheduled to ensure that repeated grading will not be required, and that implementation of the desired land use (e.g., construction, paving, or planting) will occur as soon as possible after grading;

3.     Operations during high winds. Clearing, earth-moving, excavation operations or grading activities shall cease when the sustained winds are above 15 mph;

4.     Area of disturbance. The area disturbed by clearing, demolition, earth-moving, excavation operations or grading shall be minimized at all times;

5.     Dust control. During clearing, demolition, earth-moving, excavation operations, or grading, fugitive dust emissions shall be controlled by application of water to prevent visible dust emissions, paving of construction roads or other dust-preventive measures (e.g., hydro seeding, etc.), subject to the approval of the City Engineer;

a.     Materials excavated or graded shall be sufficiently watered to prevent excessive amounts of dust. Watering shall be applied to all work areas, access roads and stockpiles before work begins and after work ends for the day. At all other times, water should be applied as necessary to prevent visible dust emissions;

b.     Materials transported off-site shall be either sufficiently watered or securely covered to prevent excessive amounts of dust;

6.     On-site roads. On-site roads shall be paved as soon as feasible, and watered periodically or chemically stabilized until the roads are paved. Access or haul roads adjoining the project shall be treated as necessary to prevent track-out and accumulation of dirt, soil, or other materials which can subsequently be entrained in ambient air, either from construction-related vehicles or from any vehicle using adjoining affected roads;

7.     Street encroachments. For land use activities that disturb two or more acres of land, paved aprons onto City streets shall be required at all access encroachments onto the City street. The aprons shall be paved within one week of the commencement of grading on the site. The aprons and portions of the street adjacent to the apron shall be flushed and/or swept at least once daily;

8.     Revegetation. Graded areas shall be revegetated as soon as possible to minimize dust and erosion. Portions of the construction site to remain inactive longer than three months shall be seeded and watered until grass cover is grown and maintained;

9.     Fencing. Appropriate fences or walls shall be constructed to permanently contain the dust and dirt within the parcel, subject to the approval of the City Planner;

10.   Other measures. Other Best Available Control Technology (BACT) may be required by the City Engineer to control air emissions of particulate matter from the site; and

11.   Performance guarantees. The City Engineer may require a permit applicant to provide adequate performance guarantees (e.g. bonds, cash deposits, certified letter of credit, etc.) to ensure the faithful and timely performance of dust suppression measures during grading. The City Engineer shall be responsible for setting the amount of the required performance guarantee, after consultation with the City Building Official and the Amador County Air Pollution Control Officer.

B.     Vehicle exhaust emissions. An applicant who proposes a land use activity that could result in potential construction-related exhaust emission impacts shall minimize the emissions by maintaining equipment engines in good condition and in proper tune in compliance with manufacturer’s specifications and by not allowing construction equipment to be left idling for long periods of time.

C.     Odor emissions. The owner of an existing or proposed use which produces odors or noxious matter (e.g., fumes, gases, vapors, etc.) in quantities that those emissions constitute a nuisance in compliance with State law (Civil Code Sections 3479-3503) shall have the source of the contaminant controlled in order to abate the nuisance.

D.    Cleared vegetation. The method of disposal of cleared vegetation from the site shall be indicated on the project improvement plans. Open burning of vegetation from site-clearing shall be prohibited unless approved by the City Engineer and the Amador County Air Pollution Control Officer upon a finding that other alternatives are unobtainable or economically infeasible.

 

17.30.040 Archeological/Cultural Resources.
A.    General standards. In the event that archaeological or cultural resources are discovered during any construction, all construction activities shall cease within 200 feet of the find unless a lesser distance is approved by the City Planner, and the Planning Department shall be notified so that the extent and location of discovered materials may be recorded in a written report prepared by a qualified archaeologist, and disposition of discovered materials may occur in compliance with State and Federal law. Construction shall not recommence until the City Planner authorizes construction to begin.

B.     Survey. The City Planner may require a cultural resources field survey by a qualified professional, at the applicant’s expense, where the project will involve areas of grading and/or the removal of natural vegetation totaling one acre or more. The City Planner may require a cultural resources field survey on smaller sites for a Zoning Clearance, Development Permit, Minor Use Permit, Use Permit, Planned Development, or Tentative Map where there is the potential for cultural resources to be located on the project site.

1.     The survey shall be conducted to determine the extent of the cultural resources on the site, before the completion of the environmental document for the project.

2.     Where the results of the survey indicate the potential to adversely impact probable cultural resources, the report shall be transmitted to the appropriate clearinghouse for comment.

3.     The City Planner shall maintain a confidential map file of known or probable cultural resource sites so as to assist in the identification of sensitive areas.

4.     A qualified professional shall be present on-site during all excavation activity, including preliminary soil investigations, grading, and trenching for foundations and utilities, in those cases where the identification of and potential impacts to cultural resources cannot be determined prior to project approval or when required by the City Planner based on a recommendation by the field surveyor.

C.     Mitigation measures. Where development would significantly impact cultural or paleontological resources which have been identified, reasonable mitigation measures shall be required by the review authority as may be recommended by the field surveyor or by the State Historic Preservation Officer. Mitigation may include the following, as applicable/necessary:

1.     The relocation or redesign of development to avoid the identified site;

2.     The opening of the site to qualified, approved professional/educational parties for the purpose of exploration and excavation for a specified time before the commencement of development;

3.     The utilization of special construction techniques to maintain the resources intact and reasonably accessible;

4.     Where specific or long-term protection is necessary, identified sites shall be protected by the imposition of recorded open space easements; and

5.     For significant sites of unique cultural resource value, where other mitigation techniques do not provide a necessary level of protection, the project shall not be approved until the City Planner determines that there are no reasonably available sources of funds to purchase the subject property or conservation easement. The City Planner shall have 90 days from the date of discovery of a significant site to make this determination.

D.    Cultural resources. Any cultural resources found on the project site shall be recorded or described in a professional report, subject to the approval of the City Planner; and

E.     Human remains. If human remains are encountered during construction, the County Coroner shall be notified. If the remains are determined to be Native American, the Coroner has 24 hours to notify the Native American Heritage Commission of the findings.

 

17.30.050 Drainage and Storm Water Runoff.
All applications for Zoning Clearance, Development Permit, Minor Use Permit, or Use Permit, except single-family dwellings, secondary residential units, and duplexes, shall include drainage and erosion control plans and be designed and constructed to provide facilities for the proper conveyance, treatment, and disposal of storm water in compliance with this Section.

A.    Drainage and erosion control plan requirements. Drainage and erosion control plans shall be submitted to the Engineering Department for review for compliance with the requirements of this Section. The plan may be incorporated within the project site plan.

1.     A preliminary drainage and erosion control plan shall be submitted as part of an application for a land use permit, for new development, and the significant expansion or redevelopment of an existing use as determined by the City Planner.

2.     Following approval of the land use permit, a final drainage and erosion control plan shall be submitted as part of the application for a Building Permit. Final plans shall be approved by the City Planner before the start of on-site construction or soil disturbance and before the issuance of a Building Permit. Projects requiring Planning Commission approval due to their size or use shall require plans prepared by a licensed engineer unless deemed unnecessary by the City Engineer.

3.     Preliminary and final plans shall contain all information specified in the instructions for preparing drainage and erosion control plans provided by the Engineering Department.

4.     After initial application review in compliance with Section 17.70.060 (Initial Application Review/Environmental Assessment), the City Planner shall review each preliminary and final plan to verify its compliance with the provisions of this Section. The City Planner may approve the submittal in compliance with this Chapter, or may deny or require changes to a submittal that is not in compliance.

B.     Runoff treatment. Surface runoff treatment measures consistent with the “State of California Stormwater Best Management Practices Handbooks,” prepared by the American Public Works Association Storm Water Task Force, shall be incorporated into the project. The following measures shall also be incorporated into the project:

1.     Stormwater runoff.

a.     Runoff from impervious surfaces shall be collected, treated, and contained on-site utilizing infiltration disposal facilities (e.g., infiltration basins and trenches) designed, installed, and maintained for, at a minimum, a 20-year, one-hour storm event based on the Public Improvements and Engineering Standards. The City Engineer may require a design to accommodate a larger storm event when topographic and/or drainage conditions of the surrounding area or watershed warrant more stringent drainage improvements;

b.     Runoff shall be directed into any on-site retention/treatment basin using a slot drain, culvert, depressed swale, rock-lined trench, and/or other approved drainage facilities. Surface and subsurface water shall not drain over sidewalks or adjoining parcels;

c.     Runoff from structures not directed into a retention/treatment basin shall utilize graveled drip line infiltration trenches under all eaves and decks designed, installed, and maintained for up to and including a 20-year, one-hour event. Infiltration trenches shall include a minimum gravel depth of eight inches and a minimum width of two feet, unless a trench of different dimensions is required by the City Engineer based upon an engineered drainage analysis; and

2.     On-site drainage facilities. Facilities shall be designed to direct stormwater runoff which exceeds the required capacity of the facility into a public storm drainage system contained within the nearest public right-of-way; and

3.     Wetlands.

a.     Runoff into wetland areas shall not be increased above or decreased below pre-project levels unless the review authority finds that the increase or decrease of runoff will not adversely affect the health, function, and values of the wetland; and

b.     Runoff into wetland areas shall be treated in accordance with subsection B prior to release into the wetland.

C.     Erosion control. Erosion control measures consistent with the “State of California Stormwater Best Management Practices Handbooks,” prepared by the American Public Works Association Storm Water Task Force, shall be incorporated into the project. The following measures shall also be incorporated into the project:

1.     Temporary measures. Temporary erosion control measures as required by the City Engineer shall be installed and continuously maintained for the duration of construction and shall include:

a.     All non-construction areas shall be clearly marked and protected during construction by fencing or other identification approved by the City Engineer;

b.     The protection of loose piles of clay, debris, sand, silt, soil, or other earthen material during periods of precipitation or runoff with nonwoven filter fabric fence, hay bales, temporary gravel, and/or earthen or sand bag dikes; and

c.     All soil disturbance activities shall cease if adverse weather conditions are predicted, unless operating under an exception granted by the City Engineer. Adequate temporary erosion control measures shall be immediately installed during adverse weather conditions.

2.     Permanent measures. Permanent erosion control measures as required by the City Engineer shall be installed and continuously maintained for the life of the project and shall include:

a.     All surplus or waste earthen materials shall be removed from the site and deposited in an approved location within 10 days from completion of construction;

b.     Earthen materials shall not be placed in surface water drainage courses, permanent or temporary, or in a location to allow the discharge of earthen materials to any surface water drainage course; and

c.     All disturbed areas shall be permanently stabilized or vegetated. Vegetated areas shall be continuously maintained to ensure adequate growth and root development. Vegetation shall consist of seeding, planting, mulching, and initial fertilizing and watering as needed.

3.     Timing of operations. Ground disturbance including vegetation removal that disturbs the soil shall be prohibited between October 15th of any year and May 1st of the following year. Exceptions may be granted by the City Engineer based upon the following:

a.     Predicted dry weather conditions;

b.     The construction activity is associated with existing disturbed conditions only and is not intended to allow for the commencement of new construction activity or new disturbance;

c.     Specific dates and scope of work involved in the construction activity; and

d.     The site shall be winterized and specific Best Management Practices implemented to control erosion and protect water quality within 48 hours of the City Engineer’s order to cease ground disturbance.

4.     Stabilization. Before October 15th in any year, permanent or temporary stabilization of all disturbed or eroding areas shall be installed consistent with the requirements of this Section.

D.    Limitation on runoff. The net rate release of runoff from a site onto adjoining parcels and rights-of-way after construction shall not be greater than pre-construction levels of the runoff release from the site based on a 20-year, one-hour storm event. The City Engineer may require a design to accommodate a larger storm event when topographic and/or drainage conditions of the surrounding area or watershed warrant more stringent drainage improvements.

E.     Maintenance. All required drainage and erosion control improvements shall be maintained for the life of the approved project, including routine maintenance, repair, and replacement of the improvements. Maintenance shall include:

1.     Unclogging of basins, pipes, swales, and trenches by debris, ice, and sediment;

2.     Repair of damaged basins, pipes, swales, and trenches;

3.     Replacement of unhealthy, damaged, or non-productive vegetation; and

4.     Restabilization of erosion on slopes.

F.     Minor Use Permit required. Projects satisfying any of the following conditions will require the approval of a Minor Use Permit in compliance with Chapter 17.76 (Use Permits and Minor Use Permits):

1.     Projects within the 100-year floodplain of waters under the jurisdiction of the State Regional Water Quality Control Board or projects required by the Regional Water Quality Control Board to obtain a waste discharge permit due to the potential for the discharge or threatened discharge of solid or liquid materials to surface waters, potential wetlands areas, or other sensitive lands;

2.     Projects located on sites containing contaminated soils as identified by the Amador County Health Department or the State Regional Water Quality Control Board; and

3.     Projects resulting in the disturbance of land or located within 200 feet of any wetland area unless the City Engineer finds that the topographic conditions of the surrounding area will clearly preclude any disturbance of wetland areas and will ensure that any runoff from the project will not result in any water quality impacts to a wetland area. A wetlands delineation report shall be required for all projects requiring a minor use permit under this condition. The disturbance of wetland areas shall comply with Section 17.46.040 (Wetlands).

 

17.30.060 Easements.
No structure shall be allowed within public utility easements, access/driveway easements, drainage easements or any other easement offered for dedication to the City or the County of Amador, except with Minor Use Permit approval. A Minor Use Permit for a structure within an easement may be granted only where the review authority first finds that the structure will not interfere with the purpose of the easement.

 

17.30.070 Fences, Walls, and Hedges.
The following standards shall apply to the installation of fences, walls, and hedges, regardless of whether a permit or City approval is required by this Section, except where an applicable Specific Plan or Planned Development establishes different standards. The provisions of this Section shall not apply to a fence or wall required by a law or regulation of the City, State or an agency thereof. For the purposes of brevity, the term “fence” as used in this Section shall mean “fence, wall, or hedge.”

A.    Permit requirement. Fences require Zoning Clearance in compliance with Chapter 17.72 (Zoning Clearance) in all zoning districts except where exempted from this requirement by following subsection B.

B.     Exemptions from permit requirement. The following fences and walls do not require Zoning Clearance, but shall otherwise comply with all applicable provisions of this Development Code.

1.     Fences within the residential zoning districts are exempt, provided that they comply with the height limits in following subsection C.

2.     Walls and retaining walls less than 48 inches in height measured from the bottom of the footing to the top of the wall. Retaining walls are exempt only in compliance with this height limit, and where they retain earth only with no surcharge, and are not required by the Uniform Building Code or this Development Code to have a Building Permit.

C.     Fence height limitations.

1.     Fences are subject to the height limitations shown in Table 3-1, based on the area of the site and the location of the fence on the site relative to the required setbacks established by Article II (Zoning Districts and Allowable Land Uses). See Figure 3-1 Fence and Wall Standards.

 



 

Figure 3-1 Fence and Wall Standards

 

TABLE 3-1 HEIGHT LIMITS FOR FENCES, WALLS, AND HEDGES

 

Maximum Allowed Height Based on Fence Location

 

Parcel Size

Within Front or Street Side Setback

Within Side or Rear Setback

Within Rear Setback on Through Lot

Outside Setback Areas (1)

Less than 1 acre

3 ft. (1,2,3)

6 ft.

3 ft.

6 ft. (4,6)

1 acre or more

3 ft. (2,5)

6 ft. (6)

6 ft. (2)

6 ft. (4,6)

Notes:

(1)    Open fences up to a maximum of four feet in height may be allowed in front and street side setbacks if the City Engineer finds that the fence will not adversely affect a front or street side setback traffic safety visibility area. An open fence shall be defined as a split board or rail fence (not exceeding three boards or three rails high), woven wire, or chain link that does not impair sight visibility.

(2)    Fences up to a maximum of six feet in height may be allowed in street side setbacks if the fence is located outside the traffic safety visibility area.

(3)    Fences up to a maximum of six feet in height may be allowed in front and street side setbacks on residential properties that face commercial or industrial properties if the City Engineer finds that the fence will not adversely affect a front or street side setback traffic visibility area.

(4)    Fences up to a maximum of 20 feet in height may be allowed for tennis and other outdoor recreational courts outside the required setback areas.

(5)    On parcels of one acre or larger, fences up to a maximum of six feet in height may be allowed in front and street side setbacks if the City Engineer finds that the fence will not adversely affect a front or street side traffic safety visibility area;

(6)    An open agricultural fence shall be allowed to a maximum height of eight feet in the side and rear setbacks and outside the required front and street side setback areas for property located in the RS district, provided that the City Planner first determines that the fence is essential to a legitimate agricultural operation or animal keeping on the site. An open agricultural fence shall be defined as an agricultural board fence or split rail (not exceeding three 6 inch boards or three rails high for a total height 5 feet), barbed or woven wire or chain link that does not impair sight visibility. All agricultural fences shall be designed to maximize safety.

 

2.     Entry features over front yard gates (e.g., arches and trellises), with a maximum height of eight feet, provided that the entry features are no wider than six feet.

3.     Retaining walls shall be subject to the height and setback limits established by Section 17.30.120(F)(6) (Setback Requirements—Retaining Walls).

4.     All vegetation shall be maintained so as not to encroach into the public right-of-way.

5.     These height limits shall not apply to the following:

a.     Official governmental warning signs or signals;

b.     Public utility poles;

c.     Saplings or plant species of open growth habits and not planted in the form of a hedge, which are so planted and trimmed as to leave, at all seasons, a clear and unobstructed crossview;

d.     Supporting members of appurtenances to permanent structures existing on the effective date of this Development Code; and

e.     For parcels located adjacent to an intersection trees shall be trimmed (to the trunk) to a line at least six feet above the elevation of the intersection.

6.     Parcels with grade differential.

a.     Where there is a difference in the ground level between two adjoining parcels of less than two feet, the height of a fence constructed along the common property line shall be determined by using the natural grade of the highest contiguous parcel.

b.     When there is a difference in the ground level between two adjoining parcels of two feet or more, the maximum allowed height of a fence on the property line shall be determined by the City Planner.

D.    Prohibited materials. The use of electrified fence or razor wire fence in conjunction with a fence, wall, or hedge, or by itself within any zoning district, is prohibited unless:

1.     Approved as part of the land use permit, based upon a finding that the material is necessary for the security of the facility or is required by a law or regulation of the City, State, or an agency thereof; or

2.     The fence is a simple, one-strand horse electric fence in the RS district. (See Figure 3-1, Fence and Wall Standards)

 

17.30.080 Grading and Vegetation Removal.
A.    Preservation of the natural vegetation. To prevent premature grading of the existing terrain and to ensure preservation of the natural vegetation within the City, grading and/or removal of natural vegetation shall not occur before the issuance of a land use permit (e.g., Zoning Clearance, Use Permit, etc.) authorizing development on the subject parcel, except for the following:

1.     Grading and/or the removal of vegetation for a single-family residence on an existing subdivision lot;

2.     Removal of vegetation done within an open space area by a subdivision homeowner’s association or similar organization or a public agency in order to maintain the health of the forest and/or enhance fire safety; and

3.     Removal of vegetation to comply with the fuel clearance regulations of the City of Jackson Fire Department.

B.     Building and Grading Permits. A Grading Permit shall not be issued until the associated Building Permits are issued, unless grading is secured with an appropriate performance guarantee in compliance with Section 17.84.040 (Performance Guarantees).

C.     Commission requirements. As part of the approval of a Development Permit or Use Permit involving grading, the Commission shall make one of the following findings:

1.     Performance guarantees in compliance with Section 17.84.040 (Performance Guarantees) shall be required prior to issuance of any grading or building permits for the project to guarantee restoration of the site if the project is not completed;

2.     There is sufficient evidence demonstrating there is adequate financing for the project to guarantee that the project will be completed; or

3.     Performance guarantees are not necessary, given the particular circumstances of the application.

 

17.30.090 Height Measurement and Height Limit Exceptions.
All structures shall comply with the following standards relating to height, except for fences and walls, which are instead subject to the provisions of Section 17.30.070 (Fences, Walls, and Hedges).

A.    Maximum height of structures. The height of structures shall not exceed the standard established by the applicable zoning district in Article II (Zoning Districts and Allowable Land Uses).

B.     Height measurement.

1.     The height limit for structures shall be measured as the vertical distance from the highest point of the structure to the average of the highest and lowest points where the exterior walls touch the natural grade. See Figure 3-2. In cases where the structure has a split roof(s) and the roofline of the split roof is five or more feet below the highest point of the structure and the floor area underneath the split roof extends at least 10 feet out from the remainder of the structure, the height limit for the structure shall be measured as the vertical distance from the average of the highest point of the structure and the highest point of the split roof to the average of the highest and lowest points of the structure where the exterior walls touch the natural grade. (See Figure 3-2, Height Measurement)

 



Figure 3-2 Height Measurement

 

2.     In no case (except as permitted in (C) below) shall the height of any portion of a structure exceed a height greater than 10 feet above the standard established by the applicable zoning district in Article II (Zoning Districts and Allowable Land Uses) as measured as the vertical distance from the natural grade of the site to an imaginary plane located the allowed number of feet above and parallel to the grade. (See Figure 3-3, Maximum Height)

 



Figure 3-3 Maximum Height

 

C.     Exceptions to height limits. The height limits of this Development Code may be exceeded as follows.

1.     Fire or parapet walls may extend up to four feet above the allowable height limit of the structure.

2.     Places of public assembly in churches, schools and other allowed public and semi-public structures, provided that they are located on the first floor of the structure and the required front, side, and rear yards shall be increased by one additional foot for each one foot by which the structure exceeds the height limit established for the applicable zoning district.

3.     Belfries, chimneys, cupolas, domes, flag poles, gables, monuments, penthouses, scenery lofts, spires, towers (e.g., hose, radio, utility, water, etc.), water tanks, similar structures, and necessary mechanical appurtenances may be authorized to exceed the height limit established for the applicable zoning district, subject to the approval of a Minor Use Permit in compliance with Chapter 17.76 (Use Permits and Minor Use Permits).

4.     Telecommunication facilities, including antennae, poles, towers, and necessary mechanical appurtenances, may be authorized to exceed the height limit established for the applicable zoning district, in compliance with Section 17.58.025 (Telecommunications Facilities).

5.     The height of a single family dwelling in a residential zoning district may be increased up to an additional five feet, when the dwelling is on a building site with an average slope of 25 percent or greater.

D.    City Planner exceptions to height limits. The City Planner may approve additional height up to a maximum of 10 percent of the height limit for a single-family dwelling in a residential zoning district as follows:

1.     The City Planner finds all of the following:

a.     There are unique circumstances associated with the property or the structure design that necessitate an increase in the height limit to prevent an unnecessary hardship or to overcome practical difficulties in constructing the dwelling;

b.     The structure height and design are compatible with the neighborhood;

c.     The additional height of the structure will not significantly impair views or sunlight quality to the surrounding properties; and

2.     Prior to approving an exception to the height limit, notice of the City Planner’s intent to approve an exception to the height limit shall be required in the following manner:

a.     Notice shall include a general explanation of the matter being considered, a general description of the height exception being requested, the date on which the City Planner may take action on the height exception, and the location and available times that information on the matter may be reviewed by the public;

b.     The notice shall be mailed or delivered to the owner(s) of the property being considered or the owner’s agent, the applicant if different from the owner, and all owners of real property as shown on the County’s last equalized assessment roll within 100 feet of the boundary of the property which is the subject of the height exemption;

c.     The notice shall be posted in City Hall; and

d.     The notice shall be mailed, delivered, and posted at least 10 days prior to the City Planner approving the height exception.

 

17.30.100 Property Maintenance.
A.    Purpose. This Section provides for the abatement of conditions which are offensive or annoying to the senses, detrimental to property values and community appearance, an obstruction to or interference with the comfortable enjoyment of adjoining property, or hazardous or injurious to the health, safety, or welfare of the general public in a manner which may constitute a nuisance.

B.     Property maintenance nuisances. It is hereby declared to be a public nuisance for any property owner or other person in control of property to keep or maintain the property, including adjoining parkways, sidewalks, or streets under fee ownership by that person, in a manner resulting in any of the following conditions.

1.     Abandoned materials. Any abandoned, discarded, dismantled, inoperable, wrecked equipment or objects including appliances, automobiles, boats, fixtures, furniture, refrigerators, trailers, trucks, water heaters, miscellaneous equipment and machinery, cans or containers standing or stored on the property or on adjoining parkway, sidewalks or streets which can be viewed from a public highway, walkway, or from private or public property, or which items are readily accessible from these places, or which are stored on private property in violation of any law.

2.     Dangerous conditions. Any condition which exists upon any premises that is dangerous to human life or is detrimental to health as determined by the Building Official.

3.     Alterations. Any alteration of land, the topography or configuration of which in any man-made state whether as a result of grading operations, excavations, fill, or other alteration, interferes with the established drainage pattern over the property or from adjoining or other property which does or may result in erosion, subsidence, or surface water drainage problems of a magnitude which would be injurious to public health, safety, and welfare.

4.     Disposal of petroleum products. Disposal or presence of grease, oil, other petroleum products, noxious chemicals, pesticides, or any gaseous, liquid, or solid waste in a manner which would consist of a health or fire hazard or degrade the appearance of or detract from the aesthetic and property values of surrounding properties.

5.     Outdoor storage in excess of one week. Lumber (excluding stacked firewood or lumber for a construction project on the property with a valid and active Building Permit), junk, salvage materials (including auto parts, bottles, scrap metals, tin cans, and tires, appliances, fixtures, furniture, refrigerators, water heaters, miscellaneous equipment and machinery), trash or packing boxes or other debris stored on the premises for a period in excess of one week.

6.     On-site repairs. Any performance of work on household fixtures, motor vehicles, or vehicle engines or parts, on a public right-of-way or performance of work in yard areas of residential properties which are visible from a public right-of-way or surrounding properties, other than emergency repairs or minor maintenance being performed by the owner of the fixture or vehicle.

7.     Vehicles as temporary or permanent living space. Use of a parked or stored boat, camper shell, trailer, vehicle, or other similar item as temporary or permanent living space for a period in excess of two weeks.

8.     Storage of building materials. Accumulations of asphalt, bricks, building materials, concrete, fill dirt, plaster, rocks, and tile unless for a construction project on the property with a valid and active Building Permit.

9.     Graffiti. The presence of graffiti, as defined in Article VII (Development Code Definitions).

10.   Maintenance. Property failing to meet minimum levels of maintenance and care as follows:

a.     Walls, fences, other structures. All walls, fences, trash enclosures, and other structures shall be maintained free of significant surface cracks, dry rot, missing panels or blocks, and warping, which threaten structural integrity;

b.     Structure elevations and roofs. Exterior structure surfaces and roofs shall be maintained free of significant surface cracks, dry rot, missing blocks or other materials, or warping, which threaten structural integrity; and

c.     Trash and debris. The property shall be maintained free of the accumulation of trash and debris not stored in designated solid waste enclosures. Trash and debris associated with allowed uses are to be stored solely in designated solid waste enclosures.

d.     Natural vegetation. Vegetation that is dry and overgrown can be a fire hazard. All vegetation on properties shall be maintained to minimize fire hazard.

 

17.30.110 Screening and Buffer Requirements.
All multifamily and nonresidential land uses shall comply with the screening and buffer requirements of this Section.

A.    Screening and buffer between nonresidential and residential land uses. Where a nonresidential development or new land use is proposed on a parcel in the commercial, industrial or public zoning district, and adjoins a residential zoning district, the following screening/ buffering features shall be constructed as part of the development or land use.

1.     A six-foot high, solid decorative masonry wall or solid fence or a combination of landscaping, berm and fencing, or wall shall be constructed between the nonresidential use and residentially-zoned parcels. The wall shall be architecturally treated on both sides, and the design of the screening (e.g., berm and fencing, landscaping, or wall) shall be subject to the approval of the City Planner. A landscaping strip with a minimum width of five feet shall be provided along the wall or fence. If adjoining a parking area, the landscaped area may be counted towards required interior parking lot landscaping.

2.     All proposed or required landscaping shall comply with Chapter 17.40 (Landscape Standards).

3.     The review authority may modify or waive the requirements of this subsection or approve alternatives to the screening and buffer methods if the review authority finds the characteristics of the site or vicinity would make the required screening and buffer unnecessary or the alternative will achieve the same effect of the required screening and buffer.

B.     Screening and buffer between limited commercial and residential land uses. Where a nonresidential development or new land use is proposed on a parcel in the LC zoning district, and adjoins a residential zoning district, the following setback, screening, and landscaping features shall be provided as part of the development or land use.

1.     Setbacks. If the proposed commercial use is in a commercial zoning district and adjoins a residential zoning district, but is not separated by a street, the required setback for a structure adjacent to a residential zoning district shall be equal the height of the building, but in no case shall the setback be less than 15 feet.

2.     Screening. A solid decorative masonry wall or solid fence with a minimum height of six feet, or higher if required by an acoustical analysis to mitigate noise impacts, shall be constructed and maintained on the project site along the common property line. Pedestrian access may be provided through the wall from a residential neighborhood to a neighborhood-serving commercial use subject to the approval of the City Planner.

3.     Landscaping. A landscaped strip shall be provided adjacent to the wall with the intention of providing a planting area for trees and shrubs on the commercial site.

a.     The width of the landscaped strip shall be a minimum of five feet. Larger areas may be required by the review authority for larger projects which shall be determined on a case by case basis.

b.     Landscaping shall be designed to visually screen the commercial development from the residences and to effectively break up the otherwise long, flat appearance of the wall. Trees shall be provided at a rate of one for every 20 lineal feet of landscaped area, and shrubs shall be provided at a rate of one for every five lineal feet of landscaped area. Additional trees and shrubs may be required by the review authority as determined on a case by case basis.

c.     The use of the landscaped setback for passive activities (e.g., lunch area, pedestrian path) shall be subject to the approval of the City Planner.

4.     Exceptions to screening and buffer requirements. The requirements of this subsection may be modified or waived through the approval of a Minor Use Permit in compliance with Chapter 17.76 (Use Permits and Minor Use Permits).

C.     Screening and buffer between multifamily and single-family residential uses. Wherever a multifamily residential project adjoins a site developed with or zoned for a single-family residence, but is not separated by a street, a six-foot high solid wood fence, decorative masonry wall, or other appropriate material shall be constructed along the property line adjoining the single-family residential use. The review authority may modify or waive the requirements for the fence or wall if the review authority finds the characteristics of the site or vicinity would make the required screening and buffer unnecessary or the fence or wall would adversely affect neighborhood compatibility and other screening and buffer methods have been incorporated into the project to achieve the same effect of the required fence or wall.

D.    Equipment. Any equipment in multifamily and nonresidential zoning districts, whether on a roof, the side of structure, or ground, and any loading docks, service yards, trash and storage areas, and utility services, shall be properly screened from public view.

1.     The method of screening shall be architecturally compatible with other on-site development in terms of colors, materials, shape, and size.

2.     The screening design and construction shall be subject to the approval of the City Planner, and shall blend with the design of the structures and include appropriately installed and maintained landscaping when on the ground.

 

17.30.120 Setback Requirements and Exceptions.
This Section provides standards for the use and minimum size of required setbacks. These standards are intended to provide open areas around structures for: visibility and traffic safety; access to and around structures; access to natural light, ventilation and direct sunlight; separation of incompatible land uses; and space for privacy, landscaping, and recreation.

A.    Setback requirements. All structures shall comply with the setback requirements of the applicable zoning district established by Article II (Zoning Districts and Allowable Land Uses), and with any special setbacks established for specific uses by this Development Code, except as otherwise provided by this Section. No portion of a structure, including eaves or roof overhangs, shall extend beyond a property line; or into an access easement or street right-of-way. Each required setback shall be open and unobstructed from the ground upward, except as provided in this Section.

B.     Exemptions from setback requirements. The minimum setback requirements of this Development Code apply to all uses except the following:

1.     Fences or walls six feet or less in height above the natural grade of the parcel; except on corner lots and within front yards in compliance with Section 17.30.070 (Fences, Walls, and Hedges);

2.     Decks, earthworks, free-standing solar devices, hot tubs, steps, swimming pools/spas, terraces, and other site design elements which are placed directly upon the finish grade and do not exceed a height of 18 inches above natural grade at any point;

3.     Retaining walls less than four feet in height above the surrounding finish grade at any point;

4.     Parking pads with railings four feet or less in height; and

5.     Basketball baskets and supports.

C.     Allowable setback reductions.

1.     A side yard setback other than that required by this article or Article II (Zoning Districts and Allowable Land Uses) may be authorized on residential lots through Minor Use Permit approval.

2.     The required front yard setback may be reduced by the City Engineer by a maximum of five feet on residential lots that are less than 80 feet wide if the City Engineer finds that the reduced setback will not adversely affect a front or street side visibility area.

D.    Measurement of setbacks. Setbacks shall be measured as follows. (See Figure 3-4, Location and Measurement of Setbacks)



Figure 3-4, Location and Measurement of Setbacks

1.     Front yard setbacks. The front yard setback shall be measured at right angles from the nearest point on the front property line of the parcel to the nearest line of the structure, except as follows. Whenever a future right-of-way width line is officially established for a street, required setbacks shall be measured from the established lines. Whenever an access easement for a public street or private street traverses a parcel, front yard setbacks shall also be measured from the outer edges of the easement.

a.     Averaging. The required front yard setback may be calculated based on an averaging of adjoining parcels only under the following circumstances:

(1)    In the residential zoning districts, where 25 percent or more of the parcels located on the same side of the street and within 200 feet of the parcel or between the nearest intersecting streets, whichever is less, have been improved with structures at the time of adoption of this Development Code, the required front yard depth for the applicable zoning district may be reduced to a depth not less than the average depth of the front yards of the parcels with existing structures; and

(2)    When an interior parcel in an RS zoning district adjoins a parcel in any other zoning district, the depth required for the front yard on the interior parcel may be reduced to not less than the average of the required depth and the width or depth of the yard required on the parcel in the other zoning district, which adjoins the street on which the interior parcel faces.

b.     Corner parcels. The measurement shall be taken from the nearest line of the structure to the nearest point of the property line adjoining the street which has the narrowest parcel frontage. Whenever a future right-of-way width line is officially established for a street, required setbacks shall be measured from the established line(s); and

c.     Flag lots. The measurement shall be taken from the nearest line of the structure to the point where the access strip meets the bulk of the parcel; establishing a building line parallel to the lot line nearest to the public street or right-of-way. (See Figure 3-5, Flag Lot Setbacks)

 



 

Figure 3-5 Flag Lot Setbacks

 

2.     Side yard setbacks. The side yard setback shall be measured at right angles from the nearest point on the side property line of the parcel to the nearest line of the structure; establishing a setback line parallel to the side property line, which extends between the front and rear yards.

3.     Street side yard setbacks. The side yard on the street side of a corner parcel shall be measured from the nearest point of the side property line adjoining the street to the nearest line of the structure. Whenever a future right-of-way width line is officially established for a street, required yards shall be measured from the established line.

4.     Rear yard setbacks. The rear yard shall be measured at right angles from the nearest point on the rear property line of the parcel to the nearest line of the structure, establishing a setback line parallel to the rear property line, which extends between the side yards, except:

a.     The rear yard on the street side of a through lot shall be measured from the nearest point of the rear property line adjoining the street; or

b.     Where the side lot lines converge to a point, a line five feet long within the parcel, parallel to and at a maximum distance from the front lot line, shall be deemed to be the rear lot line for the purpose of determining the depth of the required rear yard. (See Figure 3-6, Rear Setback Measurement for Triangular and Irregular Lots)

 



 

Figure 3-6 Rear Setback Measurement for Triangular and Irregular Lots

 

E.     Allowed projections into setbacks. Attached architectural features may extend beyond the wall of the structure and into the front, side, and rear setbacks, in compliance with Table 3-2, below. Other portions of single-family dwellings may extend into required setbacks in compliance with subsection F.7 (Setback requirements for specific structures and situations - Single-family dwellings). (See Figure 3-7, Examples of Allowed Projections into Setbacks)

 



 

Figure 3-7 Examples of Allowed Projections into Setbacks

 

TABLE 3-2 ALLOWED PROJECTIONS INTO SETBACKS

 

Allowed Projection into Specified Setback

Projecting Feature

Front Setback

Side Setback

Rear Setback

Balconies, bay windows, and other cantilevered features providing floor area

36 in.

36 in. (1)

5 ft.

Chimney/fireplace, 6 ft. or less in width

30 in.

30 in. (2)

30 in. (2)

Canopy, cornice, eave, roof overhang

36 in.

36 in. (3)

5 ft.

Deck, porch, which may be roofed but is otherwise unenclosed, 18 in. or more above natural grade (4)

6 ft.

36 in. (1)

6 ft.

Stairway, not attached to a deck, not enclosed, and does not extend above the ground floor as measured from the driveway grade adjacent to the garage or house

6 ft. (5)

36 in. (1)

6 ft.

Notes:

(1)    Feature may project no closer than five feet to any side property line. Feature may not project into the side yard setback in the Historic Commercial Zone (hc). See Section 17.30.120(F) (7) for exceptions.

(2)    Feature may project no closer than three feet to any side or rear property line.

(3)    Feature may project no closer than five feet to any side property line. See Section 17.30.120(F)(7) for exceptions.

(4)    Decks less than 18 inches above natural grade are exempt.

(5)    Covered walkways and stairways adjoining garages within the front yard setback may project into the front yard setback up to the front of the garage.

 

F.     Setback requirements for specific structures and situations.

1.     Dwelling groups. An inner court providing access to a multifamily dwelling group (constructed and located face-to-face) shall provide a minimum width of 10 feet between the rows for single-story structures with an additional five feet of width for each additional floor above the first floor.

2.     Fences. See Section 17.30.070 (Fences, Walls, and Hedges).

3.     Hot tubs, swimming pools/spas, and other site design elements.

a.     Site design elements less than 18 inches above natural grade are exempt from setback requirements.

b.     Detached decks, earthworks, freestanding solar devices, hot tubs, steps, swimming pools/spas, terraces, and other site design elements, and which equal or exceed a height of 18 inches above natural grade at any point, shall conform to the setback requirements. Swimming pools, or other recreational pools or landscape ponds, may be located in a required front, rear, or side yard, subject to the approval of a Minor Use Permit, in compliance with Chapter 17.76 (Use Permits and Minor Use Permits), and applicable Building and Health Codes.

4.     Residential accessory uses and structures. Residential accessory uses and structures shall be provided setbacks in compliance with Table 3-3 (Required Setbacks - Accessory Uses and Structures).

 

TABLE 3-3 REQUIRED SETBACKS - RESIDENTIAL ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES

Accessory Use/Structure

Type of Setback (1)

Required Setback (2)

Air conditioning equipment, pool and spa equipment, ground-based antennae

Sides, rear

5 feet

Garage

Front, street side

1 foot and 20 feet from edge of street pavement

Gazebo, greenhouse, patio cover

Front, street side

 

Rear

 

 

Interior (3)

15 feet

 

15 feet for single-family dwelling, 10 feet for multifamily dwellings

 

6 feet

Propane tank

Front, street side

Sides, rear

As required for main structure

0 feet (4)

Stationary barbecue, fire pit

Sides, rear

5 feet

Swimming pool, spa, fish pond, outdoor play equipment

Street side

Sides, rear

As required for main structure

5 feet

Other structures greater than 120 square feet

Front, street side, sides, rear

As required for main structure

Structures less than 120 square feet and greater than 6 feet in height

Front, street side

Sides, rear

As required for main structure

5 feet

Structures less than 120 square feet and 6 feet or less in height and not covered elsewhere in this Section

Front, street side, sides, rear

0 feet

 

 

Notes:

(1)    When a setback is not specified, the setback shall be as required for the main structure. Where a parcel is situated so that the front, side, or rear property lines are not readily determinable, required setbacks shall be established by the City Planner.

(2)    A structure, projection or equipment shall not be placed or occur beyond the property lines of the subject parcel.

(3)    See Chapter 17.220 (Definitions, Glossary) for the definition of interior setback.

(4)    Propane tanks must comply with the side, rear, and interior setback requirements of the City Building Code and the City of Jackson Fire Department.

 

5.     Retaining walls. (Retaining walls up to four feet in height are exempt from setback requirements.)

a.     Retaining walls from four to six feet in height may be located within a required setback provided the exposed side of the wall faces into the subject parcel; and

b.     Retaining walls greater than six feet in height, or retaining walls greater than four feet in height where the exposed side of the wall faces out from the subject parcel, shall conform to the setback requirements.

c.     Retaining walls greater than four feet in height for driveways and driveway structures may be located within a required front yard setback if the City Engineer finds that the wall will not adversely affect a front or street side traffic visibility area. (See Figure 3-8, Retaining Walls in Setback)

 



Figure 3-8 Retaining Walls in Setback

 

6.     Single-family dwellings. Single-family dwellings may extend into required setbacks as follows.

a.     Front setbacks. Where an existing sloping parcel contains 40,000 square feet or less in net area, setback requirements are not specified on the recorded subdivision map, and the average difference in elevation in the first 60 feet of the parcel measured perpendicularly between the edge of the pavement or traveled way and the structure is one vertical foot for every four horizontal feet (1:4) or more, the front setback for a single-family dwelling may be reduced up to 30 percent of that required for other parcels in the same zoning district.

b.     Side setbacks. A single-family dwelling and related accessory structures may extend up to two feet into a required side setback, but no closer than eight feet to a side property line, and allowed projections as listed in Table 3-2 (Allowed Projections Into Setbacks) may be located up to five feet into a required side setback, but no closer than five feet to any side property line, only as follows:

(1)    The average width of the parcel at the building pad is 80 feet or less;

(2)    The wall of the structure is located no closer than 15 feet to the wall of any structure on an adjoining parcel;

(3)    The pitch of any portion of the roof within the side yard setback is not directed toward the side property line or the structure has a non-shedding roof with a deed restriction recorded on the property that limits the type of roofing materials to non-shedding materials; and

(4)    Windows and other wall openings of the structural wall within the side setback are limited to five percent or less of the total area of the wall.

c.     Side setbacks for nonconforming structure. An addition or modification to a single family dwelling that encroaches into the side setback may extend up to five feet into a required side setback, but no closer than five feet to a side property line, as follows:

(1)    The Planning Commission finds all of the following:

(a)    The height and design of the addition or modification is compatible with the existing structure;

(b)    The side yard setback for the addition or modification is equal to or greater than the side yard setback for the existing dwelling;

(c)    The building frontage, as measured in lineal feet, of the addition or modification within the side yard setback does not exceed the building frontage of the existing dwelling within the side yard setback.

(2)    The applicant applies for a variance consistent with Section 17.82 (Variances and Historic Variances).

7.     Traffic safety visibility areas. Structures shall not be altered, constructed, erected, or moved, so that they are located closer to a street line than is necessary to provide adequate space for on-site traffic/vehicle maneuvering and the structures shall not be located within a traffic safety visibility area except for fences as permitted by Section 17.30.070(C) (Fence, Walls, and Hedges—Fence Height Limitations). (See Figure 3-4, Location and Measurement of Setbacks)

 



 

Figure 3-4 Location and Measurement of Setbacks

 

17.30.140 Solar Access and Solar Equipment Guidelines.
Passive heating and cooling opportunities should be incorporated into single-family residential subdivisions and multifamily residential projects as provided by this Section.

A.    Orientation of structures. Future structures should be oriented to maximize solar access opportunities.

B.     Pools and spas. A pool or spa facility owned and maintained by a homeowner’s association or multifamily rental complex shall be equipped with a solar cover. Solar water heating systems are encouraged.

C.     Collector installation. Solar collectors, if provided, shall be located and installed in the following manner:

1.     Roof-mounted solar collectors shall be placed in the least conspicuous location without reducing the operating efficiency of the collectors;

2.     Wall-mounted and ground-mounted collectors shall be screened from public view, to the maximum extent feasible;

3.     Roof-mounted collectors shall be installed at the same angle or as close as possible to the pitch of the roof. Solar panels may be placed on a flat roof in an angled position if they are appropriately screened from view by elements that are compatible with the architectural style, color, and use of materials on the main portions of the building;

4.     Appurtenant equipment, particularly plumbing and related fixtures, shall be installed in the attic whenever possible or screened from public view, to the maximum extent feasible; and

5.     Exterior surfaces of the collectors and related equipment shall have a matte finish and shall be color-coordinated to harmonize with roof materials and other dominant colors of the structure.

D.    Obstruction of solar access. Structures (building, wall, fence, etc.) should not be constructed or new vegetation placed or allowed to grow, so as to obstruct solar access on an adjoining parcel.

 

17.30.150 Solid Waste/Recyclable Materials Storage.
This Section provides standards for the construction and operation of solid waste and recyclable material storage areas in compliance with State law (California Solid Waste Reuse and Recycling Access Act, Public Resources Code Sections 42900 through 42911).

A.    Required storage for multifamily projects. Multifamily residential projects with five or more dwelling units, shall provide solid waste and recyclable material storage areas as follows:

1.     Individual unit storage area requirements. Each dwelling unit shall be provided an internal area of a minimum of six cubic feet designed for the storage of solid waste and recyclable material. A minimum of three cubic feet shall be provided for solid waste and a minimum of three cubic feet shall be provided for recyclable material; and

2.     Common storage area requirements. Table 3-4 establishes minimum requirements for common solid waste and recyclable material storage areas for multifamily developments, which may be located indoors or outdoors as long as they are readily accessible to all residents. These minimum requirements may be reduced by the City Engineer upon a finding that the reduced requirements will provide sufficient storage area for solid waste and recyclable materials generated by the structures and uses. All required storage areas are measured in cubic feet.

TABLE 3-4

MULTIFAMILY SOLID WASTE STORAGE AREA REQUIREMENTS

Number of Dwellings

Minimum Storage Area Required (cu. ft.)

Solid Waste

Recycling

Total Area

5—16

81

81

162

17—32

162

162

324

33—48

243

243

486

49—64

324

324

648

65—80

405

405

910

81+

Every additional 16 dwellings, or fraction thereof, shall require an additional 81 cu. ft. for solid waste and 81 cu. ft. for recyclables.

 

B.     Required storage area for nonresidential structures and uses. Nonresidential structures and uses within all zoning districts shall provide solid waste and recyclable material storage areas in compliance with Table 3-5. These requirements may be reduced by the City Engineer upon a finding that the reduced requirements will provide sufficient storage area for solid waste and recyclable materials generated by the structures and uses. All required storage areas are measured in cubic feet.

 

 

TABLE 3-5 NONRESIDENTIAL SOLID WASTE STORAGE AREA REQUIREMENTS

Building Floor Area (sq. ft.)

Minimum Storage Area Required (cu. ft.)

Solid Waste

Recycling

Total Area

Up to 10,000

81

81

162

10,001—30,000

162

162

324

30,001—60,000

324

324

648

60,001+

Every additional 30,000 sq. ft., or fraction thereof, shall require an additional 162 cu. ft. for solid waste and 162 cu. ft. for recyclables.

 

C.     Location requirements. Solid waste and recyclable materials storage areas shall be located in the following manner:

1.     Solid waste and recyclable material storage shall be adjacent/combined with one another. They may only be located inside a specially-designated structure, on the outside of a structure in an approved fence/wall enclosure, a designated interior court or yard area with appropriate access or in rear yards and interior side yards. Exterior storage area(s) shall not be located in a required front yard, street side yard, parking, landscaped or open space areas, or any area(s) required by the Municipal Code to be maintained as unencumbered;

2.     The storage area(s) shall be accessible to residents and employees. Storage areas within multifamily residential developments shall be located within 250 feet of an access doorway to the dwellings which they are intended to serve; and

3.     Driveways or aisles shall provide unobstructed access for collection vehicles and personnel and provide at least the minimum clearance required by the collection methods and vehicles utilized by the designated collector. Where a parcel is served by an alley, exterior storage area(s) shall be directly accessible to the alley.

4.     All trash and recycling receptacles shall be lidded.

D.    Design and construction. The storage areas shall be designed and constructed to:

1.     Be compatible with the project and surrounding structures and land uses;

2.     Be properly secured to prevent access by unauthorized persons, while allowing authorized persons access for disposal of materials;

3.     Provide a concrete pad within the fenced or walled area(s) and a concrete apron which facilitates the handling of the individual bins or containers;

4.     Protect the areas and the individual bins or containers provided within from adverse environmental conditions which might render the collected materials unmarketable; and

5.     Be appropriately located and screened from view on at least three sides subject to the approval of the City Planner. The method of screening shall be architecturally compatible with the surrounding structures.

 

17.30.160 Undergrounding of Utilities.
Proposed development, including residential subdivisions, shall provide for the undergrounding of existing and proposed utility facilities in compliance with this Section. The requirements of this Section do not apply to proposed residential parcels larger than three acres, and existing or proposed major electrical transmission lines.

A.    Facilities to be undergrounded. All electric, telecommunications, and cable television lines to be installed on the site to serve a proposed development shall be installed underground from the nearest above-ground utility service, except for equipment appurtenant to underground facilities, including surface-mounted transformers, pedestal-mounted terminal boxes and meter cabinets, and concealed ducts. New poles or overhead lines shall not be allowed. All existing electric, telecommunication, and cable television lines within the site or along streets fronting the site shall be installed underground from the nearest above-ground utility service.

B.     Responsibility of applicant. The applicant is responsible for complying with the requirements of this Section and shall make the necessary arrangements with the affected utility(ies) for facility installation. The review authority may modify or waive the requirements of this Section if the review authority finds topographical, soil, or any other conditions make underground installation unreasonable or impractical. The review authority may also require or accept an improvement fee for the future undergrounding of existing utility lines in lieu of complying with this Section. The amount of the improvement fee shall be determined by the City Engineer after consulting with affected utility companies and special districts based on the costs to underground the required utility lines. In those cases where utilities are not installed underground, utility lines shall be located to minimize visibility in scenic vista areas.

C.     Location of installation. Underground utility lines shall be installed along roadways within street rights-of-way where possible. When installed within street rights-of-way, their location and method of installation shall be done in accordance with the Public Improvements and Engineering Standards.

 

17.30.170 Vibrations.
The owner of an existing or proposed use which generates vibrations at levels constituting a nuisance, in compliance with State law (Civil Code Sections 3479-3503), shall abate the nuisance, in compliance with Chapter 17.200 (Enforcement).

 

Chapter 17.32 AFFORDABLE HOUSING
17.32.010 Purpose of Chapter.
The purpose of this policy is to:

A.    Encourage the development and availability of housing affordable to a broad range of households with varying income levels within City as mandated by State Law, California Government Code Sections 65580 and following;

B.     Promote the City of Jackson’s goal to add affordable housing units to the City’s housing stock in proportion to the overall increase in new jobs and housing units;

C.     Offset the need for housing that is created by new development, protecting the economic diversity of the City’s housing stock and promoting a jobs/housing balance, and in doing so, mitigating environmental and other impacts of traffic, transit and air quality and reducing demands on the region’s transportation infrastructure.

 

17.32.020 Applicability to Residential Development.
For all Residential Developments of 10 or more units, at least 10 percent of the total units must be Inclusionary Units within the development and restricted for occupancy by Low-, Very Low-, or Extremely Low Income Households as defined by the Regional Housing Needs Assessment Tables. The number of Inclusionary Units required for a particular project will be determined only once, at the time of tentative or parcel map approval, or, for developments not processing a map, prior to issuance of a building permit. If a change in the subdivision design results in a change in the total number of units, the number of Inclusionary Units required will be recalculated to coincide with the final approved project.

A.    Calculation. For purposes of calculating the number of affordable units required by this Section, any additional units authorized as a density bonus under California Government Code Section 65915(b)(1) or (b)(2) will not be counted in determining the required number of Inclusionary Units. In determining the number of whole Inclusionary Units required, any decimal fraction less than 0.5 shall be rounded down to the nearest whole number, and any decimal fraction of 0.5 or more shall be rounded up to the nearest whole number.

B.     Type of Inclusionary Units. At least one quarter of the Inclusionary Units (or 2.5 percent of the total development) must be restricted to occupancy by Extremely Low-Income Households. One-quarter of the Inclusionary Units (or 2.5 percent of the total development) must be restricted to occupancy by Very Low-Income Households. An additional one-half of the Inclusionary Units (or 5 percent of the total development) must be restricted to occupancy by Low-Income Households.

C.     Limitation for Rental Projects. The City acknowledges that the published appellate case of Palmer/Sixth Street Properties, L.P. v. City of Los Angeles (2nd Dist. 2009) 175 Cal. App. 4th 1396 holds that the Costa-Hawkins Act (Civil Code §1954.50 et seq.) precludes local governments from requiring a developer to set affordable rent levels for private rental housing unless the developer has agreed to such rental restrictions in exchange for financial assistance or other consideration from the local government. This Section and chapter shall be fully operative at such time that the Palmer case is overturned, disapproved or depublished by a court of competent jurisdiction, or the state legislature amends state law to authorize local governments to require the development and restriction of affordable rental units in the manner set forth in this Section and chapter. Except as expressly limited by the Palmer case, this Section and chapter remain in full force and effect.

 

17.32.030 Exemptions.
The requirements of this Policy do not apply to:

A.    The reconstruction of any structures that have been destroyed by fire, flood, earthquake or other act of nature provided that the reconstruction of the site does not increase the number of residential units by more than nine.

B.     Housing constructed by other government agencies.

 

17.32.040 Affordable Housing Standards.
Inclusionary Units built under this Policy must conform to the following standards:

A.    Design. Except as otherwise provided in this Chapter, Inclusionary Units must be comparable in infrastructure (including sewer, water and other utilities), construction quality and exterior design to the Market-rate Residential Units. Inclusionary Units may be smaller in aggregate size and have different interior finishes and features than Market-rate Units so long as the interior features are durable, of good quality and consistent with contemporary standards for new housing. The number of bedrooms should be the same as those in the Market-rate Units, except that if the Market-rate Units provide more than three bedrooms, the Inclusionary Units need not provide more than three bedrooms.

B.     Timing. All Inclusionary Units must be constructed and occupied concurrently with or prior to the construction and occupancy of Market-rate Units or development. In phased developments, Inclusionary Units may be constructed and occupied in proportion to the number of units in each phase of the Residential Development.

C.     Duration of Affordability Requirement. Inclusionary Units produced under this Section must be legally restricted to occupancy by Households of the income levels for which the units were designated for a minimum of 55 years for rental units and 45 years for owner occupied units.

 

17.32.050 Alternatives.
A.    Developer Proposal. A Developer may propose an alternative means of compliance in an Affordable Housing Plan according to the following provisions.

1.     Off-Site Construction. Inclusionary Units may be constructed off-site if the Inclusionary Units will be located in an area where, based on the availability of affordable housing, the City Manager finds that the need for such units is greater than the need in the area of the proposed development.

2.     Combination. The City Manager may accept any combination of on-site construction and off-site construction.

B.     Discretion. The City Manager may approve, conditionally approve or reject any alternative proposed by a Developer as part of an Affordable Housing Plan. Any approval or conditional approval must be based on a finding that the purposes of this Policy would be better served by implementation of the proposed alternative(s). The decision of the City Manager may be appealed to the City Council within 10 days of the City Manager’s decision.

 

17.32.060 Incentives for Rental and On-Site Housing.
The City may provide one or more of the following incentives to a Developer who elects to satisfy the inclusionary housing requirements of this Policy by producing rental units or owner-occupied housing units on the site of a Residential Development. Special preferences shall be given to projects offering Extremely Low-Income units.

A.    Modified Development Standards to Increase Density. Modification in development or zoning provided that such modifications exceed the minimum building standards provided in the Uniform Building Code that will allow for increased density, including, the following for the development of low income units:

1.     The City may provide a 20 percent increase above the otherwise maximum allowable residential density;

2.     Low income single-family units may reduce the parking requirements to one covered parking space and one uncovered with tandem parking allowed; and

3.     The front yard setback for all low income residential units may be reduced to 10 feet with the exception of the covered parking portion of the structure which must maintain a 25-foot setback from back of sidewalk or curb if there is no sidewalk, to accommodate one additional off-street parking space.

B.     Mixed Use Zoning. Approval of mixed use zoning in conjunction with a Development if such uses are compatible with the existing or planned development in the area where the proposed Development will be located.

C.     Fee Reductions. A 50 percent reduction of fees required by City Schedule of Charges for Special Services and Local Facilities Participation Charges for the portion of the Development devoted to Inclusionary Units. The fee reduction may be up to 75 percent for Extremely Low-Income units.

D.    Financial Assistance. To the extent budgeted by the City Council and otherwise available, financial assistance for the inclusionary housing component of the development in the form of loans or grants from sources as may be available to City.

17.32.070 Compliance Procedures.
A.    General. Approval of an Inclusionary Housing Plan and implementation of an approved Inclusionary Housing Agreement is a condition of any tentative map, parcel map or building permit for any Development for which this Policy applies. This Section does not apply to exempt projects.

B.     Inclusionary Housing Plan. The City Manager shall approve, conditionally approve or reject the Inclusionary Housing Plan within 60 days of the date of a complete application for that approval. If the Inclusionary Housing Plan is incomplete, the Inclusionary Housing Plan will be returned to the Developer along with a list of the deficiencies or the information required. No application for a tentative map, parcel map or building permit to which this Policy applies may be deemed complete until an Inclusionary Housing Plan is submitted to the City Manager. At any time during the review process, the City Manager may require from the Developer additional information reasonably necessary to clarify and supplement the application or determine the consistency of the proposed Inclusionary Housing Plan with the requirements of this Policy. The Inclusionary Housing Plan must include:

1.     The location, structure (attached, semi-attached, or detached), proposed tenure (for sale or rental), and size of the proposed market-rate, commercial space and/or Inclusionary Units and the basis for calculating the number of Inclusionary Units;

2.     A floor or site plan depicting the location of the Inclusionary Units;

3.     The income levels to which each Inclusionary Unit will be made affordable;

4.     The mechanisms that will be used to assure that the units remain affordable for the desired term, such as resale and rental restrictions, deeds of trust, and rights of first refusal and other documents;

5.     For phased Development, a phasing plan that provides for the timely development of the number of Inclusionary Units proportionate to each proposed phase of development;

6.     A description of any incentives that are requested of City; and

7.     Any other information reasonably requested by the City Manager to assist with evaluation of the Plan under the standards of this Policy.

C.     Inclusionary Housing Agreement. The forms of the Inclusionary Housing Agreement, resale and rental restrictions, deeds of trust, rights of first refusal and other documents authorized by this Policy, and any change in the form of any such document which materially alters any requirement in the document, must be approved by the City Manager or his/her designee prior to being executed with respect to any Residential Development or Affordable Housing Proposals. The form of the Inclusionary Housing Agreement will vary, depending on the manner in which the provisions of this Policy are satisfied for a particular development. All Inclusionary Housing Agreements must include, at minimum, the following:

1.     Description of the development, including whether the Inclusionary Units will be rented or owner-occupied;

2.     The number, size and location of Extremely Low-, Very Low-, and Low-Income Units;

3.     Inclusionary incentives by the City, including the nature and amount of any local public funding (if any);

4.     Provisions and/or documents for resale restrictions, deeds of trust, rights of first refusal or rental restrictions;

5.     Provisions for monitoring the ongoing affordability of the units, and the process for qualifying prospective resident Households for income eligibility; and

6.     Any additional obligations relevant to the compliance with this Policy.

D.    Recording of Agreement. Inclusionary Housing Agreements that are acceptable to the City Manager must be recorded against owner-occupied Inclusionary Units and residential projects containing rental Inclusionary Units. Additional rental or resale restrictions, deeds of trust, rights of first refusal and/or other documents acceptable to the City Manager must also be recorded against owner-occupied Inclusionary Units. Such items must be approved as to form by the City Attorney. In cases where the requirements of this Policy are satisfied through the development of Off-Site Units, the Inclusionary Housing Agreement must simultaneously be recorded against the property where the Off-Site Units are to be developed.

 

17.32.080 Eligibility for Inclusionary Units
A.    General Eligibility. No Household may occupy an Inclusionary Unit unless the City or its designee has approved the Household’s eligibility, or has failed to make a determination of eligibility within the time or other limits provided by an Inclusionary Housing Agreement or resale restriction. If the City has failed to identify a Household as an eligible buyer for the initial sale of an Inclusionary Unit that is intended for owner-occupancy 90 days after the unit receives a completed final inspection for occupancy, upon 90 additional days’ notice to the City and on satisfaction of such further conditions as may be included in City-approved restrictions (which may include a further opportunity to identify an eligible buyer), the owner may sell the unit at a market price, and the unit will not be subject to any requirement of this Policy thereafter.

B.     Conflict of Interest. The following individuals are ineligible to purchase or rent an Inclusionary Unit: (1) City employees and officials (and their immediate family members) who have policy-making authority or influence regarding City housing programs and do not qualify as having a remote interest as provided by California Government Code Section 1091; (2) the Project Applicant and its officers and employees (and their immediate family members); and (3) the Project Owner and its officers and employees (and their immediate family members).

C.     Occupancy. Any Household who occupies a rental Inclusionary Unit or purchases an Inclusionary Unit must occupy that unit as a principal residence.

 

17.32.090 Owner-Occupied Units
A.    Initial Sales Price. The initial sales price of the Inclusionary Unit must be set so that the eligible Household will pay an Affordable Ownership Cost.

B.     Transfer. Renewed restrictions will be entered into on each change of ownership, with a 45-year renewal term, upon transfer of an owner-occupied Inclusionary Unit prior to the expiration of the 45-year affordability period.

C.     Resale. The maximum sales price permitted on resale of an Inclusionary Unit designated for owner-occupancy shall be the lower of: (1) fair market value or (2) to the extent authorized in any resale restrictions or operative Inclusionary Housing Agreement, sellers may recover at time of sale the market value of capital improvements made by the seller and the seller’s necessary and usual costs of sale up to the percent increase in the Area Median Income, and may authorize an increase in the maximum allowable sales price to achieve such recovery.

D.    Changes in Title. Title in the Inclusionary Unit may change due to changes in circumstance, including death, marriage and divorce. Except as otherwise provided by this Policy, if a change in title is occasioned by events that changes the financial situation of the Household so that it is no longer income-eligible, then the property must be sold to an income-eligible Household within 180 days. Upon the death of one of the owners, title in the property may transfer to the surviving joint tenant without respect to the income-eligibility of the Household. Upon the death of a sole owner or all owners and inheritance of the Inclusionary Unit by a non-income-eligible child or stepchild of one or more owners, there will be a one year compassion period between the time when the estate is settled and the time when the property must be sold to an income-eligible Household. Inheritance of an Inclusionary Unit by any other person whose Household is not income-eligible shall require resale of the unit to an income-eligible Household as soon as is feasible but not more than 180 days.

 

17.32.100 Rental Units.
Rental units will be offered to eligible Households at an Affordable Rent. The owner of rental Inclusionary Units shall certify each tenant Household’s income to the City or City’s designee at the time of initial rental and annually thereafter. The owner must obtain and review documents that demonstrate the prospective renter’s total income, such as income tax returns or W-2s for the previous calendar year, and submit such information on a form approved by the City.

A.    Selection of Tenants. The owners of rental Inclusionary Units may fill vacant units by selecting income-eligible Households from an application list maintained by the City or City’s designee. Priority will be given to current residents and employees of businesses within the City of Jackson. Alternatively, owners may fill vacant units through their own selection process, provided that they publish notices of the availability of Inclusionary Units according to guidelines established by the City Manager.

B.     Annual Report. The owner shall submit an annual report summarizing the occupancy of each Inclusionary Unit for the year, demonstrating the continuing income-eligibility of the tenant. The City Manager may require additional information if he or she deems it necessary.

C.     Subsequent Rental to Income-Eligible Tenant. The owner shall apply the same rental terms and conditions to tenants of Inclusionary Units as are applied to all other tenants, except as required to comply with this Policy (for example, rent levels, occupancy restrictions and income requirements) or with other applicable government subsidy programs. Discrimination against persons receiving housing assistance is prohibited.

 

 

Chapter 17.34 FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
17.34.010 Statutory Authorization.
The Legislature of the State of California has in Government Code Sections 65302, 65560, and 65800 conferred upon local government units authority to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. The City Council of the City of Jackson does adopt the following floodplain management regulations.

 

17.34.020 Findings of Fact.
A.    The flood hazard areas of the City are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety, and general welfare.

B.     These flood losses are caused by uses that are inadequately elevated, floodproofed, or protected from flood damage. The cumulative effect of obstructions in areas of special flood hazards which increase flood heights and velocities also contribute to the flood loss.

 

17.34.030 Statement of Purpose.
It is the purpose of this Chapter to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:

A.    Protect human life and health;

B.     Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;

C.     Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;

D.    Minimize prolonged business interruptions;

E.     Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains; electric, telephone and sewer lines; and streets and bridges located in areas of special flood hazard;

F.     Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future blighted areas caused by flood damage;

G.    Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of special flood hazard; and

H.    Ensure that those who occupy areas of special flood hazard assume responsibility for their actions.

 

17.34.040 Methods of Reducing Flood Losses.
In order to accomplish the above purpose, this Chapter includes methods and provisions to:

A.    Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damage increases in erosion or flood heights or velocities;

B.     Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve the uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction;

C.     Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel flood waters;

D.    Control, file, grade, dredge and other development which may increase flood damage; and

E.     Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards in other areas.

 

17.34.050 Definitions.
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this Chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this Chapter its most reasonable application.

“Accessory use” means a use which is incidental and subordinate to the principle use of the parcel of land on which it is located.

“Alluvial fan” means a geomorphologic feature characterized by a cone or fan-shaped deposit of boulders, gravel, and fine sediments that have been eroded from mountain slopes, transported by flood flows, and then deposited on the valley floors. These deposits are subject to flash flooding, high velocity flows, debris flows, erosion, sediment movement and deposition, and channel migration.

“Apex” means the point of highest elevation on an alluvial fan, which on undisturbed fans is generally the point where the major stream that formed the fan emerges from the mountain front.

“Appeal” means a request for a review of the floodplain administrator’s interpretation of any provision of this Chapter.

“Area of shallow flooding” means a designated AO or AH zone on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM). The base flood depths range from one to three feet; a clearly defined channel does not exist; the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate; and velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.

“Area of special flood-related erosion hazard” is the land within a community which is most likely to be subject to severe flood-related erosion losses. The area may be designated as Zone E on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM).

“Area of special flood hazard” See “Special flood hazard area.”

“Area of special mudslide (i.e., mudflow) hazard” is the area subject to severe mudslides (i.e., mudflows). The area is designated a Zone M on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM).

“Base flood” means a flood which has a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year (also called the “one-hundred-year flood”). Base flood is the term used throughout this Chapter.

“Base Flood Elevation (BFE)” is the water surface elevation of the floodplain generated by the base flood at the area of interest as presented in the current Flood Insurance Study and the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) published by FEMA for the City of Jackson.

“Basement” means any area of the building having its floor subgrade, i.e. below ground level, on all sides.

“Breakaway walls” are any type of walls, whether solid or lattice, and whether constructed of concrete, masonry, wood, metal, plastic or any other suitable building material which is not part of the structural support of the building. These walls are designed to break away under abnormally high tides or wave action without causing any damage to the structural integrity of the building on which they are used or any buildings to which they might be carried by flood waters. A breakaway wall shall have a safe design loading resistance of not less than 10 and no more than 20 pounds per square foot. Use of breakaway walls must be certified by a registered engineer or architect and shall meet the following conditions:

1.     Breakaway wall collapse shall result from a water load less than that which would occur during the base flood; and

2.     The elevated portion of the building shall not incur any structural damage due to the effects of wind and water loads acting simultaneously in the event of the base flood.

“Building”—See “Structure.”

“Development” means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials.

“Encroachment” means the advance or infringement of uses, plant growth, fill, excavation, buildings, permanent structures, or development into a floodplain which may impede or alter the flow capacity of a floodplain.

“Existing manufactured home park or subdivision” means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.

“Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision” means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).

“Fill” means material from any source placed, or proposed to be placed, within FEMA designated floodplain boundaries. Material that has been placed before the date of the first National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) map (February 1990, National Flood Insurance Program map) showing the area in a Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA) is considered natural grade by FEMA.

“Flood,” “flooding,” “flood water” means:

1.     A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of inland or tidal waters; the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source; and/or mudslides (i.e., mudflow)—see “Mudslides”; and

2.     The condition resulting from flood-related erosion; see “Flood-related erosion.”

“Flood Boundary and Floodway Map (FBFM)” means the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the floodway.

“Flood Hazard Boundary Map” means the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated the areas of flood hazards.

“Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM)” means the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.

“Flood Insurance Study” means the official report provided by the Federal Insurance Administration that includes flood profiles, the Flood Insurance Rate Map, the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map, and the water surface elevation of the base flood.

“Floodplain” or “flood-prone area” means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source; see “flooding.”

“Floodplain administrator” is the individual appointed to administer and enforce the floodplain management regulations.

“Floodplain management” means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage and preserving and enhancing, where possible, natural resources in the floodplain, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, floodplain management regulations, and open space plans.

“Floodplain management regulations” means this Chapter and other zoning ordinance, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinance (such as grading and erosion control) and other application of entitlements which control development in flood-prone areas. This term describes Federal, State or local regulations in any combination thereof which provide standards for preventing and reducing flood loss and damage.

“Floodproofing” means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures, and their contents.

“Flood-related erosion” means the collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of any body of water as a result of undermining caused by water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels. This occasion of unusually high water level in a natural body of water can be the result of a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as a flash flood accompanied by a severe storm, an unanticipated force of nature, such as a flash flood or a similarly unusual and unforeseeable event which results in flooding.

“Flood-related erosion area” or “flood-related erosion prone area” means a land area adjoining the shore of a lake or other body of water, which due to the composition of the shoreline or bank and high water levels or wind-driven currents, is likely to suffer flood-related erosion damage.

“Flood-related erosion area management” means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood-related erosion damage, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood-related erosion control works, and floodplain management regulations.

“Floodway” means that area inside the floodplain, centered more or less about the watercourse thread, the width of which is presented in the current Flood Insurance Study (FIS) and the limits of which are shown on the current Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM). Within this area encroachment is permitted unless it can be proven by accepted engineering methods that the encroachment will not increase the water surface elevation of the floodway.

“Floodway encroachment lines” means the lines marking the limits of floodways on Federal, State and local floodplain maps.

“Floodway fringe” means that area of the floodplain on either side of the “regulatory floodway” where encroachment may be permitted.

“Fraud and victimization” as related to Sections 17.34.260 through 17.34.080 of this Chapter, means that the variance granted must not cause fraud on or victimization of the public. In examining this requirement, the Jackson City Council will consider the fact that every newly constructed building adds to government responsibilities and remains a part of the community for 50 to 100 years. Buildings that are permitted to be constructed below the base flood elevation are subject during all those years to increased risk of damage from floods, while future owners of the property and the community as a whole are subject to all the costs, inconvenience, danger, and suffering that those increased flood damages bring. In addition, future owners may purchase the property, unaware that it is subject to potential flood damage, and can be insured only at very high flood insurance rates.

“Functionally dependent use” means a use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water.

“Governing body” means the local government unit, i.e. county or municipality, that is empowered to adopt and implement regulations to provide for the public health, safety and general welfare of its citizenry.

“Hardship” as related to Sections 17.34.260 through 17.34.280 of this Chapter, means the exceptional hardship that would result from a failure to grant the requested variance. The City Council requires that the variance be exceptional, unusual, and specific to the property involved. Mere economic or financial hardship alone is not exceptional. Inconvenience, aesthetic considerations, physical handicaps, personal preferences, or the disapproval of one’s neighbors likewise cannot, as a rule, qualify as an exceptional hardship. All of these problems can be resolved through other means without granting a variance, even if the alternative is more expensive, requires the property owner to build elsewhere, to use the parcel differently than originally intended.

“Highest adjacent grade” means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.

“Historic structure” means any structure that is:

1.     Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register;

2.     Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;

3.     Individually listed on a State inventory of historic places in States with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or

4.     Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either by an approved State program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior in States with approved programs.

“Levee” means a manmade structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding.

“Levee system” means a flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accord with sound engineering practices.

“Lowest Adjacent Grade (LAG)” means that lowest ground elevation that is adjacent to and touching the footings of an existing or proposed structure.

“Lowest floor” means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area including basement. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, useable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area (see “basement”). This floor shall not be the structure’s lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements of this Chapter. (Note: This definition allows attached garages to be built at grade. Below grade garages are not allowed as they are considered to be basements.)

“Manufactured home” means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term “manufactured home” does not include a “recreational vehicle.”

“Manufactured home park or subdivision” mean a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.

“Mean sea level” means for the purpose of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map are referenced.

“Mudslide” (i.e., mudflow) describes a condition where there is a river, flow or inundation of liquid mud down a hillside, usually as a result of a dual condition of loss of brush cover and the subsequent accumulation of water on the ground, preceded by a period of unusually heavy or sustained rain.

“Mudslide (i.e., mudflow) prone area” means an area with land surfaces and slopes of unconsolidated material where the history, geology, and climate indicate a potential for mudflow.

“New construction” for floodplain management purposes, means structures for which the “start of construction” commenced on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by this community, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.

“New manufactured home park or subdivision” means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by this community.

“Obstruction” includes, but is not limited to, any dam, wall, embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, protection, excavation, channelization, bridge, conduit, culvert, building, wire, fence, rock, gravel, refuse, fill, structure, vegetation or other material in, along, across or projecting into any watercourse which may alter, impede, retard or change the direction and/or velocity of the flow of water, or due to its location, its propensity to snare or collect debris carried by the flow of water, or its likelihood of being carried downstream.

“One-hundred-year flood”—See “base flood.”

“Principal structure” means a structure used for the primary use distinguished from an accessory use.

“Public safety and nuisance” as related to Sections 17.34.260 through 17.34.280 of this Chapter, means the granting of a variance must not result in anything that is injurious to the safety or health of an entire community or neighborhood, or any considerable number of persons, or unlawfully obstructs the free passage or use, in the customary manner, of any navigable lake, or river, bay, stream, canal, or basin.

“Recreational vehicle” means a vehicle which is:

1.     Built on a single chassis;

2.     Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection;

3.     Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck; and

4.     Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use.

“Regulatory floodway” means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot.

“Riverine” means relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, etc.

“Sheet flow area”—see “area of shallow flooding.”

“Special flood hazard area (SFHA)” means an area having special flood, mudslide (i.e. mudflow), or flood-related erosion hazards, and shown on an FHBM or FIRM as Zone A, AO, A1-A30, AE, A99, AH, E, M, V1-V30, VE or V.

“Start of construction” includes substantial improvement and other proposed new development and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within 180 days from the date of the permit. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns or any work beyond the stage of excavation, or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include the following: land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; the installation of streets and/or walkways; excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.

“Structure” means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground; this includes a gas or liquid storage tank or a manufactured home.

“Substantial damage” means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its predamaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure.

“Substantial improvement” means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other proposed new development of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the “start of construction” of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred “substantial damage,” regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not include either:

1.     Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations or State or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are necessary to assure safe living conditions; or

2.     Any alteration of a “historic structure,” provided the alteration will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a “historic structure.”

“Variance” means a grant of relief from the requirements of this Chapter which permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this ordinance.

“Water surface elevation” means the height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, (or other datum, where specified) of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas.

“Watercourse” means a lake, river, creek, stream, wash, arroyo, channel or other topographic feature on or over which waters flow at least periodically. Watercourse includes specifically designated areas in which substantial flood damage may occur.

“Zone A” means Special Flood Hazard Area with no base flood elevations.

“Zone A1-A30” means Special Flood Hazard Area with base flood elevations.

“Zone AH” means Special Flood Hazard Area with flood depths of one to three feet (usually areas of ponding); base flood elevations determined.

“Zone AO” means Special Flood Hazard Area with flood depths of one to three feet (usually sheet flow on sloping terrain); average depths determined. For areas of alluvial fan flooding, velocities also determined.

“Zone A99” means Special Flood Hazard Area to be protected from the 100-year flood by a Federal flood protection system under construction; no base flood elevations determined.

“Zone AR” means Special Flood Hazard Area that results from the decertification of a previously accredited flood protection system that is determined to be in the process of being restored to provide a 100-year or grater level of flood protection.

“Zone B” means areas between the limits of the 100-year and 500-year flood; or certain areas subject to 100-year flooding with average depths less than one foot or where contributing drainage area is less than one square mile; or areas protected by levees from the 100-year flood.

“Zone C” means areas of minimal flooding.

“Zone D” means areas of undetermined, but possible flood hazards.

“Zone V” means Coastal Special Flood Hazard Areas with velocity hazard (wave action); no base flood elevations determined.

“Zone V1-V30” means Coastal Special Flood Hazard Areas with velocity hazard (wave action) and base flood elevations.

“Zone VE” means Coastal Special Flood Hazard Area with velocity hazard (wave action) and base flood elevations.

“Zone X (shaded)” means areas of 500-year flood; areas of 100-year flood with average depths less than one foot or where contributing drainage area is less than one square mile; or areas protected by levees from the 100-year flood.

“Zone X (unshaded)” means areas determined to be outside the 500-year floodplain.

 

FEMA Acronyms for Changes and Amendments to the FIRM.

“Conditional Letter of Map Amendment (CLOMA)” a letter from FEMA stating that a proposed structure(s) that is not to be elevated by fill (natural grade) would not be inundated by the base flood if built as proposed.

“Conditional Letter of Map Revision (CLOMR)” a letter from FEMA commenting on whether a proposed project, if built as proposed, would justify a map revision, or proposed hydrology changes.

“Conditional Letter of Map Revision due to Fill (CLOMR-F)” a letter from FEMA stating that a parcel of land or proposed structure(s) that will be elevated by fill would not be inundated by the base flood if fill is placed on the parcel as proposed or the structure(s) is built as proposed.

“Letter of Map Amendment (LOMA)” a letter from FEMA stating that an existing structure(s) or parcel of land that has not been elevated by fill (natural grade) would not be inundated by the base flood.

“Letter of Map Change (LOMC)” a letter from FEMA to revise or amend the flood hazard information shown on the FIRM or DFIRM without requiring the FIRM or DFIRM to be physically revised and republished.

“Letter of Map Revision (LOMR)” a letter from FEMA officially revising the current NFIP map to show the changes to the floodplain, regulatory floodway, or flood elevations.

“Letter of Map Revision due to Fill (LOMR-F)” a letter from FEMA stating that an existing structure(s) or parcel of land that has been elevated by fill would not be inundated by the base flood.

 

17.34.060 Lands to Which This Chapter Applies.
This Chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the jurisdiction of the City of Jackson.

 

17.34.070 Basis for Establishing the Areas of Special Flood Hazard.
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Insurance Administration (FIA) of the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) in the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) dated 09/28/90 and accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs), dated 09/28/90, and all subsequent amendments and/or revisions, are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this Chapter. This FIS and attendant mapping is the minimum area of applicability of this Chapter and may be supplemented by studies for other areas which allow implementation of this Chapter and which are recommended to the City Council by the floodplain administrator. The study, FIRMs and FNFMs are on file at the Jackson City Office, City Hall, 33 Broadway, Jackson, California.

 

17.34.080 Compliance.
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this Chapter and other applicable regulations. Violation of the requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Nothing herein shall prevent the City Council from taking such lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.

 

17.34.090 Abrogation and Greater Restrictions.
This Chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions; however, where this Chapter and another ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.

 

17.34.100 Interpretation.
In the interpretation and application of this Chapter, all provisions shall be:

A.    Considered as minimum requirements;

B.     Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and

C.     Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under State statutes.

 

17.34.110 Warning and Disclaimer of Liability.
The degree of flood protection required by this Chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This Chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards, or uses permitted within these areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This Chapter shall not create liability on the part of the City Council, any officer or employee thereof, the State of California, or the Federal Insurance Administration, Federal Emergency Management Agency, for flood damages that result from reliance on this Chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder.

 

17.34.120 Severability.
This Chapter and the various parts thereof are hereby declared to be severable. Should any section of this Chapter be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the chapter as a whole, or any portion thereof other than the section so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid.

 

17.34.130 Establishment of Development Permit.
A development permit shall be obtained before any construction or other development begins within any area of special flood hazard established in Section 17.34.070 (Basis for Establishing the Areas of Special Flood Hazard). Application for a development permit shall be made on forms furnished by the floodplain administrator and may include, but not be limited to: plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions, and elevation of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities; and the location of the foregoing. Specifically, the following information is required:

A.    Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor (including basement) of all structures in Zone AO, elevation of highest adjacent grade and proposed elevation of lowest floor of all structures; or

B.     Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any structure will be floodproofed, if required in Section 17.34.170(C)(3) (Standards of Construction); and

C.     All appropriate certifications listed in Section 17.34.150(D) (Duties and Responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator) of this Chapter; and

D.    Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development.

 

17.34.140 Designation of the Floodplain Administrator.
The City Manager or his/her designee shall be the floodplain administrator and shall have the authority to administer, implement and enforce this Chapter by granting or denying development permits in accord with its provisions.

 

17.34.150 Duties and Responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator.
The duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator shall include, but not be limited to, the following.

A.    Permit Review. Review all development permits to determine that:

1.     Permit requirements of this Chapter have been satisfied;

2.     All other required State and Federal permits have been obtained;

3.     The site is reasonably safe from flooding; and

4.     The proposed development does not adversely affect the carrying capacity of areas where base flood elevations have been determined but a floodway has not been designated. For purposes of this Chapter, “adversely affects” means that the cumulative effect of the proposed development when combined with all other existing and anticipated development will increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point.

B.     Review and Use of Any Other Base Flood Data. When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with Section 17.34.070 (Basis for Establishing the Areas of Special Flood Hazard), the floodplain administrator shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a Federal or State agency, or other source, in order to administer Sections 17.34.170 through 17.34.250. Any such information shall be submitted to the City Council for adoption.

C.     Notification of Other Agencies. In alteration or relocation of a watercourse:

1.     Notify adjacent communities and the California Department of Water Resources prior to alteration or relocation;

2.     Submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Insurance Administration, Federal Emergency Management Agency; and

3.     Assure that the flood-carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse is maintained.

D.    Documentation for Floodplain Development. Obtain and maintain for public inspection and make available as needed the following:

1.     Certification required by Section 17.34.170(C)(1) (floor elevations);

2.     Certification required by Section 17.34.170(C)(2) (elevation or floodproofing of nonresidential structures);

3.     Certification required by Section 17.34.170(C)(3) (wet floodproofing standard);

4.     Certification of elevation required by Section 17.34.190(B) (subdivision standards);

5.     Certification required by Section 17.34.220(A) (floodway encroachments);

6.     Information required by Section 17.34.230(F) (coastal construction standards); and

7.     Reports required by Section 17.34.240(D) (mudflow standards).

E.     Map Determinations. Make interpretations where needed, as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard, for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions. The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in Sections 17.34.260 through 17.34.280.

F.     Remedial Action. Take action to remedy violations of this Chapter as specified in Section 17.34.080 (Compliance).

 

17.34.160 Appeals.
The City Council shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the floodplain administrator in the enforcement or administration of this Chapter.

 

17.34.170 Standards of Construction.
In all areas of special flood hazards the following standards are required:

A.    Anchoring.

1.     All new construction and substantial improvements shall be adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy.

2.     All manufactured homes shall meet the anchoring standards of Section 17.34.200 (Standards for Manufactured Homes).

B.     Construction Materials and Methods. All new structures and substantial improvement shall be constructed:

1.     With materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage;

2.     Using methods and practices that minimize flood damage;

3.     With electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; and if

4.     Within Zones AH or AO, so that there are adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes to guide flood waters around and away from proposed structures.

C.     Elevation and Floodproofing. (See Section 17.34.050 (Definitions) for “new construction,” “substantial damage” and “substantial improvement.”

1.     Residential construction, new or substantial improvement, shall have the lowest floor, including basement:

a.     In an AO zone, elevated above the highest adjacent grade to a height equal to or exceeding the depth number specified in feet on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), or elevated at least two feet above the highest adjacent grade if no depth number is specified. The State of California recommends that the lowest flood be elevated above the highest adjacent grade if no depth number is specified.

b.     In an A zone, elevated to or above the base flood elevation, as determined by this community. The State of California recommends the lowest floor be elevated at least one foot above the base flood elevation, as determined by the Building Official.

c.     In all other zones, elevated to or above the base flood elevation. The State of California recommends the lowest floor be elevated at least one foot above the base flood elevation. Upon the completion of the structure, the elevation of the lowest floor including basement shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or surveyor, or verified by the Building Official to be properly elevated. Such certification or verification shall be provided to the floodplain administrator.

2.     Nonresidential construction shall either be elevated to conform with Section 17.34.170(C)(1) (floor elevations) or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities:

a.     Be floodproofed below the elevation recommended under Section 17.34.170(C)(1) (floor elevations) so that the structure will not sustain damage due to the passage of water;

b.     Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and

c.     Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the standards of this Section are satisfied. Such certification shall be provided to the floodplain administrator.

3.     All new construction and substantial improvement with fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor (excluding basements) that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, and which are subject to flooding, shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwater. Designs for meeting this requirement must exceed the following minimum criteria:

a.     Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect; or

b.     Be certified to comply with a local floodproofing standard approved by the Federal Insurance Administration, Federal Emergency Management Agency; or

c.     Have a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one food above grade. Openings may be equipped with screen, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwater.

4.     Manufactured homes shall also meet the standards in Section 17.34.200 (Floodways).

 

17.34.180 Standards for Utilities.
A.    All new and replacement water supply and sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate:

1.     Infiltration of flood waters into the system; and

2.     Discharge from systems into floodwaters.

B.     On-site waste disposal systems in the floodwaters shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.

 

17.34.190 Standards for Subdivisions.
A.    All preliminary subdivision proposals shall identify the flood hazard area and the level of the base flood.

B.     All subdivision plans will provide the elevation of proposed structure(s) and pad(s). If the site is filled above the base flood elevation, the final first floor and pad elevations shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or surveyor and provided to the floodplain administrator.

C.     All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.

D.    All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage.

E.     All subdivisions shall provide adequate drainage to reduce exposure to flood hazards.

 

17.34.200 Standards for Manufactured Homes.
A.    All manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved, within Zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map, on sites located:

1.     Outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision;

2.     In a new manufactured home park or subdivision;

3.     In an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision; or

4.     In an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on a site upon which a manufactured home has incurred “substantial damage” as the result of a flood, shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated to or above the base flood elevation (the State of California recommends at least one foot above the base flood elevation) and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and later movement.

B.     All manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved on sites located within Zones V1-30, V, and VE on the community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map will meet the requirements of Section 17.34.200(A).

C.     All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision within Zones A1-30, AH, AE, V1-30, V, and VE on the community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map that are not subject to the provisions of paragraph 17.20.200(A) will be elevated so that either:

1.     Lowest floor of the manufactured home is at or above the base flood elevation (the State of California recommends at least one foot above the base flood elevation); or

2.     Manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are not less than 36 inches in height above grade and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and later movement.

 

17.34.210 Standards for Recreational Vehicles.
A.    All recreational vehicles placed on sites within Zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map will either:

1.     Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days;

2.     Be fully licensed and ready for highway use. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions; or

3.     Meet the permit requirements of Sections 17.34.130 through 17.34.160 of this Chapter and the elevation and anchoring requirements for manufacture homes in Section 17.34.200(A).

B.     Recreational vehicles placed on sites within Zones V1-30, V, and VE on the community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map will meet the requirements of Section 17.34.210(A).

 

17.34.220 Floodways.
Locations within areas of special flood hazard established in Section 17.34.070 (Basis for Establishing the Areas of Special Flood Hazard) are designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles, and erosion potential, the following provisions apply.

A.    Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvement, and other new development unless certification by a registered professional engineer or architect is provided demonstrating that encroachments shall not result in any increase in (the base) flood elevation during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.

B.     If subsection A is satisfied, all new construction, substantial improvement, and other proposed new development shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of Sections 17.34.170 (Standards of Construction) through 17.34.250 (Flood-related Erosion-Prone Areas).

 

17.34.240 Mudslide Prone Areas.
A.    The floodplain administrator shall review permits for proposed construction of other development to determine if it is proposed within a mudslide area.

B.     Permits shall be reviewed to determine that the proposed site and improvement will be reasonably safe from mudslide hazards. Factors to be considered in making this determination include, but are not limited to, the:

1.     Type and quality of soils;

2.     Evidence of groundwater or surface water problems;

3.     Depth and quality of any fill;

4.     Overall slope of the site; and

5.     Weight that any proposed development will impose on the slope.

C.     Within areas which may have mudslide hazards, the floodplain administrator shall require that:

1.     A site investigation and further review be made by persons qualified in geology and soils engineering;

2.     The proposed grading, excavation, new construction, and substantial improvement be adequately designed and protected against mudslide damages;

3.     The proposed grading, excavation, new construction, and substantial improvement not aggravate the existing hazard by creating either on-site or off-site disturbances; and

4.     Drainage, planting, watering, and maintenance not endanger slope stability.

 

17.34.250 Flood-Related Erosion-Prone Areas.
A.    The floodplain administrator shall require permits for proposed construction and other development within all flood-related, erosion-prone areas identified by the community.

B.     Permit applications shall be reviewed to determine whether the proposed site alterations and improvements will be reasonably safe from flood-related erosion and will not cause flood-related erosion hazards or otherwise aggravate the existing hazard.

C.     If a proposed improvement is found to be in the path of flood-related erosion or would increase the erosion hazard, such improvement shall be relocated or adequate protective measures shall be taken to avoid aggravating the existing erosion hazard.

D.    Within Zone E on the Flood Insurance Rate Map, a setback is required for all new development from a body of water to create a safety buffer consisting of a natural vegetative or contour strip. This buffer shall be designated according to the flood-related erosion hazard and erosion rate, in relation to the anticipated “useful life” of structures, and depending upon the geologic, hydrologic, topographic, and climatic characteristics of the land. The buffer may be used for suitable open space purposes, such as for agricultural, forestry, outdoor recreation and wildlife habitat areas, and for other activities using temporary and portable structures only.

 

17.34.260 Nature of Variance.
A.    The variance criteria set forth in this Section are based on the general principle of zoning law that variances pertain to a piece of property and are not personal in nature. A variance may be granted for a parcel of property with physical characteristics so unusual that complying with the requirements of this ordinance would create an exceptional hardship to the applicant or the surrounding property owners. The characteristics must be unique to the property and not be shared by adjacent parcels. The unique characteristic must pertain to the land itself, not to the structure, its inhabitants, or the property owners.

B.     It is the duty of the City Council to help protect its citizens from flooding. This need is so compelling and the implications of the cost of insuring a structure built below flood level are so serious that variances from the flood elevation or from other requirements in the flood ordinance are quite rare. The long term goal of preventing and reducing flood loss and damage can only be met if variances are strictly limited. Therefore, the variance guidelines provided in this Chapter are more detailed and contain multiple provisions that must be met before a variance can be properly granted. The criteria are designed to screen out those situations in which alternatives other than a variance are more appropriate.

 

17.34.270 Variance - Appeal Board.
A.    In passing upon requests for variance, the City Council shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other sections of this Chapter, and the:

1.     Danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others;

2.     Danger of life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;

3.     Susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the existing individual owner and future owners of the property;

4.     Importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community;

5.     Necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable;

6.     Availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;

7.     Compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development;

8.     Relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area;

9.     Safety of access to the property in time of flood for emergency vehicles;

10.   Expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the flood waters expected at the site; and

11.   Costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water system, and streets and bridges.

B.     Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice over the signature of a community official that:

1.     The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as $25 for each $100 of insurance coverage; and

2.     Such construction below the base flood level increases risks to life and property. It is recommended that a copy of the notice shall be recorded by the floodplain administrator in the office of the County Recorder and shall be recorded in a manner so that it appears in the chain of title of the affected parcel of land.

C.     The floodplain administrator will maintain a record of all variance actions, including justification for their issuance, and report such variance issued in its biennial report submitted to the Federal Insurance Administration and Federal Emergency Management Agency.

 

17.34.280 Conditions for Variances.
A.    Generally, variances may be issued for new construction, substantial improvement, and other proposed new development to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing that the procedures of Sections 17.34.130 through 17.34.250 have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases.

B.     Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of “historic structures” (as defined in Section 17.34.050 Definitions) upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as an historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure.

C.     Variance shall not be issued within any mapped regulatory floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.

D.    Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the “minimum necessary” considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. “Minimum necessary” means to afford relief with a minimum of deviation from the requirements of this ordinance. For example, in the case of variances to an elevation requirement, this means the governing body need not grant permission for the applicant to build at grade, or even to whatever elevation the applicant proposes, but only to that elevation which the governing body believes will both provide relief and preserve the integrity of the local ordinance.

E.     Variances shall only be issued upon a:

1.     Showing of good and sufficient cause;

2.     Determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional “hardship” (as defined in Section 17.34.050 Definitions) to the applicant; and

3.     Determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, or extraordinary public expense, create a nuisance (as defined in Section 17.34.050 Definitions—see “public safety or nuisance”), cause fraud or victimization (as defined in Section 17.34.050 Definitions) of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.

F.     Variances may be issued for new construction, substantial improvement, and other proposed development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that the provisions of subsections A and through E are satisfied and that the structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damage during the base flood and does not result in additional threats to public safety and does not create a public nuisance.

G.    Upon consideration of the factors of Section 17.34.270(C) and the purposes of this Chapter, the City Council may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this Chapter.

 

Chapter 17.36 HILLSIDE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
17.36.010 Purpose of Chapter.
This Chapter establishes regulations for development within hillside areas in order to:

A.    Preserve and protect the views to and from hillside areas in order to maintain the identity, image and environmental quality of the City of Jackson;

B.     Ensure that development in the hillside areas is concentrated on the most level portions of the site, is in locations with the least environmental impact, and is designed to fit the existing landforms;

C.     Preserve significant features of the natural topography, including swales, canyons, knolls, ridgelines, and rock outcrops;

D.    Correlate intensity of development with the steepness of terrain in order to minimize the impact of grading, unnecessary removal of vegetation, land instability, and fire hazards; and

E.     Provide alternative approaches to conventional flat land development practices by achieving land use patterns and intensities that are consistent with the natural characteristics of hillside areas including slopes, land form, vegetation and scenic quality.

 

17.36.020 Applicability.
A.    Hillside area. The standards of this Chapter apply to all existing and proposed lots, uses, subdivisions, and structures proposed on development sites with an average slope of 10 percent or greater or on development sites with any slopes of 20 percent or greater; except that single-family dwellings, secondary residential units, duplexes, and residential accessory structures shall be exempt from the provisions of this Chapter.

B.     Basis for slope determinations. For the purpose of this Chapter, slope shall be computed on the natural slope of the land before grading is commenced, as determined from a topographic map having a scale of not less than one inch equals 100 feet and a contour interval of not more than five feet. See Chapter 17.220 (Definitions, Glossary) for definitions on simple slope and complex slope and how to measure slope.

C.     Use Permit required. Hillside developments (other than subdivisions) with any improvements, including roads, streets, and driveways, proposed on slopes of 20 percent or greater shall be subject to the approval of a Use Permit in compliance with Chapter 17.76 (Use Permits and Minor Use Permits). A soil and geotechnical study that identifies special constraints and mitigation measures to minimize grading, unstable soils, and erosion shall accompany the use permit application. The geotechnical study shall also analyze the landslide hazards of the site and their potential effect.

 

17.36.030 Application Content.
Land use permit and subdivision applications for projects proposed within hillside areas shall include all information and materials required by Section 17.70.040 (Application Preparation and Filing), and all additional information required by the City Planner on the basis of site topography.

 

17.36.040 Standards for Hillside Development.
A.    Minimum lot area. The minimum lot area for new subdivisions in hillside areas shall be determined by the applicable zoning district, except where housing units are clustered and the project is approved as a Planned Development in compliance with Chapter 17.78 (Planned Developments).

B.     Clustered development required. Proposed hillside development shall be clustered in compliance with Chapter 17.46 (Open Space/Cluster Requirements).

C.     Preservation of steep slopes. Slopes of 30 percent or greater shall be permanently preserved as open space. Permanent open space areas may be used in compliance with Section 17.46.060 (Open Space Standards). Grading, structures, and/or streets on slopes exceeding 20% shall be avoided if there is sufficient area on the site with slopes less than 20% to accommodate development and streets. The Planning Commission may authorize grading and structures on slopes exceeding 30% only if the Commission finds there is not sufficient area on the parcel with slopes less than 30% to accommodate a reasonable development, and measures have been incorporated into the development to minimize disturbance of the terrain (e.g. use of stem walls, split foundations).

D.    Setbacks between structures and slopes. Proposed structures shall be set back from slopes as follows, based on the difference in the vertical elevation between adjoining parcels. The difference in vertical elevation shall be measured as shown in Figure 3-9. (See Figure 3-9, Slope Setbacks)



Figure 3-9 Slope Setbacks

1.     On adjacent parcels having a difference in vertical elevation of three feet or more, the required side yard shall be measured from the toe or top of slope to a structure, whichever is nearer.

2.     On adjacent parcels having a difference in vertical elevation of six feet or more, the minimum distance between the toe or top of the slope, whichever is nearer, and a main structure shall be 15 feet. Greater setbacks may be required when elevation changes greater than six feet are proposed.

E.     Height limits. The height of structures in a hillside area shall not exceed the maximum established by the applicable zoning district. Measurement of structure height shall be as provided in Section 17.30.090 (Height Measurement and Height Limit Exceptions). Lesser heights may be required where the structure may impair prominent views to or from hillside areas or ridgelines or where a proposed structure’s height intrudes on the flow of adjacent houses and roof lines.

F.     Grading and drainage.

1.     Grading shall be designed to:

a.     Conserve natural topographic features and appearances by minimizing the amount of cut and fill and by means of landform grading to blend graded slopes and benches with the natural topography; and

b.     Retain major natural topographic features (i.e., canyons, knolls, ridgelines, and landmarks).

2.     Grading plans shall identify slopes that are to be landform graded. “Landform grading” means a contour grading method that creates artificial slopes with curves and varying slope ratios in the horizontal plane designed to simulate the appearance of the surrounding natural terrain. (See Figure 3-10, Landform Grading)

 



 

Figure 3-10 Landform Grading

 

3.     Lot pad grading for subdivisions shall be limited to the structure footprint, vehicle parking space and a yard area as shown on the approved grading plan. Lot pad grading shall be reviewed and approved as part of the subdivision process. Pads shall not exceed 5,000 square feet in total area. Smaller pad areas may be required to preserve natural vegetation, landforms, rock outcroppings, etc.

4.     Cut and fill slopes shall be designed and constructed to not exceed a vertical height of 10 feet, unless the review authority approves slopes of greater height with benching, terracing, and/or the use of retaining walls.

5.     All graded areas shall be protected from wind and water erosion. Interim erosion control plans shall be required, certified by the project engineer, and reviewed and approved by the City Engineer. Permanent erosion control measures in accordance with standard Best Management Practices shall be required.

6.     Slopes created by grading shall not exceed a ratio of 2:1 (horizontal: vertical), except where the City Engineer determines that a greater slope is appropriate, based on a soils report and stabilization study.

 

17.36.050 Design Criteria for Hillside Development.
The following design criteria shall be implemented in the design and construction of projects on hillsides whenever applicable:

A.    Preservation of topography. The natural contour of the site is an important characteristic of the site, and new buildings should try to minimize alterations to the perceived slope of the area. Site grading should be sensitive to existing landforms and topography so that the natural setting may be preserved to the greatest extent possible. Every effort should be made to minimize the limits of construction on the site, and all stockpiling of materials and equipment and equipment storage should occur within those limits. Abrupt grade changes on property lines should not be permitted. Grade changes within tree driplines should be avoided.

B.     Terrain alteration. The project shall be designed to fit the terrain rather than altering the terrain to fit the project. Development patterns which form visually protruding horizontal bands or steeply cut slopes for roads or lots shall be avoided.

C.     Street layout. Streets shall follow the natural contours of the terrain in order to minimize the need for grading. Cul-de-sacs and loop roads are encouraged where necessary to fit the natural topography subject to the approval of the City Engineer and the Fire Chief.

D.    Site and structure design. Site design shall utilize varying structure and setbacks, heights, split-level foundations, and retaining walls to terrace structures with the direction of the slope.

E.     Lot line locations. Lot lines shall be placed at the top of slope areas to help ensure that the slope will not be neglected by the up-hill owner. (See Figure 3-11, Lot Line Location)

 



Figure 3-11 Lot Line Location

 

F.     Design and location of structures. Structures proposed on slopes shall be designed and located as follows.

1.     The form, mass, and profile of individual buildings and architectural features shall be designed to blend with the natural terrain and preserve the character and profile of the natural slope. Some techniques which may be considered include:

a.     Split pads, stepped footings and grade separations to permit structure to step up the natural slope.

b.     Detaching parts of a dwelling (e.g., a garage).

2.     Excessive cantilevers should be avoided on downhill building elevations.

3.     Structures should be placed partly underground or utilize below grade rooms to reduce effective bulk and to provide energy efficient and environmentally desirable spaces. However, the visible area of the building shall be minimized through a combined use of re-grading and landscaping techniques.

4.     Roofs on lower levels should be used as the deck open space of upper levels.

5.     Architectural treatment shall be provided to all visible sides of the structure.

6.     Exterior structural supports and undersides of floors and decks not enclosed by walls shall be allowed only if fire safety and aesthetic considerations have been adequately addressed.

7.     To the extent possible, the width of a building measured in the direction of the slope, shall be minimized in order to limit the amount of cutting and filling and to better “fit” the house to the natural terrain.

8.     Structures shall be placed to minimize disturbance of natural vegetation on all lots but particularly on lots with slopes of 10 percent or greater.

G.    Retaining walls. Large retaining walls in a uniform plane shall be avoided. Retaining walls over five feet in height shall be divided into elements and terraces with landscaping to screen them from view. Generally, no retaining wall should be higher than 10 feet. Where feasible, retaining walls should be constructed of the same materials as the primary buildings on the site. (See Figure 3-12, Retaining Wall Design)

 



Figure 3-12 Retaining Wall Design

 

H.    Open space preservation. Open space may be preserved by reducing the width of street improvements, reducing sidewalk widths, using common driveways and clustering units subject to the approval of the City Engineer and Fire Chief.

I.      Slope restoration. Transitional slopes shall be replanted with self-sufficient trees, shrubs and ground cover that are compatible with existing surrounding vegetation in order to enhance the blending of manufactured and natural slopes. Cuts and fills shall have good surface drainage and shall be revegetated and terraced or controlled by retaining walls to protect against erosion and sedimentation. (See Figure 3-13, Slope Restoration)

 



Figure 3-13 Slope Restoration

 

J.      Road alignment. The alignment of roads and driveways should follow the contours of the site. By meandering roads and driveways to follow landforms, it is possible to minimize cuts and fills, preserve natural drainage patterns, and produce roads that are easily negotiated. Roads should not be constructed perpendicular to contours.

K.    Reduced street widths. On-street parking lanes may be omitted from streets when the result is a substantial decrease in cutting and/or filling. Off-street parking areas shall be provided to yield a ratio of one additional space per dwelling unit.

L.     Preservation of ridgelines. Ridgelines shall be preserved. Structures located adjacent to prominent ridgelines should complement, rather than provide a stark contrast with, the natural landform(s). Structures shall not be closer to a prominent ridgeline than 100 feet measured horizontally on a topographic map. In no case, shall the roofline or any other portion of a structure extend above the line of sight between a ridgeline and any public right-of-way, whether the ridgeline is above or below the right-of-way. (See Figure 3-14, Development Preserves Ridgeline)

 



Figure 3-14 Development Preserves Ridgeline

 

17.36.060 Criteria for Use Permit Approval.
The Commission shall evaluate a Use Permit application for hillside development based on the following objectives, and the findings required for Use Permits by Chapter 17.76 (Use Permits and Minor Use Permits):

A.    The preservation of natural topographic features and appearances by means of landform grading so as to blend constructed slopes into the natural topography;

B.     The preservation of natural topographic features and appearances through restrictions on successive padding and terracing of building sites;

C.     The retention of major natural topographic features - drainage courses, steep slopes, watershed areas, vernal pools, view corridors, and scenic vistas;

D.    The preservation and enhancement of landmark features - ridgelines, rock outcroppings, heritage sized trees and woodlands, mining ruins, other points of historical interest, and other areas of special natural beauty;

E.     The use of varying setbacks, building heights, foundation designs and compatible building forms, materials, and colors which serve to blend buildings into the terrain;

F.     The use of clustered sites and buildings on more gently sloping terrain so as to reduce grading alterations on steeper slopes;

G.    The use of building designs, locations, and arrangements which do not intrude with the skyline effect and which afford view privacy and protection;

H.    The preservation and introduction of plant materials to protect slopes from soil erosion and slippage and minimize the visual effects of grading and construction of hillside areas; and

I.      The use of street designs and improvements which serve to minimize grading alterations and harmonize with the natural contours and character of the hillsides.

 

 

 

Chapter 17.38 STREAM CORRIDOR DEVELOPMENT
17.38.010 Purpose of Chapter.
This Chapter provides standards for development adjacent to Jackson Creek and other significant streams throughout the City to:

A.    Provide appropriate buffer areas between proposed development and Jackson Creek and other designated stream corridors, to protect valuable environmental, scenic, and recreational resources; and

B.     Protect the public health, safety, and welfare.

 

17.38.020 Applicability.
The provisions of this Chapter apply to property adjoining the Jackson Creek, its tributaries and any other significant stream in the City of Jackson.

 

17.38.030 Application Content.
Land use permit and subdivision applications for projects on parcels that include a 100-year floodplain or are located within 100 feet of a 100-year floodplain shall include all information and materials required by Section 17.70.040 (Application Preparation and Filing) and shall show 100-year floodplains, floodways, and base flood elevations in relation to the parcel. This flood information shall be certified by a registered engineer.

 

17.38.040 Stream Development Standards.
A.    Setback requirements. Proposed development shall be designed and constructed to provide the following minimum setbacks from adjacent waterways. See Chapter 17.220 (Definitions, Glossary) for definition of the 100-year floodplain referenced in this Chapter.

1.     Jackson Creek or its tributaries. Proposed structures shall be set back from adjacent streams as follows:

a.     Structures proposed on parcels with an average depth of 175 feet or more shall be set back a minimum of 50 feet from the edge of the 100-year floodplain of any stream;

b.     The required stream setback for structures proposed on parcels with an average depth of less than 175 feet shall be determined by the following formula, except that no setback shall be less than 20 feet:

Required setback in feet = 50 - (175 - parcel depth).

For example, a structure proposed on a parcel with a depth of 163 feet would have a required setback of 38 feet (50 - (175 - 163) = 38).

c.     Structures proposed adjacent to streams for which the 100-year floodplain has not been determined or mapped, shall be set back a minimum of 100 feet from the centerline of the stream channel.

d.     Structures proposed adjacent to streams that have been channelized by manmade improvements prior to the adoption and effective date of this Development Code shall be set back a minimum of 20 feet from the improvements. Channelized shall mean improvements that have altered and replaced the natural alignment of the stream.

2.     Setback reduction in RS district. The required setback from the 100-year floodplain of the Jackson Creek, tributaries and other streams may be reduced in the residential zoning districts based on the averaging of the setbacks of structures on adjoining parcels, where 25 percent or more of the parcels in any one block have been improved with structures as of the effective date of this Development Code. In these cases, proposed structures shall be set back from the edge of the 100-year floodplain by no less than the average of the setbacks of the existing structures on the block.

3.     Variances. Setback requirements may be decreased if a Variance is approved by the Building Official in compliance with Chapter 17.82 (Variance and Historic Variances). Approval of the Variance shall be based on findings consistent with the purpose and intent of this Chapter and with Chapter 17.82 (Variances and Historic Variances).

4.     Bridges and drainage structures. Bridges, crossings, and drainage structures and facilities may be allowed in the required setback if approved by the City Engineer and approvals are obtained from all agencies with permitting authority.

B.     Use of setback areas.

1.     Structures. Fences and other structures, parking access, parking space(s), paved areas (not including trails, paths, walkways, and small sitting areas), or swimming pools, shall not be constructed within required setbacks.

2.     Grading and landscaping. Grading or filling (not including trails, paths and walkways, and small sitting areas not exceeding 300 square feet), planting of exotic/nonnative or nonriparian plant species, or the removal of native vegetation except for fire safety, shall not be permitted within a setback area.

3.     Drainage structures. Where constructed drainage devices and improvements are required, they shall be placed in the least visible locations and naturalized through the use of river rock, earth tone concrete, and native landscaping.

4.     Allowed projections. Architectural features may extend beyond the wall of the structure and into the setback area in compliance with the following:

a.     Balconies, bay windows, and other cantilevered features may extend five feet into the setback area;

b.     Canopies, cornices, eaves, and roof overhangs may extend five feet into the setback area;

c.     Decks and porches, which may be roofed but is otherwise unenclosed, may extend six feet into the setback area provided any foundation, piers, supports, or other structural connections to the ground comply with the required setback.

C.     Flood hazard areas. Development proposed in areas of flood hazard shall comply with the floodplain regulations in Chapter 17.34 (Floodplain Management).

D.    Drainage easements. Uses and activities set forth in subsection B shall not be permitted within open space easements created for waterways, or within drainage easements established and shown on subdivision maps.

 

 

 

Chapter 17.40 LANDSCAPE STANDARDS
17.40.010 Intent and Purpose.
It is the intent of this Chapter to promote the planting and care of new and additional trees and landscaping, and to conserve trees and other foliage wherever practical. Grading and construction shall be planned so as to maximize the retention of established trees. These efforts will serve in a significant way to enhance aesthetic and economic values of the community, and to maximize the related effects of erosion control, ground water recharge, and local air quality. Hence to carry out this intent, the purpose of this Chapter is to provide guidelines and performance requirements that are reasonable, beneficial and equitable.

 

17.40.020 Definitions.
For the purpose of this Section phrases shall be defined as follows:

A.    “Development” means construction, reconstruction or structural alteration of a building or exterior use, and establishment, enlargement or conversion of any land use and the development of any site, except for the construction or major expansion of any individual single-family home.

B.     “Landscape plans” means site-specific design, plans and specifications for the type, size, placement, removal, irrigation and maintenance of existing, new and additional trees, shrubs, grasses and ground cover.

 

17.40.030 Installation.
A.    All development requiring approval by the Planning Commission shall also be required to have a landscape plan which shall be subjects to approval by the Planning Commission. All development proposals subject to Planning Commission approval shall include a topographical map accurately showing all trees and other prominent landscape features. Landscape plans shall be prepared by a qualified professional.

B.     For trees designated to be saved by the Planning Commission, a minimum of four-foot tall brightly colored synthetic fence shall be installed at the outermost edge of the drip line (the farthest point of reach of any branch) of each protected tree or group of protected trees. The fences must be installed prior to the commencement of any grading operations or the access of any vehicles or construction equipment.

C.     All development (excluding individual single-family home construction, reconstruction or structural alternation) shall have an approved landscape plan, as a part of and along with, site development and improvement plans. The work, facilities and materials called for in such plans shall be certified, complete and in place prior to any occupancy. No occupancy shall be permitted before completion of work in conformance with the approved site development/landscape plan.

D.    A temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued due to circumstantial or seasonal limitations, upon the posting of surety in the form of faithful performance and labor and materials bonds, and covering the full cost of the plantings, irrigation and related labor.

 

17.40.035 Fees and Security.
A fee equal to reasonable cost of processing landscaping plan reviews, not to exceed 10 percent of the professionally estimated cost of the landscaping to be installed, shall be established by the City Manager. If a surety is required as a condition of plan approval, it shall be equal to 100 percent of the established cost of the landscaping (including irrigation to be installed).

 

17.40.040 Recommended Species and Size.
A.    Tree and shrub varieties called for on a site development landscape plan shall consist of approved native species or regionally compatible species as listed in the following sources:

1.     “Drought Tolerant Landscape for Amador County,” published by Amador County Water Agency;

2.     “New Western Garden Book,” published by Sunset Magazine;

3.     Supplemental professional sources specifying plants for dry climate;

4.     As approved a licensed landscape architect familiar with local conditions.

B.     Minimum tree size shall be 15 gallons. Minimum shrub size shall be five gallons. Exception to this requirement (i.e., more plantings of smaller size) may be approved when site conditions or local availability warrant.

 

17.40.050 Street Trees—All Residential and Nonresidential Developments.
Approved plant species shall be located in such a manner as to shade, shield or buffer land uses. Street tree plantings, as illustrated on the landscape plan shall:

A.    Be a minimum of one tree per 40 feet of lot frontage;

B.     Be planned to provide shade and aesthetic values to sidewalks and streets compatible with necessary sight distance, street lighting, signage and maintenance;

C.     Avoid interference with construction, maintenance and operation of utilities and services above or below ground. Trees shall be planted so that upon maturity, their branches do not come within 10 feet of uninsulated conductors;

D.    Not interfere with public sidewalk locations, existing or planned;

E.     Be protected from vehicular movement by unmountable curb or barrier.

 

17.40.060 Irrigation Systems.
A.    The irrigation system shall incorporate multiple regulator mechanisms when required to separate drought tolerant from nondrought tolerant plant material. The establishment of a permanent method of minimum water consumption shall be the primary objective in the design of the irrigation system, which shall include drip emitters, bubbler heads, micro spray units and similar devices.

B.     Electrically controlled irrigation systems shall have the capability to accept ground moisture sensors and/or automatic rain shut-off devices.

C.     Open water bodies, including, but not limited to, ponds, decorative fountains, basins, reflective pools and spray/mist fountains, are not recommended as landscaping features unless nonconsumptive, i.e., recirculating sustained flow.

 

17.40.070 Criteria for Tree Removal.
A.    All development shall conserve trees. A minimum of 3:1 replacement ratio shall apply upon removal of any such tree having a diameter greater than sixteen inches at four and one-half feet from grade. Oak trees removed shall be replaced with like species. Trees planted as replacements shall be maintained for five years, and again replaced and maintained if they fail to survive within that period.

B.     No person shall cut down or remove any tree having a diameter of eight inches or greater on any public property, without review and approval by the Planning Commission.

C.     Any development proposal which calls for the removal of any tree having a diameter of eight inches or greater shall require Planning Commission approval. The subject determination will be based upon reasonable criteria, including, but not limited to, the following;

1.     The condition of the tree with respect to its general health, damage, status as a public nuisance or traffic hazard, danger of falling, interface with utility services, and its status as host for parasitic plants, pests or diseases endangering other species of trees or plants with infection or infestation;

2.     The topography of the land and the effect of the requested action on soil retention, water retention, and diversion or increased flow of surface water. Developers are encouraged to work with existing terrain;

3.     The number, species, size and location of existing trees in the area and the effect of the requested action on historic values, scenic beauty, shade areas, air pollution and the general welfare of the City as a whole.

 

17.40.080 Tree Placement for Parking Areas.
Trees and planting areas shall be provided within and abutting the perimeter of parking areas and shall meet the following conditions:

A.    Planting areas shall be located so every parking space or portion thereof is not more than forty feet from the trunk of a tree within a planting area.

B.     Planting areas shall be separated from parking spaces, drives and alleys by an unmountable curb or barrier. The curb or barrier shall be constructed in such a manner that rainwater runoff will not damage the tree. Planting areas shall be of a size suitable to meeting the needs of the tree at maturity.

 

These requirements shall not apply when the parking area is to be shaded with solar panels. (Ord. 707 §1, 2019)

 

17.40.090 Tree Removal from Undeveloped Property in Anticipation of Development Prohibited.
Removal of any trees having a minimum trunk diameter of eight inches measured from grade on any undeveloped parcel within the City in anticipation of developing that parcel without advance approval of the Planning Commission is strictly prohibited.

 

17.40.100 Hardships—Remedies.
A.    When it is determined by the Planning Commission that compliance with these regulations would create an unreasonable hardship, relief may be granted from those provisions that cause the hardship. Determination of unreasonable hardship shall be based upon an overall evaluation including the following factors:

1.     The cost of the landscaping;

2.     The cost of the construction of the project;

3.     The nature of the landscaping that would be gained or lost;

4.     Physical site restraints;

5.     Legal restriction.

B.     The Planning Commission will advise an equivalent remedy when a hardship has been determined, such as in-lieu fees, alternative off-site landscaping, or combination thereof.

 

17.40.110 Appeals.
A decision of the Planning Commission denying tree removal pursuant to this Chapter may be appealed to the City Council. Appeals shall be in writing, signed by the appellant, stating the reasons for the appeal, accompanying an amount as specified by resolution, and filed with the City within 10 days of Planning Commission action. The appeal shall be heard by the City Council meeting following the receipt of the appeal.

 

17.40.120 Violation—Penalty.
Any person violating any provision of this Chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor, provided, however, that any such violation may be charged as an infraction, where deemed in the interest of justice by the District attorney. Additionally, and without limitation on the authority or action of the District attorney, the City Manager or his/her designee may direct that work be halted on any development subject to this Section until any violation of this Section is corrected, or until an appropriate course of action for remedial measures is determined. The City Manager or his/her designee may also convene an administrative hearing or alternatively docket for Planning Commission review to determine if a violation occurred and, if so, to assess an administrative penalty. The penalty would require the replacement, at the violator’s expense, of any tree irreparably cut or damaged with one or more trees of sufficient size and maturity to fulfill the intent and purpose of this Section.

 

 

 

Chapter 17.43 LIGHTING REGULATIONS
17.43.010 Purpose of Chapter.
It is the intent of this Chapter to establish rules and regulations for the reduction and restriction of unnecessary and excessive stray light as given off by exterior lighting sources on commercial and residential buildings during the nighttime hours. The excessive stray light emitted from exterior lighting sources within the City constitutes a form of visual pollution that interferes with the enjoyment of the nighttime visual environment for citizens in and around the City of Jackson

 

17.43.020 Definitions.
For the purpose of this Chapter phrases shall be defined as follows:

Color Rendering Index (CRI). A method for describing the effect of a light source on the color appearance of objects being illuminated, with 100 representing the reference condition and is the CRI of natural outdoor light or a 100-watt incandescent bulb. In general, a lower CRI indicated that some colors may appear unnatural when illuminated by a lamp.

Correlated Color Temperature (CCT). A description of the color appearance of a light source in terms of warmth or coolness, as measured on the Kelvin scale (K). As the temperature rises, the color appearance shifts from yellow to blue. Lamps with a low CCT (3000K or less) have a yellow-white color appearance and are generally described as “warm.” Lamps with a high CCT (4000K and higher) have a blue-white color appearance and are described as “cool.”

Full Cut Off Light Fixture. A light fixture so designed that no light rays are directly emitted by the installed fixture at angles above the horizontal plane as certified by a photometric test report. As a practical matter, the light source cannot be seen when viewed on a plane horizontal with the bottom of the shade or shield.

High Intensity Discharge (HID) Lamp. A term for a lamp or light source characterized by an arc tube which encloses various gases and metal salts operating at relative high pressures and temperatures. Common HID lamps are mercury vapor, metal halide and high-pressure sodium.

Light Emitting Diode (L.E.D.). A light source where light is produced by passing an electric current through a semi-conductor diode. Intensity and color may change as a function of the energy level and type of semi-conductor material used.

 

17.43.030 Citywide Lighting Regulations.
The following regulations shall apply to all lighting within the City of Jackson, unless otherwise indicated:

A.    No High Intensity Discharge lights may be utilized in any exterior application within the City.

B.     No lights or lamps with a Correlated Color Temperature of higher than 2400 K or a Color Rendering Index of lower than 70 may be utilized on any exterior within the City.

 

17.43.040 Residential Lighting Regulations.
A.    All exterior lighting, including motion-sensitive lighting, will be provided by full cut-off fixtures that by design have a cut-off angle of not more than 90 degrees, properly installed so as to maintain the full cut-off angle of 90 degrees. Fixtures which are shielded by a structural element so as to meet the intent of a full cut-off fixture shall be considered to be in compliance.

B.     Non-seasonal lights that blink, flash, rotate, move, or change in intensity or color and “wall washer” lights are prohibited with or without cut-off design.

C.     Exterior lighting fixtures will be mounted no higher than 10 feet above the flooring, deck, walkway, driveway or other occupied area, or highest grade point of the ground surface immediately adjacent to the lighting fixture. The height of the fixture shall be vertical distance from the surface directly below the centerline of the fixture to the lowest direct light emitting part of the fixture.

 

17.43.050 Commercial Lighting Regulations.
The following commercial lighting regulation apply to all property within the Commercial, Limited Commercial, Historic Commercial, Professional Office, and Public zones and those areas of a Planned Development utilized for commercial purposes:

A.    All exterior lighting shall be provided by full cut-off fixtures that by design have a cut-of angle of not more than 90 degrees, properly installed so as to maintain the full cut-off angle of 90 degrees. Fixtures which are shielded by a structural element so as to meet the intent of a full cut-off fixture shall be considered to be in compliance.

B.     Lights which blink, flash, rotate, move, or change in color or intensity are prohibited.

C.     Exterior lighting fixtures will be mounted no higher than 13 feet above the flooring, deck, walkway, driveway or other occupied area, or highest grade point of the ground surface immediately adjacent to the lighting fixture. The height of the fixture shall be vertical distance from the surface directly below the centerline of the fixture to the lowest direct light emitting part of the fixture.

D.    Temporary, ornamental lighting shall be allowed from October 15th to January 15th, and in all other times, for periods not to exceed 72 hours. Such lighting shall be deemed temporary if it is not of such permanent electrical wiring as would be deemed permanent under any applicable electrical code enforceable with the City.

E.     Rope lights or L.E.D. lights that do not conform to Section 17.43.040 (Residential Lighting Regulations) are prohibited, unless they are temporary, ornamental lighting otherwise permitted.

F.     The illumination of signs shall comply with Chapter 17.54 (Sign Regulations) of this code.

 

17.43.060 Street Parking and Security Lighting.
The requirements for street, parking, and security lighting set forth in this Section, except where specifically exempted, apply to all zoning districts within the City.

A.    All street, parking, and security lights will utilize full cut-off fixtures that by design have a cut-off angle of not more than 90 degrees, properly installed so as to maintain the full cut-off angle of 90 degrees. Fixtures which are shielded by a structural element so as to meet the intent of a full cut-off fixture shall be considered to be in compliance.

B.     Lighting fixtures shall be mounted no higher than 15 feet above a parking or street surface.

 

17.43.070 Exemptions and Nonconforming Fixtures.
The following exterior light fixtures shall be exempt from the regulation contained in this Section.

A.    Illumination of the United States flag, provided that such lighting does not interfere with the vision of drivers or pedestrians, or otherwise create an unsafe condition for the public. No more than two lights per pole are allowed.

B.     Fixtures which are part of an official traffic control device.

C.     Lights and lighting devices which are part of a City event or public gathering, so long as the event or gathering is of a temporary nature and licensed or permitted under other provisions of the Municipal Code.

D.    Lights which highlight theatre marquees, if approved by the Site Plan Review Committee.

E.     Historic light fixtures which are part of a historic property and add to the historic character of the property.

F.     Lights which illuminate public outdoor recreation facilities. Such lighting shall be designed to minimize light pollution.

G.    Other fixtures which, by their nature, use, and design, present a compelling argument for the promotion of public health, safety, and welfare as determined by the Building Official or Chief of Police.

 

17.43.080 Maintenance and Repairs of Nonconforming Fixtures.
Nonconforming fixtures may be maintained and repaired; however, any structural change in a nonconforming fixture or the addition of any fixtures shall be consistent with the provisions of this Chapter. Nonconforming fixtures that are destroyed or damaged to an extent in excess of 25 percent shall be replaced or repaired by a fixture which conforms to the provisions of this Chapter.

 

 

 

Chapter 17.44 NOISE
17.44.010 Purpose of Chapter.
This Chapter establishes standards for the elimination and regulation of noise disturbances in order to protect the health, safety, welfare, and living/working environments of those living and working in the City.

 

17.44.020 Noise Complaints.
Persons who believe that noise sources exceed any of the standards provided in this Section may file a complaint with the appropriate City department as follows:

A.    Planning Department. Noise complaints regarding the following types of noise sources shall be directed to the Planning Department:

1.     Commercial (non-governmental) repair or testing of aircraft, boats, or motor vehicles;

2.     Loading and unloading activities;

3.     Stationary, non-emergency, non-residential sources; or

4.     Construction activity.

B.     Police Department. Noise complaints regarding the following types of noise sources shall be directed to the Police Department. This Development Code does not contain procedures for regulating or enforcing standards related to these noise sources:

1.     Animals;

2.     Emergency signaling alarms or devices;

3.     Motor vehicles (including alarms, radios, tape or disc players, etc.);

4.     Places with dance permits; or

5.     Radio, tape or disc players, television, or any similar devices whether on public or private property.

 

17.44.030 Noise Measurement Criteria.
A.    Exterior noise. Exterior noise levels may be measured at any point on the affected church, commercial property, hospital, public library, residential property, or school.

B.     Noise measurement equipment. Any noise measurement made in compliance with this Section shall be made with a sound level meter using the ‘A’ weighted scale at slow meter response. Fast meter response shall be used only for an impulsive noise. Calibration of the measurement equipment, utilizing an acoustic calibrator, shall be performed immediately before the recording of any noise data.

 

17.44.040 Exterior Noise Standards.
It shall be unlawful for any person, at any location within the City, to create any noise or to allow the creation of any noise on property leased, occupied, owned, or otherwise controlled by the person which does not comply with the provisions of this Section, unless the provisions of either Sections 17.44.050 (Residential Interior Noise Standards) or 17.44.070 (Exceptions), below have been met.

A.    Exterior levels. Exterior noise levels, when measured at any receiving church, commercial, hospital, public library, residential or school property, do not conform to the provisions of this Section when they exceed the noise level standards established by Table 3-6.

B.     Ambient noise level adjustment. In the event the measured ambient noise level exceeds the applicable noise level standard in any category above, the applicable standards shall be adjusted to equal the ambient noise level. For example, if the applicable noise level standard is 60 dB(A) and the ambient noise level is 63 dB(A), the applicable noise level standard would be adjusted to 63 dB(A). In these cases, a use would not exceed the applicable noise level standard if it did not increase the ambient noise level by more than 3.0 dB(A) when the ambient noise level is between 60 and 65 dB(A) or by more than 1.5 dB(A) when the ambient noise level is greater than 65 dB(A).

C.     Simple tone noises. Each of the noise level standards specified above shall be reduced by five dB(A) for simple tone noises, noises consisting primarily of speech or music or for recurring impulsive noises.

D.    Intruding noise source. If the intruding noise source is continuous and cannot reasonably be discontinued or stopped for a time period to allow measurement of the ambient noise level, the noise level measured while the source is in operation shall be compared directly to the applicable noise level standards in Table 3-6.

E.     Equipment noise. The noise level standard applicable to the emission of sound from regulators, transformers, and associated equipment in electrical substations shall be 60 dB(A).

TABLE 3-6 NOISE STANDARD BY RECEIVING LAND USE

 

Noise Level Standards, dB(A)

 

Cumulative number of minutes in any hour

Day - 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.

Night - 10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.

Hospital, Library, Religious Institution, Residential, or School Uses

30 (1)

55

50

15

60

55

5

65

60

1

70

65

0

75

70

 

Commercial Uses

 

30

65

60

15

70

65

5

75

70

1

80

75

0

85

80

Notes:

(1)    For example, this means the measured noise level may not exceed 55 dB(A) for more than 30 minutes out of any one hour time period.

 

F.     Commercial/Industrial exterior noise standard. Whenever a new office, commercial, hotel/motel, or light industrial use is proposed on a parcel where the existing ambient noise levels may exceed 70 dB(A) CNEL, the land use permit application shall include an acoustical analysis of the affect of noise sources on the use. The acoustical analysis shall identify appropriate mitigation measures that reduce noise levels to acceptable levels. These mitigation measures shall be incorporated into the design, construction, and operation of the use. Office, commercial, hotel/motel, and light industrial uses that cannot mitigate noise levels to “Normally Acceptable” levels as defined in Table 6.1 of the General Plan shall not be approved.

G.    Public/Institutional exterior noise standard. Whenever a hospital, library, school, congregate care, or similar public or institutional use is proposed on a parcel where the existing ambient noise levels may exceed 65 dB(A) CNEL, the land use permit application shall include an acoustical analysis of the affect of noise sources on the use. The acoustical analysis shall identify appropriate mitigation measures that reduce noise levels to acceptable levels. These mitigation measures shall be incorporated into the design construction, and operation of the use. Public and institutional uses that cannot mitigate noise levels to “Normally Acceptable” levels as defined in Table 6.1 of the General Plan shall not be approved.

H.    Sensitive land uses. Whenever a use is proposed on a parcel where the expected noise levels generated by the use, when measured at any receiving church, hospital, public library, residential, or school property, may exceed the noise level standards established by Table 3-6, the land use permit application shall include an acoustical analysis of the affect of the noise generated by the use on the sensitive land use property. An acoustical analysis shall also be required when a commercial or industrial loading dock or area is located within 300 feet of a sensitive use. The acoustical analysis shall identify appropriate mitigation measures that reduce exterior noise levels to acceptable levels established by Table 3-6. These mitigation measures shall be incorporated into the design, construction, and operation of the use.

I.      Mitigation. Reasonable noise mitigation measures including building setbacks, alternative site design techniques, and alternative building orientation layouts shall be employed in lieu of sound walls to mitigate noise impacts. Sound walls may be used if there are no other reasonable mitigation measures available or all reasonable mitigation measures do not satisfactorily reduce noise levels to acceptable levels.

 

17.44.050 Residential Interior Noise Standards.
Single-family and multifamily residential development shall be designed and constructed to comply with the interior noise standards of this Section.

A.    Interior noise standard. Whenever a new single-family or multifamily dwelling unit is proposed on a parcel where the existing exterior ambient noise level may exceed 60 dB(A) CNEL, the land use permit application shall include an acoustical analysis showing the dwelling unit has been designed to limit intruding noise to an interior CNEL of 45 dB, in compliance with California Code of Regulations Title 24, Part 2.

B.     Noise mitigation measures. Whenever interior noise levels may exceed 45 dB CNEL, residential developments shall incorporate the following noise mitigation measures, where appropriate:

1.     Increase the distance between the noise source and the receiver;

2.     Locate bedrooms on the side of the structure away from major public rights-of-way; and/or

3.     Locate land uses not sensitive to noise (e.g., garages, maintenance facilities, parking lots, utility areas, etc.) between the noise source and the receiver.

C.     Noise barrier standards. The minimum acceptable surface weight for a noise barrier is four pounds per square foot (equivalent to three-fourths-inch plywood). Noise barriers shall interrupt the line-of-sight between the noise source and the receiver. The barrier shall be designed and constructed consistent with the provisions of Section 17.30.070 (Fences, Walls, and Hedges) of a continuous material which is resistant to sound and may including the following:

1.     Earth berm or a combination of earth berm with concrete block; or

2.     Masonry block; or

3.     Precast concrete.

 

17.44.060 Prohibited Acts.
The following acts, and the causing or allowing of these acts, are a violation of this Section:

A.    Places of public entertainment. Operating or allowing to be operated, any loudspeaker, musical instrument, or other source of sound in any place of public entertainment that exceed 95 dB(A) at any point normally occupied by a customer, without a conspicuous and legible sign stating, “WARNING! Sound levels within may cause hearing impairment.” Nothing in this Section shall be construed to allow any violation of Section 17.44.040 (Exterior Noise Standards) or any noise disturbance in any place of public entertainment;

B.     Emergency signaling devices. The intentional sounding or allowing the sounding outdoors of any burglar, civil defense or fire alarm, siren, whistle, or similar stationary emergency signaling device, except for emergency purposes or for testing, which shall only be conducted in the following manner:

1.     The testing of a stationary emergency signaling device shall not occur before 7:00 a.m. or after 7:00 p.m. Any testing shall use only the minimum cycle test time. The test time shall not exceed 60 seconds, and

2.     The testing of the complete emergency signaling system, including the functioning of the signaling device, and the personnel response to the signaling device, shall not occur more than once in each calendar month. The testing shall not occur before 7:00 a.m. or after 10:00 p.m. The times specified in paragraph 1 above shall not apply to the complete system testing;

C.     Sounding of alarms. Sounding or allowing the sounding of any exterior burglar or fire alarm or any motor vehicle burglar alarm unless the alarm is terminated within 15 minutes of activation;

D.    Stationary non-emergency signaling devices.

1.     Sounding or allowing the sounding of any electronically amplified signal from any stationary bell, chime, siren, whistle, or similar device, intended primarily for non-emergency purposes, from any place, for more than 10 seconds in any one hour period;

2.     Persons, businesses and institutions which, as of September 1, 2009, were regularly sounding an electronically amplified signal, of a non-emergency nature, as part of the business or mission of the person, business, or institution, are exempt from the provisions of this Section. Reasonable accommodation shall be provided for other persons, businesses, and institutions. “Reasonable” is defined, for the purposes of this Section, as the minimum necessary to allow freedom of expression; and

3.     Sound sources covered by this Section and not exempted under subsection B, above may be exempted by a Variance, approved in compliance with Chapter 17.44 (Noise);

E.     Loading and unloading. Closing, loading, opening, unloading, or other handling of boxes, building materials, containers, crates, garbage cans, or similar objects between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in a manner that causes a noise disturbance beyond a residential property line. This action shall not apply to activities where the items handled are still in interstate commerce; and

F.     Residential air conditioning, refrigeration, and heating. Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 17.44.040 (Exterior Noise Standards) where the intruding noise source is a residential air conditioning or a refrigeration system, heating system, or associated equipment installed before the effective date of this Section, the exterior noise level shall not exceed 55 dB(A). For equipment installed after the effective date of this Section, the exterior noise level shall not exceed 50 dB(A).

 

17.44.070 Exceptions.
A.    Construction. The provisions of this Chapter shall not apply to noise sources associated with non-single family residential construction, provided the activities do not take place before 7:00 a.m. or after 9:00 p.m. on any day except Sunday, or before 9:00 a.m. or after 6:00 p.m. on Sunday. The review authority may impose further limitations on the hours and day of construction or other measures to mitigate significant noise impacts on sensitive uses.

B.     Emergency exception. The provisions of this Chapter shall not apply to:

1.     The emission of sound for the purpose of alerting persons to the existence of an emergency; or

2.     The emission of sound in the performance of authorized emergency work.

C.     Maintenance of equipment. Notwithstanding the provisions of Sections A and B above, no exceptions to the provisions of this Section shall apply where the equipment used for those activities is not maintained in good condition which would result in unnecessarily creating a noise disturbance or exceeding the standards in Section 17.44.040 (Exterior Noise Standards), above.

D.    Municipal Code provisions. The provisions of this Chapter shall not apply where noise standards are specified elsewhere in the Municipal Code.

E.     Public health, safety, and welfare activities. The provisions of this Section shall not apply to construction or maintenance and repair operations conducted by public agencies and/or utility companies or their contractors which are deemed necessary to serve the best interests of the public and to protect the public health, safety, and welfare, including debris and limb removal, removal of downed wires, repairing of gas lines, oil lines, roads, sewers, sidewalks, storm drains, traffic signals, water hydrants and mains, restoring electrical service, street sweeping, unplugging sewers, vacuuming catch basins, etc.

F.     Public transportation facilities. The provisions of this Section shall not apply to any airports, railroad facilities including but not limited to trains, rolling stock, and railroad equipment, publicly owned roads and rights-of-way, or other similar facilities.

 

G.    Solid waste collection.

1.     The provisions of this Section shall not apply to noise sources associated with the authorized collection of solid waste (e.g., refuse and garbage), provided the collection activities do not take place between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.

2.     Any noise complaints associated with the collection of solid waste shall be resolved to the satisfaction of the City Manager. The City Manager may require modifications to pick-up schedules, equipment used, or any other reasonable means deemed appropriate by the City Manager to resolve the noise complaints, including changing the 6:00 a.m. time to a later time (e.g., 7:00 a.m.) for any portion of the City.

H.    State or Federal preempted activities. The provisions of this Section shall not apply to any activity regulated by State or Federal law including, but not limited to, trains, rolling stock, and railroad equipment.

I.      City parks. The provisions of this Section shall not apply to public agency sanctioned recreational activities/programs conducted in public parks.

J.      Warning devices. Warning devices, necessary for the protection of public safety (e.g., ambulance, fire, and police siren) shall be exempted from the provisions of this Section.

 

 

 

Chapter 17.46 OPEN SPACE/CLUSTER REQUIREMENTS
17.46.010 Purpose of Chapter.
This Chapter provides requirements for the preservation and maintenance of permanent open space in conjunction with the development of private property, to preserve and to protect the following areas:

A.    100 year floodplains (as provided in Chapter 17.34, Floodplain Management);

B.     Environmentally sensitive areas;

C.     Lakes and ponds; and

D.    Slopes in excess of 30 percent.

 

17.46.020 Applicability.
This Chapter shall apply to all new development projects, including, but not limited to, residential subdivisions. A single-family dwelling, secondary residential unit, duplex, and residential accessory structures constructed on an existing lot are exempt from the provisions of this Chapter.

 

17.46.030 Cluster Development.
A.    Objectives for clustering. Cluster development is encouraged as a means of protecting and preserving environmentally sensitive areas, the natural appearance of hillsides, and other important views and visual resources; maintaining the open space(s) that contributes significantly to the character of the City; providing for the integrity and continuity of wildlife and wetland habitat; and protecting and conserving forest and rangeland for their resource (trees and grasses), recreational, aesthetic, historic, and biological values.

B.     Environmentally sensitive areas defined. Environmentally sensitive areas shall include deer migration/wildlife movement corridors, habitat for State and Federally listed plant and animal species including special status and candidate species, high fire hazard areas, scenic vistas, riparian habitat and corridors, and wetlands per Section 17.46.040 (Wetlands).

C.     Related provisions. The provisions of the following Chapters shall also apply to the design of clustered developments:

1.     Chapter 17.36, Hillside Development Standards; and

2.     Chapter 17.38, Stream Corridor Development.

 

17.46.040 Wetlands.
Wetlands are areas where the water table is at, near, or above the surface of the land long enough to promote the formation of hydric soils (as defined by the U.S. Department of Agriculture Soil Conservation Service) or to support the growth of hydrophytes.

A.    Presumption of significance. All wetlands shall be presumed to be environmentally sensitive areas unless the City finds, on the basis of evidence in the environmental documents prepared for the development of the property in which the wetlands are situated, that the subject wetlands are not environmentally significant. These findings shall be based on an analysis performed by a State agency, serving as the responsible or trustee agency for the City.

B.     Preservation requirements. In preserving these environmentally sensitive areas, emphasis shall be placed on maintaining the natural characteristics of the property while ensuring that any proposed development is harmonious with the terrain and provides significant buffers for adjacent land. Areas designated as environmentally sensitive shall remain in their natural and undisturbed state and shall be maintained in a manner which minimizes the danger of fire hazards.

C.     Disturbance and restoration of wetlands. Development projects resulting in the disturbance of wetlands shall require the approval of a Minor Use Permit in compliance with Chapter 17.76 (Use Permits and Minor Use Permits). The review authority may approve a minor use permit for disturbance of wetlands only if all of the following findings can be made:

1.     The wetlands cannot be avoided and there are no feasible alternatives or mitigation to disturbance of the wetlands;

2.     Any wetlands removed or destroyed as part of the project are mitigated by the restoration or creation of wetland habitat at a rate of 1.5 to 1 (1.5 units of restored habitat for each unit of habitat removed or destroyed); and

3.     The disturbance and/or removal of the wetlands complies with all applicable Federal and State regulations.

 

17.46.050 Minimum Open Space Requirements.
A.    Minimum open space requirements.

1.     All subdivisions within the RS, RL, and RSF zoning districts shall provide permanent open space. The minimum amount of open space required within the property shall be either:

a.     The sum of all areas listed in Section 17.46.010 (Purpose of Chapter) and all those OS zoned portions of the property; or

b.     As shown in Table 3-7 below, whichever is greater.

2.     The minimum amount of open space required within the property for the multifamily residential, commercial, and manufacturing/industrial zoning districts shall be either:

a.     The sum of all areas listed in Section 17.46.010 (Purpose of Chapter) and all those OS zoned portions of the property; or

b.     As identified in the applicable open space standards in Article II (Zoning District and Allowable Land Uses), whichever is greater.

3.     The minimum amount of open space required within the property for the Recreation zoning district shall be either:

a.     The sum of all areas listed in Section 17.46.010 (Purpose of Chapter) and all those OS zoned portions of the property; or

b.     10 percent of the gross site area, whichever is greater.

B.     Use of Table 3-7.

1.     The following minimum open space requirements shall only apply to single-family residential subdivisions.

2.     The minimum open space shall be based on the density of the zoning district as identified in Table 3-7.

3.     Portions of the property zoned OS, or areas listed in subsection A of this Section shall be credited toward this calculated minimum open space requirement.

 

TABLE 3-7 MINIMUM OPEN SPACE AREA

Minimum Open Space Area Required

Zoning District

Minimum Open Space Area Required

(% of gross site area)

RM, RH

30%

RD

40%

RSF

50%

RL

70%

RS

80%

 

C.     Disturbance and restoration of sensitive habitat. Development projects resulting in the disturbance of riparian habitat and habitat for State and Federally listed animal and plant species shall require the approval of a Minor Use Permit in compliance with Chapter 17.76 (Use Permits and Minor Use Permits). The review authority may approve a minor use permit for disturbance of these habitats only if all of the following findings can be made:

1.     The habitat cannot be avoided and there are no feasible alternatives or mitigation to disturbance of the habitat;

2.     Any habitat removed or destroyed as part of the project are mitigated by the restoration or creation of habitat at a rate of 1.5 to 1 (1.5 units of restored habitat for each unit of habitat removed or destroyed); and

3.     The disturbance and/or removal of the habitat complies with all applicable Federal and State regulations.

D.    Open space incentives. The minimum open space area requirements established by this Section may be reduced by the review authority, subject to the following standards.

1.     The review authority shall find that the open space reduction is proportional to the benefit provided by the project.

2.     Open space may be reduced by 5 percent of the project site up to a maximum of 10 percent, based on each/any of the following project features:

a.     Lands are dedicated for public open space, public access, and/or public recreation beyond that necessary for the project;

b.     The project will provide enhanced public facilities which are needed by the City beyond those required for the project as mitigation measures (for example, transit facilities).

E.     Reduction of planning fees. The review body may reduce planning fees for a land use permit application by up to 75 percent if the project provides permanent open space that is equivalent to 10 percent or more of the project site above and beyond the minimum open space requirements. For example, a project in the RSF zoning district would qualify for a planning fee reduction if 60 percent of the site was provided as permanent open space (50 percent minimum open space requirements plus 10 percent of the site).

 

17.46.060 Open Space Standards.
A.    Natural tree or shrub removal. Upon the development of any property which includes environmentally sensitive areas identified in Section 17.46.030(B) (Environmentally Sensitive Areas Defined), if the natural tree or shrub coverage has been removed from the environmentally sensitive area, the area shall be revegetated with indigenous plant material subject to the approval of the City Planner.

B.     Disruption of land. Grading and removal of native vegetation is prohibited except for access roads, driveways, parking areas, and within an area immediately adjoining the structure(s) which is the smallest area practicable to accommodate:

1.     Proper separation from cut and fill slopes;

2.     Usable yard areas; and

3.     Fuel reduction areas in compliance with Fire Protection District standards.

C.     Acceptable nonstructural uses. Acceptable uses in open space areas are those that do not involve structures or large paved areas. Examples that may be acceptable uses include primitive campgrounds (i.e., no facilities), picnic areas, hiking and equestrian trails, and equestrian corrals, other non-enclosed structures, and buffer areas. Fairways and greens for golf courses are not acceptable as open space areas. Examples of uses that are not acceptable include recreational vehicle campgrounds, tennis courts or similar paved areas, and equestrian centers with barns and other enclosed facilities.

D.    Continuity required. Open space shall provide continuity and links with the open space area(s) of other adjoining clustered residential developments and with public open space(s), whenever feasible.

E.     Permanent open space.

1.     The portions of the parent parcel not developed with clustered residential uses, including all slopes of 30 percent or greater, shall be preserved as permanent open space.

2.     Preservation and management options for open space, in order of preference, include the following:

a.     Dedication of the land to the City of Jackson.

b.     Common area parcel(s) with dedication of a conservation easement in perpetuity to the City of Jackson.

c.     Use of building envelopes in conjunction with conservation easements, deed restrictions, and/or dedication to a homeowner’s association.

d.     Open space zoning.

3.     Incentives for projects that dedicate open space and trails to public agencies may include planning fee waivers, reductions in open space requirements, and/or increases in density.

 

 

Chapter 17.48 PARKING AND LOADING STANDARDS
17.48.010 Purpose of Chapter.
This Chapter provides off-street parking and loading standards to:

A.    Provide for the general welfare and convenience of persons within the City by ensuring sufficient parking facilities to meet the needs generated by the specific use;

B.     Provide accessible, attractive, secure and well-maintained off-street parking and loading facilities;

C.     Increase public safety by reducing congestion on public streets;

D.    Encourage the use of alternative modes of transportation and other trip reduction measures;

E.     Ensure access and maneuverability for emergency vehicles; and

F.     Provide loading and delivery facilities in proportion to the needs of the proposed use.

 

17.48.020 Applicability.
Every use, including a change or expansion of a use or structure shall have appropriately maintained off-street parking and loading areas in compliance with the provisions of this Chapter. A use shall not be commenced and structures shall not be occupied until improvements required by this Chapter are satisfactorily completed.

 

17.48.030 General Parking and Loading Regulations.
A.    Retention and maintenance of parking and loading areas. All covered or uncovered off-street parking and loading facilities required by this Chapter shall be permanently reserved for parking and loading purposes.

1.     The City Planner may approve the temporary reduction of parking or loading spaces in conjunction with a seasonal or intermittent use for not more than 30 days in any calendar year.

2.     All parking facilities, including but not limited to curbs, directional markings, disabled symbols, landscaping, pavement, signs, striping, and wheel stops, and other facilities, shall be permanently maintained by the property owner/tenant in good repair, free of litter and debris, potholes, obstructions, and stored material.

B.     Parking and loading to be unrestricted. Owners, lessees, tenants or persons having control of the operation of premises for which parking or loading spaces are required by this Chapter shall not prevent, prohibit or restrict authorized persons from using these spaces without prior approval of the City Planner.

 

17.48.040 Number of Parking Spaces Required.
Each use shall provide at least the minimum number of off-street parking spaces required by this Chapter, except where an exception has been granted through approval of a land use permit.

A.    Parking requirements by land use. Each land use shall be provided the number of off-street parking spaces required by Table 3-8.

1.     Additional requirements. Additional spaces may be required by the review authority through land use permit conditions of approval, where applicable.

2.     Uses not listed. Land uses not specifically listed by Table 3-8 (Parking requirements by land use), below, shall provide parking as required by the City Planner. The City Planner shall use the requirements of Table 3-8 as a general guide in determining the minimum number of off-street parking spaces to be provided.

3.     Rounding of quantities. When a calculation of the number of parking spaces required results in a fraction of 0.50 or more, the number of required spaces shall be rounded up to the nearest whole number.

B.     Expansion of existing structure, change in use. When a structure is enlarged or increased in capacity or intensity, or when a change in use requires more off-street parking, additional parking spaces for the enlargement or increase in capacity or intensity shall be provided in compliance with this Chapter.

C.     Multiple uses on a single site. A site or facility proposed for multiple tenants or uses (for example, a building with ground-floor shops and second floor offices) shall provide the aggregate number of parking spaces required for each separate use; except where the site is developed as a shopping center, the parking ratio shall be that required for the shopping center as a whole as provided in Table 3-8.

D.    Parking required by permits, Development Agreements, or Specific Plans. Parking requirements established by Use Permits, Development Agreements, Specific Plans or similar entitlements supersede the provisions of this Chapter.

E.     Excessive parking. The parking standards established in this Chapter are both minimum and maximum standards. Off-street parking spaces in excess of these standards may be approved only in conjunction with a land use permit, and when additional landscaping and pedestrian improvements are also provided. When a project proposal includes parking in excess of the number of spaces required by this Chapter, the review authority shall approve no more than 20 percent more spaces than otherwise required.

F.     Bench or bleacher seating. Where fixed seating is provided in the form of benches or bleachers, a seat shall be construed to be not less than 24 inches of continuous bench space for the purpose of calculating the number of required parking spaces.

G.    Company-owned vehicles. The number of parking spaces required by this Chapter does not include spaces needed for the parking of company-owned vehicles. Parking spaces for company-owned vehicles shall be provided in addition to the requirements for a particular land use.

 

TABLE 3-8 PARKING REQUIREMENTS BY LAND USE

Land Use Type: Manufacturing Processing and Warehousing

Vehicle Spaces Required

General manufacturing, industrial and processing uses (See Section 17.12.030, Table 2-5, “Commercial, Office, and Industrial District Allowable Land Uses” for examples.)

2 spaces per each 1,000 sq.ft. of gross floor area for the first 25,000 sq.ft.; and 1 space per each 1,000 sq.ft. thereafter. The gross floor area shall include incidental office space comprising less than 20% of the total gross floor area. The parking requirements for additional office space shall be calculated separately as provided by this table for “Offices.”

Recycling facilities

Determined by Use Permit.

Research and development, laboratories

1 space per each 250 sq.ft. of gross floor area, plus 1 space for each company vehicle.

Warehouses and storage facilities (for example, long- term storage facilities)

1 space per each 2,000 sq.ft. of gross floor area for the first 10,000 sq.ft., and 1 space per each 5,000 sq.ft. thereafter. The gross floor area shall include incidental office space comprising less than 20% of the total gross floor area. The parking requirements for additional office space shall be calculated separately as provided by this table for “Offices.”

Wholesale and distribution operations not used exclusively for storage.

1 space per each 1,000 sq.ft. of gross floor area for the first 10,000 sq.ft., and 1 space per each 3,000 sq.ft. thereafter. The gross floor area shall include incidental office space comprising less than 20% of the total gross floor area. The parking requirements for additional office space shall be calculated separately as provided by this table for “Offices.”

Land Use Type: Recreation, Education, Public Assembly

Vehicle Spaces Required

Child day care—Centers

1 space per each 7 children, plus adequate drop-off area as approved by the Site Plan Review Committee.

Child day care - Large family day care homes

1 space per each employee and 1 space for drop-off/pick-up, in addition to the required residential spaces.

Churches, community centers, meeting halls, membership organizations, mortuaries, and performance theaters

1 space per each 3 seats; without fixed seats, 1 space per each 50 sq.ft. of gross floor area

Cinemas - Single-screen

1 space per each 3 seats, plus 6 spaces for employees

Cinemas - Multi-screen

1 space per each 5 seats, plus 10 spaces for employees.

Golf courses

3 spaces per hole; plus clubhouse spaces as required for restaurants, bars, indoor recreation/fitness centers, office, etc.

Golf driving ranges (separate from golf course)

2 spaces per tee.

Indoor recreation/fitness centers - Arcades

1 space per each 200 sq.ft. of gross floor area

Indoor recreation/fitness centers - Bowling alleys

5 spaces per lane, plus required spaces for ancillary uses.

Indoor recreation/fitness centers - Health/fitness clubs

1 space per each 250 sq.ft. of gross floor area.

Indoor recreation/fitness centers - Pool and billiard rooms

2 spaces per table, plus required space for ancillary uses.

Indoor recreation/fitness centers - Skating rinks

1 space per each 400 sq.ft. of gross floor area for public use, plus required spaces for ancillary uses.

Libraries, museums, art galleries

1 space per each 500 sq.ft. of gross floor area, plus 1 space per official vehicle.

Outdoor commercial recreation

Determined by Use Permit

Schools (public and private) - Elementary/Junior High

2 spaces per each classroom, plus 1 space for every 200 sq.ft. of assembly area in an auditorium.

Schools (public and private) - High School

3 spaces per each classroom, plus 1 space for every 6 students

Schools (public and private) - College

As determined by Use Permit.

Schools (public and private) - Trade and business schools

1 space per each 50 sq.ft. of gross classroom floor area.

Studios for dance and art

1 space per each 200 sq.ft. of gross floor area.

Land Use Type: Recreation, Education, Public Assembly

Vehicle Spaces Required

Tennis/racquetball/handball or other courts

2 spaces per each court, plus 1 space per each 200 sq.ft. of floor area for ancillary uses.

Performance theaters, meeting halls and membership organizations.

1 space per each 3 seats; without fixed seats, 1 space per each 50 sq.ft. of gross assembly or viewing area, plus ancillary uses (e.g. bar, restaurant)

Land Use Type: Residential Uses

Vehicle Spaces Required

Group Quarters (including boarding houses, rooming houses, dormitories, and organizational houses)

1 space per each bed, plus 1 space per each 8 beds for guest parking, 1 space per each employee on largest shift.

Duplex housing units

2 spaces per each unit, with 1 space per unit in a fully enclosed garage.

Mobile homes (in M.H. parks)

2 spaces per each mobile home (tandem parking allowed in an attached carport), plus 1 guest parking space for each 4 units.

Multifamily dwelling, condominiums and other attached dwellings.

Studio and 1 bedroom units - 1.5 spaces per each unit with 1 space per unit in a fully enclosed garage. No garage is required for affordable housing units. 2 bedrooms or more - 2 spaces per each unit, with 1 space per unit in a fully enclosed garage. No garage is required for affordable housing units.

Multifamily dwelling, condominiums and other attached dwellings.

Guest parking - 25% of total required spaces.

Mixed-use developments

Determined by Use Permit.

Secondary residential units

2 spaces in addition to that required for the single-family dwelling.

Senior housing projects

1 space per each unit with 0.5 spaces per unit covered, plus 1 guest parking space per each 10 units.

Senior congregate care facilities

0.5 space per each residential unit, plus 1 space per each 4 units for guests and employees.

Single-family dwelling

2 spaces, with 1 space per unit in a fully enclosed garage.

Land Use Type: Retail Trade

Vehicle Spaces Required

Automobile, mobile home, vehicle, machinery and parts sale

1 space per each 400 sq.ft. of gross floor area, plus 1 space per each 3,000 sq.ft. of outdoor display and sales service area, plus 1 space per each 300 sq.ft. of gross floor area for a parts department.

Banks and financial services

1 space per each 300 sq.ft. of gross floor area.

Building materials, hardware stores and plant nurseries

1 space per each 300 sq.ft. of gross floor area, plus 1 space per each 1,000 sq.ft. of outdoor display and sales area.

Convenience stores

1 space per each 200 sq.ft. of gross floor area.

Restaurants (except fast food), cafes, cafeterias, nightclubs, taverns, lounges or similar establishments for the consumption of food and beverages on the premises.

1 space per each 75 sq.ft. of gross floor area for patrons, plus 1 space per each 300 sq.ft. of service area, plus one space per each 100 sq.ft. of outdoor dining area.

Restaurants, fast food

1 space per each 100 sq.ft. of gross floor area, plus 1 space per each 100 sq.ft. of outdoor dining area.

Restaurants, delicatessens, take out only, no customer seating

1 space per each 250 sq.ft. of gross floor area.

Retail Stores - General merchandise

1 space per each 250 sq.ft. of gross sales area, plus 1 space per each 600 sq.ft. of storage area, and 1 space per each company vehicle.

Retail Stores - Appliance, furniture and bulk goods stores

1 space per each 500 sq.ft. of gross floor area and 1 space per each company vehicle.

Shopping centers

1 space per each 250 sq.ft. of gross floor area for centers of less than 30,000 sq.ft. and 1 space per each 300 sq.ft. of gross floor area for centers of 30,000 sq.ft. or more.

Land Use Type: Service Uses

Vehicle Spaces Required

Bed and Breakfast Inns

1 space per each guest room, in addition to two spaces for owners and one space for each staff member.

Copy and reproduction

1 space per each 400 sq.ft. of gross floor area.

Consumer products - repair and maintenance

1 space per each 250 sq.ft. of gross floor area

Land Use Type: Service Uses

Vehicle Spaces Required

Depots: bus, freight, or rail

Determined by Use Permit

Equipment rental

1 per each 300 sq.ft. of gross floor area, plus 1 space per each 1,000 sq.ft. of outdoor display, sales, storage, and work area.

Hotels and motels

1 space per each guest room, plus 1 space per each 2 employees on largest shift, plus required spaces for accessory uses.

Medical Services - Clinics, medical/dental offices

1 space per each 200 sq.ft. of gross floor area.

Medical Services - Extended care (elderly, skilled nursing facilities and residential care homes)

1 space per each 3 beds the facility is licensed to accommodate

Medical Services - Hospitals

1 space per each patient bed the facility is licensed to accommodate, plus 1 space per each 400 sq.ft. of office area, plus required spaces for ancillary uses as determined by the Site Plan Review Committee.

Medical Services - Medical/dental labs

1 space per each 300 sq.ft. of gross floor area.

Offices, business and professional

1 space per each 250 sq.ft. of gross floor area for the first 5,000 sq.ft. and 1 space per each 300 sq.ft. thereafter.

Pet grooming

1 space per each 400 sq.ft. of gross floor area.

Personal services - Barber/beauty shops (and other personal services: tattoo studios, massage therapy)

1 space per each 250 sq.ft. of gross floor area.

Kennels and animal boarding

1 space per each 500 sq.ft. of gross floor area, plus 1 space for each 800 sq.ft. of boarding area

Laundries and dry cleaning plants

1 space per each 1,000 sq.ft. of gross floor area.

Land Use Type: Service Uses

Vehicle Spaces Required

Dry cleaning pick-up facilities

1 space per each 400 sq.ft. of activity area (office, reception area, counter area), plus 1 space per each 1,000 sq. ft of storage or work area.

Laundromats

1 space per each 250 sq.ft. of gross floor area.

Laboratories and research/development facilities

1 space per each 300 sq.ft. of gross floor area

Service stations

1 space per each 180 sq.ft. of gross floor area, plus 3 spaces per each service bay.

Storage, personal storage facilities

2 spaces for manager office.

Vehicle repair and maintenance - Repair garage

4 spaces per service bay, plus adequate queuing lanes for each bay, plus 1 space for each 2 employees on the largest shift.

Vehicle repair and maintenance - Self-service vehicle washing

2.5 spaces per washing stall, for queuing and drying.

Vehicle repair and maintenance - Full-service vehicle washing

10 spaces, plus 10 spaces per wash lane for drying area, plus queuing area for 5 vehicles ahead of each lane.

Veterinary clinics and hospitals

1 space per each 250 sq.ft. of gross floor area, plus 1 space per each 800 sq.ft. of boarding area.

 

17.48.050 Adjustments to Off-Street Parking Requirements.
A.    Shared parking reduction. Where two or more nonresidential uses are developed as a recognized shopping or professional center and two or more uses have distinct and differing peak traffic usage periods, (for example, a theater and a bank) or share customers (for example, a restaurant and retail store), a reduction in the required number of parking spaces may be approved, provided that the most remote space is located within 500 feet of the use it is intended to serve (as measured along the most direct pedestrian path). The amount of reduction may be up to 25 percent of the total parking spaces required for the uses. A parking study analyzing peak hour parking demands for the uses may be required.

B.     Compact car spaces. Parking lots with 20 or more spaces may include compact car spaces for up to 25 percent of the total number of required spaces. Compact car spaces shall be a minimum of 8 feet by 14 feet in size and shall be clearly marked “Compact Only” in letters not less than 12 inches high and 7 inches wide.

17.48.060 Disabled/Handicapped Parking Requirements.
Parking areas shall include parking spaces accessible to the disabled in the following manner:

A.    Number of spaces, design standards. Parking spaces for the disabled shall be provided in compliance with Section 1129B of the California Building Code of Regulations;

B.     Reservation of spaces required. Disabled accessible spaces required by this Chapter shall be reserved by the property owner/tenant for use by the disabled throughout the life of the approved land use;

C.     Upgrading of markings required. If amendments to State law change standards for the marking, striping, and signing of disabled parking spaces, disabled accessible spaces shall be upgraded in compliance with the new State standards. Upgrading shall be completed by affected property owners within 60 days of being notified in writing by the Department of new State standards; and

D.    Fulfilling of requirements. For parking lots with 10 or more spaces, disabled accessible parking spaces required by this Chapter shall count toward fulfilling off-street parking requirements.

 

17.48.070 Development Standards for Off-Street Parking.
Off-street parking areas shall be designed and constructed in compliance with the following standards. See also Chapter 17.50 (Parking Design Guidelines).

A.    Location. Off-street parking areas shall be provided on the subject site, outside of any public right-of-way, except that parking may be located on a parcel directly abutting the parcel served subject to a covenant running with the land recorded by the owner of the parking lot guaranteeing that the required parking will be maintained for the life of the use or activity served.

B.     Access to parking areas and parking stalls.

1.     Driveway location and design. Site access driveways shall be located and designed in compliance with Section 17.48.080 (Driveways and Site Access).

2.     Internal maneuvering area. Parking areas shall provide suitable maneuvering room so that vehicles enter an abutting street in a forward direction. Parking lots shall be designed to prevent access at any point other than at designated access drives. The City Planner may approve exceptions for single-family homes and duplexes;

3.     Car pool and bicycle space location. Car pool and bicycle spaces shall be located as close as is practical to the entrance(s) to the use they are intended to serve. Spaces shall be situated so that they do not obstruct the flow of pedestrians at entrances or sidewalks; and

4.     Vertical clearance. A minimum unobstructed clearance height of 14 feet shall be maintained above areas accessible to vehicles.

C.     Adjacent site access. Nonresidential developments should be designed and constructed to provide shared vehicle and pedestrian access to adjacent nonresidential properties for convenience, safety and efficient circulation. A joint access agreement running with the land shall be recorded by the owners of the abutting properties, as approved and executed by the City Planner, guaranteeing the continued availability of the shared access between the properties;

D.    Parking space and lot dimensions.

1.     Residential uses. Minimum parking dimensions shall be as indicated in Table 3-9.

 

TABLE 3-9 MINIMUM PARKING STALL AND LOT DIMENSIONS FOR RESIDENTIAL USES

Length

Width

Covered Spaces (garage/carport)

20 feet

10 feet; 12 feet if located parallel to an object(s) that may obstruct vehicle doors

Uncovered Spaces

Spaces shall conform to the standards in Table 3-10

Tandem Spaces

20 feet

9 feet

 

2.     Nonresidential uses. Minimum parking dimensions shall be as indicated in Table 3-10.

 

TABLE 3-10

MINIMUM PARKING STALL AND LOT DIMENSIONS FOR NONRESIDENTIAL USES

Standard Stall

Compact Stall

Length

Width

Length

Width

20 feet; 18 feet with bumper overhang per subsection D.3

9 feet

16 feet; 14 feet with bumper overhang per subsection D.3

8 feet

 

One-Way Traffic and Single-Loaded Aisles

 

Parking angle (degrees)

Stall depth (1)

Aisle width (travel lane)

Total bay depth (2) (approximate)

30

17 feet (3)

14 feet

30 feet

45

19 feet (3)

15 feet

35 feet

60

20 feet (4)

16 feet

38 feet

90

20 feet (4)

24 feet

44 feet

 

One-Way Traffic and Double-Loaded Aisles

 

Parking angle (degrees)

Stall depth (1)

Aisle width (travel lane)

Total bay depth (2) (approximate)

30

18 feet (3)

14 feet

48 feet

45

19 feet (3)

15 feet

55 feet

60

20 feet (4)

16 feet

60 feet

90

20 feet (4)

24 feet

64 feet

 

Two-Way Traffic and Double-Loaded Aisles

 

Parking angle (degrees)

Stall depth (1)

Aisle width (travel lane)

Total bay depth (2) (approximate)

30

18 feet (3)

24 feet

60 feet

45

19 feet (3)

24 feet

62 feet

60

20 feet (4)

24 feet

64 feet

90

20 feet (4)

24 feet

64 feet

Notes:

(1)    Stall depth may be reduced by two feet with bumper overhang per subsection D.3.

(2)    Bay depths are approximate and may not equal “stall depth + aisle width” because of parking angles.

(3)    Stall depth may be reduced by three feet for compact spaces.

(4)    Stall depth may be reduced by four feet for compact spaces.

3.     Bumper overhang areas. A maximum of two feet of the parking stall depth may be landscaped with low-growth, hearty materials in lieu of paving, allowing a two-foot bumper overhang while maintaining the required parking dimensions. A two-foot bumper overhang is also allowed over adjacent sidewalks provided that a minimum clear distance of four feet is maintained on the sidewalk at all times.

4.     Parallel parking spaces. Parallel parking spaces shall have minimum width of 10 feet and a minimum length of 24 feet. Aisle widths shall be 14 feet for one-way traffic and 24 feet for two-way traffic.

E.     Directional arrows and signs.

1.     In parking facilities containing 40 or more parking spaces, aisles, approach lanes and maneuvering areas shall be clearly marked with directional arrows and lines to ensure the safe and efficient flow of vehicles.

2.     The City Planner may require the installation of the traffic signs in addition to directional arrows to ensure the safe and efficient flow of vehicles in a parking facility.

3.     The exit from a parking area which provides parking for 40 or more vehicles shall be clearly marked with a vehicle “STOP” sign.

F.     Grades of entrances, spaces and driveways.

1.     Entrance—Four or fewer dwellings including single-family dwellings. Driveways shall have a maximum grade of 16 percent measured along the driveway centerline, for a distance of not less than 25 feet from the ultimate right-of-way line of the street or alley.

2.     Entrance—Five or more dwellings and all other uses. Driveways shall have a maximum grade of 12 percent, measured along the driveway centerline, for a distance of not less than 20 feet from the ultimate right-of-way line of the street or alley.

3.     Parking spaces. Parking spaces and abutting access aisles shall have a maximum grade of seven percent, measured in any direction.

4.     Interior driveways. Ramps or driveways for four or less dwelling units within the interior of a parking area (beyond 20 feet from ultimate right-of-way line) shall have a maximum grade of 16 percent. Ramps or driveways for five or more dwelling units and all other uses within the interior of a parking area shall have a maximum grade of 12 percent.

5.     Vertical clearance. Covered parking spaces shall have a vertical clearance of at least seven feet, six inches above the parking lot surface for all uses except residential. The Building Official may require a higher vertical clearance where necessary to comply with Section 1129B of the California Building Code of regulations for disabled/handicapped parking.

G.    Landscaping. Landscaping shall be provided in compliance with the requirements of Chapter 17.40 (Landscape Standards).

H.    Lighting. Parking areas shall have lighting capable of providing adequate illumination for security and safety. Lighting standards shall be energy-efficient and in scale with the height and use of the on-site structure(s). Any illumination, including security lighting, shall be directed downward, away from adjacent properties and public rights-of-way in compliance with Section 17.43 (Lighting Regulations).

I.      Maintenance of parking facilities. Parking facilities shall be properly maintained at all times. Surface materials shall be free of holes and cracks. Painted markings (e.g., parking space striping, pedestrian crossings, directional markings, loading area identification, fire aisles, etc.) shall be maintained to be clearly visible to motorists and pedestrians. Landscaped areas shall be kept free of litter and shall be maintained in compliance with the requirements of Section 17.40 (Landscape Standards).

J.      Residential garages—Minimum size. Garages shall be completely enclosed on four sides and have a solid roof. The minimum interior dimensions shall be 10 feet in width and 20 feet in length for a single-car garage and 20 feet in width by 20 feet in length for a two-car garage.

K.    Residential guest parking. Guest parking in residential zoning districts shall be so designated and restricted, with appropriate signs/pavement markings, for the exclusive use of the guests.

L.     Shopping cart storage. Parking facilities shall contain shopping cart storage areas for appropriate uses (e.g., supermarkets, drugstores, etc.). The number, dimensions and locations of these storage areas shall be determined by the City Planner.

M.    Striping and identification. Parking spaces shall be clearly outlined with four-inch wide lines painted on the surface of the parking facility. Compact and car pool spaces shall be clearly identified for compact vehicle and car pool usage respectively. Spaces for the disabled shall be striped and marked according to the applicable State standards. All parking lot striping shall be permanently maintained in good condition.

N.    Surfacing. Parking spaces and maneuvering areas for all vehicles (including motorcycles) shall be paved and permanently maintained with asphalt, concrete or other all-weather surfacing approved by the City Planner.

O.    Tandem parking. Tandem parking resulting in the stacking of no more than two parking spaces may be allowed to satisfy off-street parking requirements for single-family dwellings, secondary residential units, duplexes, and bed and breakfasts. Tandem parking resulting in the stacking of two parking spaces within a garage shall not be allowed to satisfy off-street parking requirements.

P.     Separation. Parking spaces shall be separated from adjacent fences, walls, property lines, landscaped areas and structures in accordance with the Public Improvements and Engineering Standards.

 

17.48.080 Driveways and Site Access.
Driveways providing site access shall be from an improved street, alley or other right-of-way, and shall be designed, constructed and maintained as follows:

A.    Number of driveways. One driveway encroachment shall be allowed for each parcel two acres or less in size unless the City Planner and City Engineer find that more than one driveway encroachment is necessary to accommodate traffic volumes for the development and the additional driveway encroachment will not be detrimental to traffic flow on the street(s). Whenever a property has access to more than one street, access shall be generally limited to the lowest volume street where the impact of a new access will be minimized; and

B.     Distance from street corners. Parking area driveways shall be located a minimum of 150 feet from the nearest intersection, as measured from the centerline of the driveway to the centerline of the nearest travel lane of the intersecting street. For parcels with street frontages of less than 150 feet, the minimum distance shall be 100 feet. The review authority may reduce these requirements based on recommendations from the City Engineer that site configuration or terrain, or adjacent roadway conditions necessitate another location than provided by this subsection.

C.     Driveway spacing. Driveways shall be separated along the street frontage as follows:

1.     Single-family and duplex residential development. Driveways shall be separated by at least six feet, unless a shared, single driveway is approved by the City Planner. The six-foot separation does not include the transition or wing sections on each side of the driveway;

2.     Multifamily and nonresidential development. Where two or more driveways serve the same or adjacent multifamily or nonresidential development, the centerline of the driveways shall be separated by a minimum of 50 feet. Exceptions to this standard shall be subject to the approval of the City Engineer; and

D.    Driveway width and length.

1.     Single-family dwellings.

a.     Driveways providing access to garages or parking areas shall be a minimum of 25 feet long with a width of the garage door opening plus 2 feet or the width of the parking area. This standard shall not apply to turnaround areas for vehicles.

b.     When a garage is perpendicular (90 degrees) to the driveway, a minimum 24-foot deep unobstructed back-out area shall be provided.

c.     All newly constructed residences shall be served by a driveway that is constructed to within at least 50 feet of each dwelling unit.

d.     Driveways exceeding 150 feet, but less than 800 feet in length, shall provide a turnout near the midpoint of the driveway. Where the driveway exceeds 800 feet, turnouts shall be provided no more than 400 feet apart.

e.     Dead-end driveways in excess of 400 feet in length shall be provided with a turnaround at the closed end. Grades on turnarounds shall be no more than 12 percent. The turnaround shall be built with the edge of the fire lane within 50 feet of the dwelling unit but no closer than 10 feet.

f.      Driveway curves shall be constructed with a curvature radius of not less than 50 feet, measured at centerline. For all curve radii less than 100 feet, an additional four feet of surfacing width shall be provided.

g.     The driveway shall be capable of supporting a 40,000 lb. legally-loaded vehicle per City of Jackson Improvement Standards.

h.     A roadside vegetation fuel modification area as required by the Fire Department regulations shall be provided for a distance of 10 feet on each side of the driveway.

i.      The standards in paragraphs (d) to (i) may be modified by the Fire Chief.

2.     Multifamily residential projects.

a.     Driveways for multifamily uses with four or less units shall have a minimum paved width of 20 feet.

b.     Driveways for multifamily uses with more than four units shall have a minimum paved width of 24 feet.

3.     Nonresidential uses. Driveways for nonresidential uses shall have a minimum paved width of 12 feet for one-way driveways and 24 feet for two-way driveways. The maximum driveway width shall be 30 feet subject to approval of the City Planner and City Engineer, exclusive of the area provided for a median divider.

4.     Modified width. The review authority may modify the driveway width based on recommendations from the City Engineer.

E.     Clearance from obstruction. The nearest edge of a driveway curb cut shall be at least three feet from the nearest property line, the centerline of a fire hydrant, utility pole, traffic signal, light standards, or other similar facilities. Street trees shall be a minimum of 10 feet from the driveway access, measured at the trunk. Driveways shall have an overhead clearance of 15 feet in height except within a parking structure which may be reduced to seven feet, six inches.

F.     Traffic safety sight area. Structures or landscaping over 30 inches in height shall not be allowed within a traffic safety sight area except elements associated with a public utility or a traffic safety device.

 

17.48.090 Bicycle Parking and Support Facilities.
Bicycle parking facilities shall be provided for nonresidential and multifamily residential uses as follows.

A.    Number of spaces required. Multifamily residential projects with 11 or more dwelling units, and all nonresidential projects, shall provide bicycle parking spaces at a rate of five percent of the number of vehicle parking spaces required by Section 17.48.040 (Number of Parking Spaces Required), with a minimum of three spaces required in all cases. The City Planner may modify this requirement where it can be demonstrated that a lesser number of bicycle spaces can adequately serve the intended use.

B.     Nonconforming uses. Any existing nonresidential use without bicycle parking spaces shall provide the number of bicycle spaces required by this Section for the area of any proposed expansion or intensification.

C.     Bicycle parking design and devices. Bicycle parking areas shall be designed and constructed as follows.

1.     Parking equipment. Each bicycle parking space shall include a stationary parking device to adequately support the bicycle.

2.     Parking layout.

a.     Aisles. Providing access to bicycle parking spaces shall be at least five feet in width;

b.     Spaces. Each bicycle space shall be a minimum of two feet in width and six feet in length and have a minimum of seven feet of overhead clearance;

c.     Relationship to structure entrances. Bicycle spaces shall be conveniently located and generally within proximity to the main entrance of a structure; and

d.     Relationship to motor vehicle parking. Bicycle spaces shall be separated from motor vehicle parking spaces or aisles by a fence, wall, or curb, or by at least five feet of open area, marked to prohibit motor vehicle parking.

D.    Bicycle parking area surfacing. Bicycle parking areas shall be surfaced so as to keep the area in a dust-free condition, subject to the approval of the City Planner.

E.     Shower and locker facilities encouraged. The City encourages shower and locker facilities in projects when appropriate. Incentives may be provided (e.g., reduction of required parking) when it can be demonstrated that providing these facilities will help reduce vehicle trips generated by the particular use. The granting of incentives (e.g., waiver or modification of development standards) shall be through the approval of a Minor Use Permit Chapter 17.76 (Use Permits and Minor Use Permits).

17.48.100 Off-Street Loading Space Requirements.
A.    Number of loading spaces required. Nonresidential uses with less than 5,000 sq.ft. of gross floor area shall provide one off-street loading space, which may be combined with an off-street parking space. Nonresidential uses with 5,000 square feet of floor area or more shall provide off-street loading space in compliance with Table 3-11. Requirements for uses not specifically listed shall be determined by the City Planner based upon the requirements for comparable uses and upon the particular characteristics of the proposed use.

 

TABLE 3-11 REQUIRED LOADING SPACES

Type of Land Use

Total Gross Floor Area

Loading Spaces Required

Manufacturing, research and development, institutional, and service uses

5,000 to 20,000 sq.ft.

1 space

20,001 sq.ft. or more

1 for each additional 20,000 sq.ft., plus additional as required by Site Plan Review Committee.

Office uses

5,000 to 35,000 sq.ft.

1 space

 

35,001 sq.ft. or more

1 for each additional 35,000 sq.ft., plus additional as required by Site Plan Review Committee.

Commercial and other allowed uses

5,000 to 10,000 sq.ft.

1 space

10,001 sq.ft. or more

1 for each additional 10,000 sq.ft., plus additional as required by Site Plan Review Committee.

 

B.     Standards for off-street loading areas. Off-street loading areas shall be provided in the following manner:

1.     Dimensions. Loading spaces shall be not less than 15 feet in width, 25 feet in length, with 14 feet of vertical clearance;

2.     Lighting. Loading areas shall have lighting capable of providing adequate illumination for security and safety. Lighting standards shall be energy-efficient and in scale with the height and use of adjacent structure(s);

3.     Loading doors and gates. Loading bays and roll-up doors shall be painted to blend with the exterior structure wall(s) and be located on the rear of the structure only. Bays and doors may be located on the side of a structure, away from a street frontage, where the City Planner determines that the bays, doors and related trucks can be adequately screened from view from adjacent streets;

4.     Loading ramps. Plans for loading ramps or truck wells shall be accompanied by a profile drawing showing the ramp, ramp transitions and overhead clearances;

5.     Location. Loading spaces shall be located and designed as follows:

a.     As near as possible to the main structure and limited to the rear two-thirds of the parcel, if feasible;

b.     Situated to ensure that the loading facility is screened from adjacent streets as much as possible;

c.     Situated to ensure that loading and unloading takes place on-site and in no case within adjacent public rights-of-way or other traffic areas on-site;

d.     Situated to ensure that vehicular maneuvers occur on-site and away from parking areas and driveways; and

e.     Situated to avoid adverse impacts upon residential properties, and landscaped in compliance with Section 17.40.080 (Tree Placement for Parking Areas).

6.     Screening. Loading areas abutting residentially zoned parcels shall be screened in compliance with Section 17.30.110 (Screening and Buffer Requirements); and

7.     Striping. Loading areas shall be striped indicating the loading spaces and identifying the spaces for “loading only.” The striping shall be permanently maintained by the property owner/tenant in a clear and visible manner at all times.

 

17.48.110 Historic Commercial Zoning District Parking.
Parking requirements for uses in the Historic Commercial Zoning District may be provided in one or more of the following manners:

A.    Off-street parking provided in accordance with this Chapter;

B.     Off-street parking provided on a non-contiguous, separate parcel or parcels subject to all of the following requirements:

1.     The off-street parking shall be approved as part of the land use permit and comply with all applicable standards of Chapter 17.40 (Landscape Standards) and Chapter 17.48 (Parking and Loading Standards);

2.     The parcel(s) on which the parking is proposed to be provided shall be located within 300 feet from the parcel containing the use the parking is intended to serve;

3.     Due to existing site conditions, the review authority shall find that it is not feasible to provide the required off-street parking on the parcel containing the use; and

4.     The parcel(s) on which the parking is proposed to be provided is under the control of the same business or ownership entity as the parcel containing the use, and a deed restriction is recorded in the Amador County Recorder’s Office on the parcels. The deed restriction shall prohibit the conveyance or transfer of the parcels separately from each other during the period the use is operating.

C.     On-street parking provided within the street right-of-way in front of the parcel containing the use subject to all of the following requirements:

1.     A minor use permit shall be approved in compliance with Chapter 17.76 (Use Permits and Minor Use Permits);

2.     The review authority shall find that the on-street parking does not currently exist or the condition of the parking is substantially below City standards;

3.     The property owner and/or business owner shall construct the on-street parking in accordance with the Public Improvement and Engineering Standards and the requirements of the City Engineer;

4.     The on-street parking shall be located directly adjacent to the parcel containing the use;

5.     One on-street parking space shall be equivalent to 0.75 of an on-site parking space;

6.     An agreement shall be executed between the property owner, business owner, and the City requiring the property owner and/or business owner to provide street maintenance services on the on-street spaces as required by the City Engineer;

7.     The on-street parking spaces shall be available for public parking with no exclusive occupancy for the business(es);

8.     For any portions of the on-street parking located within the parcel containing the use, a public use easement shall be executed and recorded in the Amador County Recorder’s Office;

9.     The review authority shall find that the on-street parking will not hinder future improvement plans for the street, will not result in traffic safety hazards, and will not unduly interfere with traffic flow.

D.    Other on-street and off-street parking proposals that do not comply with subsections A, B, and/or C may be authorized through approval of a Minor Use Permit in compliance with Chapter 17.76 (Use Permits and Minor Use Permits).

 

 

Chapter 17.50 PARKING DESIGN GUIDELINES
17.50.010 Purpose of Chapter.
This Chapter provides parking design guidelines to assist property owners and project designers in understanding the City’s goals for attaining high quality development that is sensitive to the City’s unique character.

 

17.50.020 Applicability.
These guidelines will be used during the land use permit process as additional project review criteria.

A.    The provisions of this Chapter apply whenever access and/or parking are provided for a project regardless of whether the access or parking are required by this Development Code. Any addition, relocation, or construction requiring land use permit approval in compliance with Article IV (Land Use and Development Permit Procedures), shall follow these guidelines where applicable.

B.     The following guidelines may be interpreted with some flexibility in their application to specific projects, as not all design criteria may be workable/appropriate for each project. In some circumstances, a guideline may be relaxed in order to accomplish another, more important guideline. The overall objectives are to ensure that the intent and spirit of the design guidelines are followed and to attain the best possible design within reason.

 

17.50.030 General Parking Guidelines.
A.    Location of parking areas. Aside from concerns for traffic safety and efficiency, the appearance of parking lots, from the standpoint of their visual impact, is an important concern. Projects should be laid out so that parking lots are not the dominant feature of the development when viewed from the street. Generally, it is not advisable to place the parking area along the front of the site because it creates a negative visual impact which detracts from the project’s architectural image. Parking placed along the side or to the rear of a site, or within a complex of buildings, allows project architecture and the beauty of the landscaped open space to take precedence. (See Figure 3-15, Location of Parking Areas)

 



Figure 3-15 Location of Parking Areas

 

B.     Limiting pavement. Paving areas of the site for parking and other vehicle use beyond the minimum necessary to comply with the requirements of this Development Code is strongly discouraged. The City requires significant landscaping adjacent to the perimeter of the parking area and along the street frontage to soften the appearance of paved areas.

 

17.50.040 Access and Circulation.
A.    Primary project entries should be designed as special statements reflective of the character of the project. The goal should be to establish a distinctive and inviting image for the project. Textured paving, flowering accents, low walls, shrubs, and the use of specimen trees (36″ box or larger) should be used to generate visual interest at entry points to commercial centers.

B.     Entry drives on larger projects (200 or more parking stalls) should include a minimum five foot wide landscaped median to separate incoming and out-going traffic. (See Figure 3-16, Entry Drives for Large Lots)



Figure 3-16 Entry Drives for Large Lots

 

C.     Driveways should be coordinated with existing or planned median openings. Driveways should also align with driveways on the opposite side of the roadway.

D.    The first parking stall that is perpendicular to an entry driveway or the first aisle juncture that is perpendicular, should be a least 40 feet back from the curb to provide adequate vehicle queuing distance off the street. With larger centers, a longer setback distance may be required. (See Figure 3-17, Queuing Area)

 



Figure 3-17 Queuing Area

 

E.     Nonresidential projects are encouraged to provide cross-access to adjacent nonresidential properties for convenience, safety and efficient circulation. A Mutual Access Agreement shall be executed where cross access is provided. A shared parking reduction may be allowed in compliance with Section 17.48.050 (Adjustments to Off-Street Parking Requirements).

 

17.50.050 Parking Lot Design.
A.    Parking lots should be designed with a hierarchy of circulation: major access drives with no parking; major circulation drives with little or no parking; and then parking aisles for direct access to parking spaces. Small projects may need to combine components of the hierarchy.

B.     Proposed parking lots with compact spaces should be designed to disperse the compact spaces throughout the parking area.

C.     Parking lots should include landscaping that accents the importance of the driveways from the street, frames major circulation aisles, and highlights pedestrian pathways. (See Figure 3-18, Circulation Hierarchy and Landscaping)

 



Figure 3-18 Circulation Hierarchy and Landscaping

 

D.    Drop-off points (i.e. wider aisles) located near entrances to major buildings and plaza areas should be provided for projects over 50,000 square feet of building area.

E.     Parking areas should be separated from buildings by either a raised walkway or landscape strip at least four feet wide. Situations where parking aisles or spaces directly abut the building are strongly discouraged. (See Figure 3-19, Separation of Parking From Structures)



Figure 3-19 Separation of Parking From Structures

F.     Intersections should be kept to a minimum and dead end aisles should be avoided unless absolutely necessary and then proper backup areas are required.

G.    Parking lots should be broken up into segments or modules by means of intervening landscaping, access driveways, or structures to avoid large unbroken expanses of paved area.

H.    Parking and circulation areas should be screened from public streets by combinations of low walls, berms, plant materials and changes in grade. The height of the screen should not cause visibility problems at entrances or along pedestrian ways.

 

17.50.060 Pedestrian Connections.
A.    Pedestrian and bicycle access should be designed to physically and visually link the site to the public sidewalk and bikeway system as an extension of the project’s circulation system and to separate pedestrian and vehicular traffic. Also, provision should be made for direct pedestrian links between the project and adjoining projects and residential areas, whenever appropriate.

B.     Projects should include a system of pedestrian walkways that interconnect business entries with each other and with parking areas. Walkways should connect individual structures within a project directly without forcing pedestrians to mix with vehicular traffic.

C.     Where pedestrians mix with traffic, parking lots should be designed so that pedestrians walk parallel to moving cars. This will minimize the need for pedestrians to cross parking aisles and landscape areas. (See Figures 3-20, Pedestrian Connections and 3-21, Pedestrian Circulation)



Figure 3-20 Pedestrian Connections



Figure 3-21, Pedestrian Circulation

 

D.    Walkway layout should anticipate pedestrians’ desired movements and should provide direct routes whenever feasible. Meandering sidewalks, while encouraged, should contain only shallow curves to avoid frustrating pedestrians with unnecessary detours.

E.     Walkways should be well-marked by means of low-level directional signs, lighting, distinctive paving, and landscaping. Where feasible, trellises, arbors, arcades, or similar features should be used to cover walkways and provide clear identification of facilities. Where textured paving is used, it should not be so rough or irregular as to make walking difficult or discourage the use of baby strollers or wheelchairs.

 

 

Chapter 17.54 SIGN REGULATIONS
17.54.010 Purpose and Intent.
The purpose and intent of this Section is to establish standards which accomplish the following:

A.    Provide businesses the ability to communicate effectively with their customers without excessive signage;

B.     Preserve and protect the historic character and quality of life that is the basis of Jackson’s economy by maintaining the aesthetics of the City;

C.     Ensure that signage installed meets all applicable building and safety codes;

D.    Establish fair and effective procedures for the enforcement of this Chapter to prevent unsightly sign competition and illegal sign installation to the detriment of local businesses, visitors, and residents;

E.     Reduce hazards to motorists and pedestrians; and

F.     Promote the public health, safety, and general welfare.

 

17.54.020 Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms and phrases shall have the indicated meanings:

A.    “A board sign” is any upright, rigid supporting frame in the form of a triangle with steeply angled sides that meet at the top in the shape of the letter “A” which conveys a message. Sandwich board signs are included in this definition.

B.     “Area of sign” means the number of square feet of the smallest rectangle within which a sign face can be enclosed. In determining the area of an individual sign which has more than one face, the greatest area of sign faces visible from any one point shall be used. The “total area of signs on a site” is the greatest area of sign faces which are visible from any one point.

C.     “Animated sign,” means a sign, or any device designed to attract attention by visual means through the movement or semblance of movement of the whole or any part of the sign.

D.    “Banner sign” is any canvas, plastic coated cloth, or other flexible material sign which is mounted to a structure with rope, canvas, or other fastening device. These signs are considered temporary.

E.     “Billboard” means a sign structure which is available for lease or rent.

F.     “Building face,” means the whole of a building visible in an elevation of the building excluding sloped roof surfaces.

G.    “Bulletin Board” means a sign which accommodates changeable copy and which displays information on activities and events on the premises.

H.    “Cabinet sign” is a sign that contains all the text and/or logo symbols within a single enclosed cabinet and may or may not be illuminated.

I.      “Changeable copy sign” is a sign on which copy is changed manually in the field, i.e. reader boards with changeable letters.

J.      “Channel letter sign” is a fabricated or formed three-dimensional letter that may accommodate a light source.

K.    “Channel logo” is a fabricated or formed three-dimensional logo that may accommodate a light source.

L.     “Community directional sign” means a sign informing the location of a community service organization, public facility, or a church.

M.    “Commercial sign” means a sign that relates primarily to economic interests such as the exchange of goods and services.

N.    “Directory sign” means a sign identifying the location of occupants of a building or group of buildings which are divided into rooms or suites as separate offices or studios.

O.    “Eaves” are the lower border of a roof that overhangs the wall.

P.     “Electronic display screen” is a sign, or portion of a sign, that displays an electronic image or video, which may or may not include text. This definition includes television screens, plasma screens, digital screens, flat screens, LED screens, video boards, and holographic displays.

Q.    “Electronic message center” is any sign or portion of a sign that uses changing lights to form a sign message or messages in text form wherein the sequence of messages and the rate of change is electronically programmed and can be modified by electronic processes.

R.     “Exterior-illuminated sign” means any sign with any part of which is illuminated from an exterior artificial light source mounted on the sign, another structure, or the ground.

S.     “Fascia” means a flat horizontal band or broad fillet covering the joint between the top of a wall and projecting eaves.

T.     “Flag pole sign” is any sign which utilizes the flag pole holes found in the sidewalk along Main Street.

U.    “Flashing sign” means an illuminated sign in which the artificial light is not maintained in a stationary or constant intensity.

V.    “Freestanding sign” means a sign not attached to any building and having its own support structure.

W.    “Historic District” is defined as the metered parking district within the City.

X.    “Identification sign” means any sign identifying an institution in a residential zone, occupant, apartment, residence, school or church, and not advertising any product or service.

Y.    “Interior-illuminated sign” means any part of which has characters, letters, figures, or any portion of the sign face or outline thereof illuminated from an interior light source.

Z.     “Height of sign” means the vertical distance from average adjacent ground level to the top of the sign including the support structure and any design elements.

AA.  “Logo” is a graphic mark or emblem commonly used by commercial enterprises, organizations and individuals to aid and promote instant public recognition. Logos are either purely graphic (symbols/icons) or are composed of the name of the organization (a logotype or wordmark). An example of an abstract mark is the blue octagon representing Chase Bank, while an example of a representational mark is the “everyman” icon of PBS. Examples of well-known logotypes (wordmarks) are the striped IBM design, Mobil written in blue with a red “o” and Coca Cola written in flowing red script.

BB.  “Lot frontage” or “frontage” means the horizontal distance along a lot line adjacent to or highly visible from a public street, or the side of a lot adjacent to or highly visible from a public street.

CC.  “Marquee sign” means a sign placed on the face of a permanent roof structure projecting over the building entrance, which is an integral part of the building (usually a theater or hotel) and is not a fascia extension of the roof or eave.

DD.  “Monument sign” means a sign which is completely self-supporting, has its base on the ground, and is generally rectangular in form.

EE.   “Nonconforming sign” means a sign which was validly installed under laws or ordinances in effect prior to the adoption of this Chapter, but which is in conflict with the provisions of this Chapter.

FF.   “Non-illuminated sign” means a sign with no internal or external artificial light source and only incidentally illuminated by ambient light conditions.

GG.  “Nonresidential zone” means any zone other than RS, RL, RSF, RD, RM, and RH zone districts.

HH.  “Notice” means written correspondence given to a tenant or property owner either by personal delivery or by deposit in the United States mail in a sealed envelope, registered mail, return receipt requested, postage prepaid and addressed to the owner or his/her tenant.

II.     “Off-premises sign” means any sign which directs attention to a business, service, product, or entertainment not sold or offered on the premises on which the sign is located.

JJ.    “Person” means any individual, partnership, corporation, association or government or any other legal entity.

KK.  “Pole sign” is a sign erected on one or more uprights supported from the ground, and which is not a part of any building or structure other than a structure erected solely for the purpose of supporting a sign.

LL.   “Premises” means a building or unified complex of buildings on one lot or on two or more contiguous lots under common ownership.

MM. “Price sign,” means a sign on the premises of a service station which contains information on the cost and type of motor fuel only (Refer to Section 13530 et. seq. California Business and Professional Code).

NN.  “Projecting sign” means a sign which extends out from a building face or wall so that the sign face is perpendicular or at an angle to the building face or wall.

OO.  “Public entrance” means a place of entry at a premises which is accessible to the general public.

PP.   “Reader board sign” See “changeable copy sign”

QQ.  “Roof-mounted sign” means any sign located or attached to the eave of a roof of a building.

RR.  “Sandwich board sign” See the definition for “A board sign.”

SS.   “Shopping center” means five or more stores with a minimum area of 50,000 square feet, 300 feet of frontage and common off-street parking.

TT.   “Second story” means the highest point of the second floor of a building.

UU.  “Sign” means any visual device or representation designed or used for the purpose of communicating a message or identifying or attracting attention to a premises, product, service, person, organization, business or event, with or without the use of the words, visible from outside the premises on which such device is located.

VV.  “Sign face” means the visible sign proper including the characters and symbols (excluding essential structural elements which are not an integral part of the display) and including non-structural frame.

WW.        “Suspended sign,” means a sign attached to and located below any permanent eave, roof, or canopy.

XX.  “Temporary noncommercial sign” means a temporary sign that does not primarily relate to economic interests such as the exchange of goods and services, such as an ideological, political, or religious sign.

YY.  “Temporary sign” means any sign, banner, pennant, valance, or advertising display constructed of cloth, canvas, light fabric, cardboard, wall board, or other light materials, with or without frames, that is not designed or intended to be placed permanently.

ZZ.   “Wall sign” means a single-faced sign painted on or attached to a building or wall, no part of which extends out from or above a wall more than six inches (excluding window signs).

AAA. “Window sign” means a sign displayed within a building or attached to the interior of a window but visible through a window or similar opening for the primary purpose of exterior visibility. (Ord. 707 §2, 2019)

 

17.54.030 Sign Permit Application and Fee.
An application for a permit for each sign shall be made to the Building Official in such form and include such information as the Building Official may prescribe. The application shall be accompanied by the permit fee. The permit fee for each application for each sign shall be based on the fees prescribed in the Uniform Building Code currently in effect and adopted by the City. Sign permit applications and fees for commercial and industrial centers shall be submitted with the building permit application.

 

17.54.040 Erection and Placement of Signs.
No person shall erect, reconstruct, alter, relocate, or place any sign within the City except such signs as are permitted by this Chapter. All signs, including the frames, braces or supports thereof, shall be constructed and maintained in compliance with this article, the Uniform Building Code and National Electric Code, the zoning ordinances and all other applicable ordinances and codes of the City.

 

17.54.045 Obstruction of Ingress or Egress.
No sign, or any portion thereof, shall be anchored to, attached to, supported by any fire escape or any standpipe, or erected so as to obstruct or prevent the unobstructed ingress to or egress from any window, door, or fire escape.

 

17.54.050 Obstruction of Vision.
No sign shall be erected or placed so as to obstruct the vision of vehicular traffic or at any location where it may interfere with, or be confused with, any traffic signal or device.

 

17.54.055 Maintenance and Repair.
All signs including signs installed prior to the adoption of this Chapter shall be constantly maintained in a state of security, safety, and good repair. If the Building Official finds that any sign is unsafe or insecure, is a menace to the public safety, is in a state disrepair, or has been constructed, erected, relocated, or altered after the effective date of this Chapter in violation of the provisions hereof, he or she shall give written notice to the owner or the tenant of the property wherein it is located to remove or alter such sign. If the owner or tenant fails to comply with the provisions of this Chapter within 10 calendar days after such notice, the Building Official may cause such sign to be removed and the cost hereof shall be paid by the owner or tenant. The Building Official may cause any sign which is, in his/her opinion, an immediate peril to persons or property, to be removed summarily and without notice.

 

17.54.060 Removal of Signs.
Any sign now or hereafter existing which no longer advertises a bona fide business conducted, a product sold or service rendered, shall be removed, or the advertising copy shall be painted or coated out, unless it is a sign having historical significance as defined by Section 17.54.150 (Historical Signs) of this Chapter.

If the property owner or tenant fails to do so within 30 calendar days after written notice from the Building Official, the Building Official shall remove or paint out the sign and any expense incident thereunto shall be paid by the owner or tenant.

 

17.54.065 Inspection and Approval.
No sign containing electrical wiring or connections shall be installed until the sign has been inspected and approved by the Building Official or his/her representative. The Building Official may accept the approval of such sign by the Underwriters Laboratories or other recognized testing agency as prima facie evidence of compliance with the requirement of the City for the electrical wiring and construction of such sign.

 

17.54.070 Consent of Owner.
It shall be unlawful for any person to place, attach or maintain any sign, banner, sticker or other advertising devise upon or within any property, whether public or private, without securing the consent of the owner or his/her tenant.

 

17.54.075 Owner Responsible.
It shall be the responsibility of every owner of real property and/or his/her tenant or other person in possession of such property with the consent of the owner to maintain every sign on such property in strict compliances with this Chapter.

 

17.54.080 Encroachment Permit Required.
No sign shall be attached to, anchored in, or supported by any structure or pole placed on or otherwise located on or allowed to extend into public property or rights-of-way, except as otherwise provided in this Chapter, unless an encroachment permit to do so is first obtained from the City.

 

17.54.085 Signs on Public or Private Property.
A.    Except as otherwise provided in this Chapter, signs supported entirely on public or private property may be permitted to extend up to five feet into a public right-of-way; provided that in no event shall any sign be permitted to extend within three feet of any portion of the public right-of-way used principally for vehicular traffic.

B.     Portions of signs extending into the public right-of-way shall have a minimum vertical clearance of eight feet between the bottom of the sign or its supporting structure and the surface of the ground or sidewalk below. A marquee sign shall have a minimum vertical clearance of eight feet. In the event more restrictive provisions are established in connection with State highways, such provisions shall control.

C.     No sign or sign’s structure shall project into any public alley below a height of 14 feet above grade, nor project more than 12 inches where the sign structure is located 14 feet to 16 feet above grade. The sign or sign structure may project no more than 36 inches into the public alley where the sign or sign structure is located more than 16 feet above grade.

 

17.54.090 Conflicting Signs.
Any sign which is permitted to extend over and be maintained on any public right-of-way shall be removed or altered by the person maintaining such sign at his/her sole expense within 10 days of receipt of written notice from the Building Official whenever, by reason of changed traffic conditions or the construction or relocation of public improvements or otherwise, the Building Official finds that the continued existence of such sign is no longer consistent with the purposes for which such public property is to be used.

 

17.54.095 Placement of Signs—Prohibited.
No sign shall be constructed or maintained which has less horizontal or vertical clearance from communication wires or electric power lines than the clearance prescribed by the Orders or Regulation of the State Public Utilities Commission and the Department of Industrial Relations and other State law.

 

17.54.100 Nonconforming Sign Status.
All permanent signs which existed prior to the effective date of this Chapter and which do not meet the requirements of the chapter will be considered nonconforming. Nonconforming signs may be altered, converted, or changed as long as such alteration, conversion, or change does not increase the extent of nonconformity or exceed the 50 percent provision in Section 17.54.105 below.

 

17.54.105 Maintenance and Repairs of Nonconforming Signs.
A.    The routine maintenance or repair of a nonconforming sign or sign structure is permitted, provided the cumulative repair or maintenance does not exceed 50 percent of the replacement cost of the sign.

B.     If any nonconforming sign requires change, repair, or maintenance which would constitute an expense of more than 50 percent of the replacement cost of the sign, such sign must either be removed or brought within the requirements of this Section. Any nonconforming sign that is damaged due to circumstances beyond the owner’s control shall be allowed to be rebuilt, provided that the nonconformity is not increased in any way.

C.     Replacement face plates for internally lit cabinet signs shall be required to conform to Section 17.54.152(H).

 

17.54.118 Storage of Removed Signs.
Signs removed by the Building Official pursuant to this Chapter shall be stored for a period of at least 20 days, and if not claimed within such time, may be destroyed. Prior to the reclaiming of any sign, the owner shall pay a fee of $10 per day to the City to defray a portion of the expenses associated with storing and handling the illegal sign.

 

17.54.120 Administration and Enforcement.
The provisions of this Chapter shall be administered by the Building Official and his/her authorized representatives. All other officers and employees of the City shall assist and cooperate with the Building Official in administering and enforcing the provisions of this Chapter.

 

17.54.125 Revocation of Permit.
Any permit issued under the terms of this Chapter may be revoked by the Building Official when it appears that the sign has been erected or maintained in violation of the provisions of this Chapter or any other ordinance or law. No such permit shall be revoked until a hearing shall have been held by the Building Official. Written notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be given by the Building Official to the property owner or tenant at least 10 days prior to the date set for the hearing. The notice shall contain a brief statement of the grounds for revoking such permit. Notice may be given either by personal delivery or by deposit in the United States mail in a sealed envelope, registered mail, return receipt requested, postage prepaid and addressed to the owner or his/her tenant.

 

17.54.130 Owner to Remove Signs.
Within 30 days after revocation of any permit as provided in the preceding Section or within 10 days after affirmation of such revocation by the Planning Commission as provided in the following Section, the sign or signs described in such revocation shall be removed by the property owner or tenant. If such removal is not completed within that time, the Building Official shall cause such sign to be removed, and the cost thereof shall be paid by such owner or tenant.

 

17.54.135 Appeals.
A.    Any applicant for a permit under the provisions of this Chapter who is dissatisfied with the decision of the Building Official may appeal such decision to the Planning Commission by filing with the City Clerk a written notice of appeal. Such notice must be filed within 10 calendar days after the date on which the decision of the Building Official is made, and shall set forth the specific ground or grounds of such appeal. The City Clerk shall forthwith set the matter for hearing before the Planning Commission and shall cause notice thereof to be mailed to the applicant not less than 10 days before such hearing. Such hearing may be continued from time to time, and upon the conclusion thereof, the Planning Commission shall promptly make a final decision in the matter.

B.     Any applicant dissatisfied with the decision of the Planning Commission may appeal such decision to the City Council by following the same procedure described above.

 

17.54.140 Violation.
Violations under this Section shall be an infraction punishable as set forth in Municipal Code Section 1.20.020 (General Penalty—Infraction), or any successor section thereunto. Violations shall also be subject to enforcement by administrative action following notice to the owner of sign and the opportunity to be heard at a hearing called for that purpose by the City Manager or his/her designee. The hearing officer may, but is not limited to require the owner to do the following:

A.    Remove the sign;

B.     Alter any unlawful or nonconforming sign to bring it into compliance with this Chapter;

C.     Replace any unlawful sign with a sign meeting the requirements of this Chapter;

D.    Assess an administrative penalty and/or enforcement costs against the owner of the sign; or

E.     Cancel or revoke any permit issued under this Chapter.

Any hearing to be held under this Section may be referred to the Planning Commission at the discretion of the City Manager. The remedies set forth in this Section are not exclusive and the City retains the right to exercise any and all other remedies as available in law or equity to address violations of this Chapter.

 

17.54.145 Signs for Business Purposes Generally.
Unless otherwise expressly provided in this Chapter, no sign shall be erected or used for business purposes of any kind except such signs as shall be located on a place of business, enterprise, or calling, and used solely for the naming, designating, or identifying of the business, enterprise, calling, products or services available on or within the premises, except for window signs.

 

17.54.150 Historical Signs.
A sign having historical significance need not be removed or painted out even though it no longer advertises a bona fide business conducted, a product sold or a service rendered. A sign having historical significance would be a sign which would be desirable to retain because of its connection with some event, product, or business which is considered to be historically significant to the City of Jackson. Any person having a sign on his or her property which he or she believes falls in the category of a sign having historical significance may file a written application with the City Clerk requesting that the sign be designated as a sign having historical significance. The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing within 45 days from the date the application is filed for the purpose of hearing comments from the general public regarding the request contained in the application. A notice of the public hearing shall be published once in a newspaper of general circulation published in the County of Amador at least five days prior to the hearing. The City Clerk shall, at least 10 days before the public hearing, inform the Amador County Archivist and the Historical Society of the request so they may comment on whether the sign has historical significance. Within 45 days from the conclusion of the public hearing the Planning Commission shall decide whether the sign has historical significance. The applicant or any citizen of the City may appeal the decision of the Planning Commission to the City Council. The procedure for appealing shall be the same as is established for appealing decisions of the Planning Commission pertaining to a variance.

 

17.54.152 Sign Illumination.
The artificial illumination of signs, either from an internal or external source, shall be designed to eliminate negative impacts on surrounding rights-of-way and properties. The following standards apply to all illuminated signs:

A.    External light sources shall be directed and shielded to limit direct illumination of any object other than the sign;

B.     The light from an illuminated sign shall not be of an intensity or brightness which will interfere with the reasonable enjoyment of residential properties in direct visual proximity to the sign;

C.     Sign shall not have blinking, flashing, or fluttering lights or other illuminating devices that have a changing light intensity, brightness or color;

D.    Colored lights shall not be used at a location or in a manner so as to be confused or construed as traffic control devices;

E.     Neither the direct nor reflected light from primary light sources shall create a hazard to operators of motor vehicles;

F.     Reflective-type bulbs and incandescent lamps that exceed 15 watts (or 15 watt equivalent) shall not be used on the exterior surface of signs so as to expose the face of the bulb or lamp to a public right-of-way or adjacent property;

G.    Light sources shall utilize energy efficient fixtures to the greatest extent possible; and

H.    Cabinet (can or box) signs that are internally illumined shall have opaque backgrounds so that when the sign is illuminated, only the words or logos on the sign are lighted.

 

17.54.155 Exempt Signs.
The following signs shall be allowed in all zoning designations without a permit. All signs falling within categories A and C within this Section shall be in conformity as to size, design, and location with the other sections of this Chapter:

A.    Public information, identification, civic event, and directional signs constructed by a public agency or public utility; signs constructed by a private individual when required by law or regulations of any governmental agency; and legal notices. Signs exempt under this Section shall include safety signs, danger signs, no trespassing signs, signs showing the location of public telephones, signs placed by a public utility to show the location of underground facilities, signs placed by the City indicating scenic or historical points of interest, event signs, banners and patriotic swags in the downtown historic district placed by a public agency, and all signs erected by a public or peace officer in performance of a public duty.

B.     Temporary noncommercial signs that do not exceed 32 square feet per side. No temporary noncommercial signs shall be placed in a way that obstructs pedestrian or vehicle traffic or that poses a public safety or health hazard. Temporary noncommercial signs that do not comply with these requirements will be deemed a public nuisance and abated pursuant to Section 17.54.140 (Violation) of this chapter. Temporary noncommercial signs are limited to eighty square feet of aggregate area on any single parcel of property, must be posted on private property only, and must only be posted with the permission of the property owner.

C.     Signs may be erected in conjunction with construction projects and used for the purpose of publicizing the future occupants of the building, or the architects, engineers and construction organization participating in the project. Such signs shall not exceed six square feet in area, and no freestanding sign shall exceed five feet in height. All such signs shall be removed before a final release on the construction is given by the Building Official. (Ord. 707 §2, 2019)

 

17.54.160 Exceptions.
The provisions of this Chapter shall not apply to signs which have been fabricated or assembled on the premises of a business which makes and sells signs and which is in compliance with all requirements of this Code, which do not advertise the sign business itself, and which are temporarily stored on the premises of the sign business until picked up by customers. In addition, the Planning Commission may, upon filing of appropriate applications, allow exceptions to the provisions of this Chapter. Such exceptions shall be granted only where the Commission finds that:

A.    The proposed exception is required to provide for safe installation of the proposed sign; or

B.     The proposed exception is consistent with the purpose and intent of this Chapter as set forth in Section 17.54.010 and the resulting sign will be superior to the sign which would otherwise be allowed by this Chapter in its design, construction, and placement.

 

17.54.165 Certain Signs Prohibited in All Zones.
No person may erect or maintain a sign which:

A.    Is a flashing sign, changeable copy sign or electronic display screen, except for prices of fuel on appropriate fuel station signs, and electronic message centers.

B.     Is a moving or animated sign including attention getting devices such as spinners, balloons, inflatable signs, and search lights.

C.     Is a sign advertising a business or housing development that is being held by an individual.

D.    Is designed or used for the purpose of emitting sound.

E.     Is roof-mounted except with approval of the Planning Commission per the process established in Section 17.54.160 (Exceptions), and if the building is single-story and is less than 35 feet. To be granted an exemption per Section 17.54.160 (Exceptions) for a roof-mounted sign, the Planning Commission must also make a finding that there is no other reasonable location for sign placement.

 

17.54.170 Sign Criteria for Residential Zones.
A.    Residential signs providing name of residents and address shall be allowed in all residential zones within the City without obtaining a permit if said signs meet the following criteria:

1.     One sign not to exceed two square feet in area attached to and parallel with the front wall of the building, and containing only the name and/or title or occupation of the occupant.

2.     One temporary single or double faced sign not to exceed four square feet in area per side advertising the premises for sale, lease, or rent located not nearer than 10 feet to adjoining premises, nor within a public way.

B.     Subdivision signs offering real estate or homes for sale in an approved subdivision may be erected under the following conditions:

1.     Not more than two such signs shall be allowed per subdivision unit;

2.     No such sign shall exceed 32 square feet in area;

3.     Such signs shall be removed when all lots and houses in the subdivision have been sold.

C.     Two single-sided subdivision name signs not exceeding 32 square feet shall be allowed at each entrance to a subdivision.

D.    One temporary sign, not to exceed six square feet if single-sided or 12 square feet if double sided, is allowed to advertise the property for sale, lease or rent; and shall be located not more than five feet to adjoining properties, nor within a public way. Larger signs may be allowed with approval of the Planning Commission per the process established in Section 17.54.160 (Exceptions).

 

17.54.175 Sign Criteria for Mixed Use and Other Nonresidential Zones.
No sign shall be placed, erected, altered or relocated on any property within the Commercial (C), Limited Commercial (LC), Professional Office (PO), Industrial (I), Public (P), or Recreation (R) zone unless such sign is, as to its exterior appearance, compatible with the Mother Lode architecture and typography consistent with the historic nature of the City (examples of which are available from the City’s Planning Department), and unless it complies with all of the following requirements:

A.    Maximum Aggregate Sign Area Per Site. The aggregate area of all signs on a single lot, excluding exempt signs shall not exceed one square foot of sign area per lineal foot of public street frontage. However, in the special situations listed below, sign area is calculated as follows:

1.     Sites with Multiple Frontages. On sites with more than one frontage on a public street, maximum permitted sign area shall be calculated as follows:

a.     Where an interior lot fronts on two streets (a corner or “through lot”), either both the front and side, or front and rear lot lines as related to the applicable frontages may be used for calculating the allowable sign area.

b.     Where a lot has three or more frontages on a public street, the length of only two contiguous sides, one of which shall be the principal street frontage, shall be added together to determine allowable sign area.

B.     Wall Signs. The maximum wall sign area for each building face shall not exceed 20 percent of the total wall sign area available. No one sign for a single business shall exceed 90 square feet. Businesses with multiple store fronts shall be allowed 180 square feet of total wall signage.

C.     Pole Signs. No pole sign shall be erected to a height exceeding twice the distance from the sign to the nearest property line of the parcel on which it is placed, and in no event shall a pole sign be erected in excess of 35 feet in height. Not more than one pole sign shall be installed for any one entity. Pole signs shall not exceed 32 square feet per side or a total of 64 square feet. Pole signs which advertise a shopping center, professional center, or industrial center shall not exceed the areas set forth in the following Table 1 (Pole Signs).

 



Table 1 Pole Signs

 

D.    Projecting Signs. No projecting sign shall project more than one third of its height above the eave line or parapet of the wall on which it is mounted. There shall be a minimum distance of eight feet from the bottom of the sign to ground level. The minimal horizontal clearance between a sign and the curb line shall be two feet. The maximum projection over a public sidewalk shall be two-thirds the width of the sidewalk or six feet, whichever is less.

E.     Monument Signs. Freestanding monument or “ground” signs can be placed a minimum of five feet from the street right-of-way. Maximum sign area, height, and setback shall not exceed those set forth in Table 2 (Monument Signs).

F.     Suspended Signs. The maximum area for a suspended sign shall be 12 square feet per side. Additionally there shall be a minimum distance of eight feet from the bottom of the sign to ground level

G.    A cinema may erect a directory sign listing the attractions at the cinema the size of which shall be approved by the Planning Commission.

H.    As an alternative to the pole sign allowed in 17.54.175(D), but not in addition thereunto, each gasoline service station may place, erect, alter, or relocate a single pole sign which complies with State requirements.

Table 2 Monument Signs

Distance of Sign from Street Right-of-Way

Building Frontage

Maximum Sign Area

Maximum Height of Sign

5—50 feet

Under 50 feet

30 sq. ft.

6 feet

 

51-100 feet

45 sq. ft.

6 feet

 

101-150 feet

60 sq. ft.

6 feet

 

151-300 feet

75 sq. ft.

6 feet

51—100 feet

Under 50 feet

35 sq. ft.

6 feet

 

51-100 feet

50 sq. ft.

6 feet

 

101-150 feet

65 sq. ft.

6 feet

 

151-300 feet

80 sq. ft.

6 feet

101—200 feet

Under 50 feet

40 sq. ft.

6 feet

 

51-100 feet

55 sq. ft.

6 feet

 

101-150 feet

70 sq. ft.

7 feet

 

151-300 feet

85 sq. ft.

8 feet

201—300 feet

Under 50 feet

45 sq. ft.

7 feet

 

51-100 feet

60 sq. ft.

7 feet

 

101-150 feet

75 sq. ft.

7 feet

 

151-300 feet

90 sq. ft.

8 feet

 

300+ feet

105 sq. ft.

8 feet

 

I.      Board signs are permitted with the following requirements:

1.     Signs shall be a maximum of 24 inches wide and shall not extend more than 36 inches above the sidewalk surface;

2.     Signs shall not be placed within the public way except on established sidewalks within six feet of business frontage;

3.     A clear pedestrian travel way as required by the Americans with Disabilities Act shall determine sign location;

4.     No sign shall contain any flashing, blinking or moving letters, characters or other elements, and the sign itself shall not move;

5.     No sign shall contain any outline tubing, internal lighting, or neon lighting;

6.     The square footage of such signs shall not be counted as aggregate area as specified in subsection A, above.

J.      Temporary commercial signs are allowed subject to the following requirements:

1.     The use of a banner shall be used only to advertise a special promotion or for property sales, not as a permanent sign for naming the business.

2.     A temporary sign may be used to name the business for a period of 60 days only if it is a new business in the process of having permanent signs prepared or an existing business in the process of updating/maintaining existing permanent signs. Existing “naming” signs in place at time of adoption of this Section must be removed no later than six months from the effective date of this article.

3.     A maximum of two temporary/promotional signs shall be allowed per business at any given time.

4.     Temporary signs shall be limited to a total of 16 square feet, unless an exception is approved by the Planning Commission per the process established in Section 17.54.160 (Exceptions).

5.     Temporary signs can only be used up to three times per year for no longer than 30 days each use. An application shall be submitted for each instance per the following requirements:

a.     Sign permit fee shall be $25.00 per sign. Those larger than 16 square feet shall be charged $10.00 for each additional four square feet or portion thereof.

b.     Permit shall include a picture or sketch of the temporary sign with the colors to be used. Neon colors or reflective signs are prohibited.

c.     Location for temporary sign placement shall be shown on a picture or sketch, including distance to nearest street or highway.

d.     Applicant shall provide the dates for the proposed use of the temporary sign.

6.     It is recommended that the letter size conform to the following distance to size ratio based on desired viewing distance: 100 feet—4 inches; 250 feet—10 inches; 360 feet—16 inches; 500 feet—22 inches; 1,000 feet—43 inches.

K.    Temporary signs may be hung on the wall of a building or from sturdy posts. Temporary signs will not be allowed on utility poles, bushes, trees, cyclone fences or “T” posts. Temporary signs shall not be mounted on a roof, balcony or awning. One temporary sign, not to exceed 16 square feet if single-sided or 32 square feet if double sided, is allowed to advertise property for sale, lease or rent; and shall be located not more than five feet to adjoining properties, nor within a public way. Larger signs may be allowed with approval of the Planning Commission per the process established in Section 17.54.160 (Exceptions).

L.     Wall murals, off-premises signs, outdoor advertising, or graphic depictions which exceed the allowable square footage provided in subsection A of this section are subject to the Conditional Use Permit process described in Chapter 17.76 (Use Permits and Minor Use Permits) of the Development Code.

M.    Two off-premises directional signs shall be allowed per business and shall be limited to a maximum size of 25 square feet per side; and provided that such signs shall not be within the public way. Such signs shall not be counted as aggregate area as specified in subsection A.

N.    Window signs may cover no more than 25 percent of the surface area of the window or door in which such signs are placed. Temporary window signs shall not be allowed above the first story of a building. A window sign shall be considered to be a temporary window sign if it is displayed in the same window or door, or same approximate location outside of a window or door, for no more than 30 calendar days within a six-month period of time. Changes in the message displayed on such sign shall not affect to the computation of the 30-day period of time provided for herein. (Ord. 707 §2, 2019)

 

17.54.180 Sign Criteria for the Historic Commercial Zone.
No sign shall be placed, erected, altered or relocated on any property within the Historic Commercial Zone (hc) unless such sign is, as to its exterior appearance, compatible with the Mother Lode architecture and typography consistent with the historic nature of the City (examples of which are available from the City’s Planning Department), and unless it complies with all of the following requirements:

A.    The maximum wall sign area for each building face shall not exceed 20 percent of the total area, but not exceed 90 square feet for a single business, except for multiple store fronts.

B.     Each sign shall be affixed to a building, except that where the building is set back from the street to such extent that a sign affixed to the building would not be within reasonable view from the street, then a sign need not be so affixed, but may be located in some other manner as the Planning Commission shall approve with a Conditional Use Permit;

C.     No sign shall project more than six feet from the face or vertical surface of the building;

D.    No sign shall project above the eave or parapet line of the building;

E.     No sign shall contain any outline tubing;

F.     Either an A-Board sign or a Flag Pole sign is permitted with the following requirements:

1.     Signs shall be a maximum of 24 inches wide and shall not extend more than 36 inches above the sidewalk surface;

2.     Signs shall not be placed within the public way except on established sidewalks and must be within six feet of the business frontage;

3.     A clear pedestrian travel way as required by the Americans with Disabilities Act shall determine sign location;

4.     No sign shall contain any outline tubing, internal lighting, or neon lighting unless the Planning Commission has determined that such sign is historic;

The square footage of such signs shall not be counted as aggregate area as specified in subsection A, above.

G.    Neon signs or signs containing any outline tubing which are sought to be located inside a building and which are designed to be seen from the outside of the building are prohibited with the exception of “Open” signs.

 

17.54.185 Vehicle-Mounted Signs.
A.    No sign shall be placed or erected in the bed of a truck or on the deck of a trailer or a truck.

B.     Banners or other temporary signs displayed on vehicles shall be prohibited, except that temporary signs placed inside a vehicle relating to the proposed sale, lease or exchange of that vehicle are allowed without a permit.

C.     This Section shall not apply to signs that are being transported for installation.

 

17.54.190 Calculation of Sign Area.
Sign area shall include the entire area within a single continuous perimeter composed of squares or rectangles that enclose the extreme limits of all sign elements, including, but not limited to, sign structures or borders, written copy, logos, symbols, illustrations, and color. Supporting structures such as sign bases and columns are not included in sign area provided that they contain no lettering or graphics except for addresses or required tags. The calculation of sign area for various types of signs is illustrated in Figure 3-22, Calculation of Sign Area.

 



Figure 3-22 Calculation of Sign Area

 

17.54.195 Severability.
If any part, section, subsection, paragraph, subparagraph, sentence, phrase, clause, term, or word in this Chapter is declared invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the validity or enforceability of the remaining portions of the chapter.

 

17.54.200 Substitution.
Signs containing noncommercial speech are permitted anywhere that advertising, business, or other commercial signs are permitted, subject to the same regulations applicable to such signs.

 

 

Chapter 17.58 STANDARDS FOR SPECIFIC LAND USES
17.58.010 Purpose of Chapter.
This Chapter provides site planning and development standards for land uses that are allowed by Article II (Zoning Districts and Allowable Land Uses) in individual or multiple zoning districts (e.g., in residential, commercial, and manufacturing districts, and in residential and commercial, and/or in commercial and manufacturing districts).

 

17.58.020 Applicability.
Land uses and activities covered by this Chapter shall comply with the provisions of the Sections applicable to the specific use, in addition to all other applicable provisions of this Development Code.

 

17.58.025 Telecommunication Facilities.
This Section establishes standards for the development and operation of telecommunications facilities including cellular wireless communication facilities (subsection A), satellite antennae (subsection B), single pole/tower amateur radio antennae (subsection C), and television and radio broadcasting towers (subsection D). This Section applies to all new construction of such facilities within the City, and any modification or relocation of such equipment and facilities, exclusive of the ordinary maintenance and repair of facilities and equipment lawfully in existence on the effective date of this Section.

A.    Cellular Wireless Communications Facilities. Except as otherwise provided in subsections G and H, cellular wireless telephone antennae, including supporting towers and related ground-mounted structures and equipment shall comply with the following requirements.

1.     Permit Requirements. The land use permit requirement for wireless communications shall be as determined by the zoning districts and allowable land uses contained within the Municipal Code.

Plans for the wireless communication facilities shall be submitted with a CUP application in compliance with Section 17.70 (Applications, Processing, and Fees).

 

 

2.     Site Selection. Sites for cellular wireless communications facilities and/or buildings shall be selected according to the following order of preference:

a.     On existing structures (e.g., a billboard, church steeple, communication towers, freestanding sign, water tank, etc.);

b.     In locations where the existing topography, vegetation, or other structures provide the greatest amount of screening; or

c.     On vacant land without significant visual mitigation, only in industrial and manufacturing zoning districts where no other feasible alternative exists to such a placement.

As part of the CUP application process, applicants for cellular wireless communication facilities shall be required to provide written documentation demonstrating a good faith effort in locating facilities in compliance with subsection 2a (Site selection order of preference) above.

3.     Co-Location. The City shall encourage and give preference to the co-location of cellular equipment on appropriate existing City structures, and towers subject to reasonable engineering requirements. The City shall encourage utility providers, special districts, and other public agencies to allow co-location of cellular equipment on appropriate existing structures and towers subject to reasonable engineering requirement.

4.     Painting. With the exception of church steeples and artificial tree structures, the equipment and supporting structure shall be painted a single, neutral, nonglossy color (e.g., earth-tones, gray, black, etc.) and, to the extent possible, compatible with the appearance and character of the surrounding neighborhood.

B.     Setbacks. Equipment shall not be located within any front or street side yard setbacks in any zoning district, and shall not extend beyond the property lines.

C.     Signs. Identification signs, including emergency phone number of the cellular service provider, shall be posted and readable at ground level, at all equipment/tower sites.

D.    Undergrounding Required. Electrical and equipment wiring shall be placed underground unless the City Engineer determines that such undergrounding is economically or technically infeasible.

E.     Unused/Obsolete Equipment. Unused/obsolete equipment and towers shall be removed from the site within six months after their need has ceased or the City may, after notice and hearing, remove the equipment and place a lien on the land to recover the costs of removal plus administrative overhead. All towers and equipment not used for a period of six months shall be removed from the site and the site cleared of any debris by the permittee or, if the permittee has not done so after reasonable notice to do so from the City, the City may effect the removal using the bond described herein. At the time any permittee obtains a permit for a tower or other equipment, the permittee shall provide a performance bond, cash, or irrevocable letter of credit (collectively “bond”) in the amount of 100 percent of the City’s estimated cost for removal of the tower and other equipment. Said amount may be revised by the City periodically. The bond shall be utilized by the City in the event that a permittee fails to remove the tower and/or other equipment. If the costs of removal thereof exceed the bond amount, the landowner, if different person or entity from the permittee, shall remove the remaining portion of the tower and/or other equipment at the landowner’s expense or pay to the City the costs necessary to complete the removal.

F.     Maintenance Obligation. The owner and/or operator of facilities and equipment for which a permit is issued under this Section shall operate and maintain such facilities in clean, safe and attractive conditions at all times. If such facilities become dilapidated, inoperative or are abandoned by the owner and/or operator, the City Manager may, after notice and hearing, cause any such facilities and equipment to be removed at the owner’s expense.

G.    Design Review. The application shall be subject to design review by the Planning Commission. In such review the Commission shall give preference to monopole structures over lattice towers and shall have the authority to impose such conditions and mitigation measures on structures as may be necessary or desirable to reduce or eliminate the visual, aesthetic, and/or environmental impacts of the tower or structure proposed.

B.     Satellite Antennae. Satellite antennae, including portable units and dish antennae, shall be designed, installed, and maintained in compliance with the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) and the California Public Utilities Commission (CPUC) and as follows, when these provisions are not in conflict with applicable State and Federal regulations. (Normal/typical television antennae or satellite dishes with a maximum diameter of one meter (approximately 39 inches) are not regulated by this Section).

1.     Application Requirements. Plans for antennae shall be submitted with each application for a land use and/or building permit, and shall include a simple site plan and elevation drawings indicating color, diameter, foundation details, height, landscaping, setbacks, and method of screening. The plans shall be subject to the approval of the City.

2.     Painting. The antennae and supporting structure shall be painted in a single, neutral, nonglossy color (e.g., earth-tones, gray, black, etc.) and, to the extent possible, compatible with the appearance and character of the surrounding neighborhood;

3.     Setbacks. An antenna shall not be located within any front or street side yard setbacks in any zoning district, and shall not extend beyond the property lines;

4.     Undergrounding Required. Electrical and antenna wiring shall be placed underground, whenever possible;

5.     Residential Zoning District Standards. In any residential zoning district, antennae shall be subject to the following standards:

a.     Mounting Location. Only ground-mounted antennae shall be allowed and the antennae shall be located only within the rear yard of the parcel, at least five feet from the rear lot line of an interior parcel, or 15 feet from the street side of a corner parcel. This provision may be modified by the City if strict compliance would result in no/poor satellite reception. However, the maximum diameter of a nonground-mounted antenna shall be one meter (approximately 39 inches);

b.     Size Limitations. The diameter of the ground-mounted antenna shall not exceed eight feet. This provision may be modified by the City if strict compliance would result in no/poor satellite reception;

c.     Screening. The antenna shall be separated from adjoining properties by at least a six-foot high solid fence or wall, or by plants or trees of equal minimum height, approved by the City;

d.     Height and Location. The height and location of the antennae shall comply with the requirements of the applicable zoning district. The height provision may be modified by the City if strict compliance would result in no/poor satellite reception; and

e.     Setbacks. If the subject parcel adjoins a residential zoning district, the antenna shall be set back a minimum distance from the property line that is equal to or greater than the height of the antenna, unless otherwise screened from public view to the satisfaction of the City.

f.      Unused/Obsolete Equipment. Unused/obsolete equipment and towers shall be removed from the site within six months after their need has ceased or the City may, after notice and hearing, remove the equipment and place a lien on the land to recover the costs of removal plus administrative overhead.

g.     Maintenance Obligations. The owner and/or operator of facilities and equipment for which a permit is issued under this Section shall operate and maintain such facilities in clean, safe and attractive conditions at all times. If such facilities become dilapidated, inoperative or are abandoned by the owner and/or operator, the City Manager may, after notice and hearing, cause any such facilities and equipment to be removed at the owner’s expense.

C.     Single Pole/Tower Amateur Radio Antennae. Pole/tower amateur radio antennae shall be designed, constructed/installed, and maintained in the following manner.

1.     Location Requirements. Antennae shall not be located in a front or side yard.

2.     Mounting. Antennae may be ground- or roof-mounted.

3.     Height Limit. The maximum height shall not exceed 50 feet, measured from finished grade.

4.     Size Limitations. Any boom or other active element/accessory shall not exceed 25 feet in length.

5.     Unused/Obsolete Equipment. Unused/obsolete equipment and towers shall be removed from the site within six months after their need has ceased or the City may, after notice and hearing, remove the equipment and place a lien on the land to recover the costs of removal plus administrative overhead.

6.     Maintenance Obligations. The owner and/or operator of facilities and equipment for which a permit is issued under this Section shall operate and maintain such facilities in clean, safe and attractive conditions at all times. If such facilities become dilapidated, inoperative or are abandoned by the owner and/or operator, the City Manager may, after notice and hearing, cause such any facilities and equipment to be removed at the owner’s expense.

D.    Television and Radio Broadcasting Towers. These towers shall be allowed in compliance with Chapter 17.76 (Use Permits and Minor Use Permits).

E.     Effects of Development on Antenna Reception. The City shall not be liable if subsequent development impairs antenna reception.

F.     Variances. Telecommunications facilities not complying with the requirements of this Section may be authorized only if a variance is obtained under Chapter 17.82 (Variances and Historic Variances).

G.    Co-located Wireless Communications Facilities. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Section, base facilities that can accommodate co-located facilities shall require the adoption of a negative declaration, mitigated negative declaration, or certification of an environmental impact report. For purposes of this subsection, a “base facility” is a particular telecommunications facility that is planned to accommodate collocated facilities, and “co-located facilities” are telecommunications facilities that are installed on the same tower or other structure as other telecommunications facilities. Co-located facilities which satisfy all of the following conditions shall not require the issuance of any discretionary permit:

1.     The base facility upon which the facility is co-located has undergone CEQA review consisting of the adoption of a negative declaration, mitigated negative declaration, or certification of an environmental impact report; and the co-located facility incorporates all mitigation measures required by the environmental document.

2.     The co-located facility utilizes a stealth design.

3.     The height of the co-located facility does not exceed the maximum height allowed in the underlying zone or size of the base facility.

4.     The co-located facility is aesthetically compatible with the base facility.

5.     The co-located facility complies with zoning, the General Plan and applicable specific plans.

H.    Facilities in the Public Right-of-Way. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Section, the requirements of this Section shall not apply to communications facilities proposed to be installed in the public right-of-way, to the extent that the application of this Section would be inconsistent with, or is preempted by, applicable law, including but not limited to Section 7901 of the California Public Utilities Code.

 

17.58.030 Accessory Retail Uses.
This Section establishes standards for the development and operation of retail sales and service establishments within/in conjunction with and accessory to a main commercial and/or manufacturing use where authorized by Article II (Zoning Districts and Allowable Land Uses). For example, these accessory uses include restaurants and pharmacies within hospitals, etc., and the sale of retail merchandise.

A.    General standard. Accessory retail uses are allowed, provided there will be only minor external evidence of any commercial activity other than the main use of the parcel (e.g., no signs, windows with merchandise visible from adjoining public rights-of-way, etc.), nor access to any space used for the accessory retail use other than from within the main structure.

B.     Commercial and manufacturing zoning districts. Restaurants and retail sales are allowed in the commercial zoning districts incidental and accessory to offices, hospitals, and other medical facilities and pharmacies. Accessory restaurants, retail sales, and other services are allowed in the manufacturing zoning district to serve the needs of the employees.

C.     Residential and special purpose zoning districts. Membership organizations, social, or recreational establishments may engage in retail sales for guests only.

D.    Review and approval required. Accessory retail uses shall be subject to land use permit approval in compliance with Chapter 17.12 (Commercial, Office, and Industrial Zoning Districts). In order to approve an accessory retail use, the City Planner shall find that there will be no harm to adjoining existing or potential residential development due to excessive noise, traffic, or other adverse effects generated by the accessory use.

 

17.58.040 Accessory Uses—General Standards.
This Section establishes standards defining the relationship between a main use and an accessory use on the same site, where the accessory use is a common feature of the main use, but would not be allowed by the applicable zoning district as a main use on the same site. For example, a coffee shop in a C (Commercial) zoning district may include minor coffee bean roasting as part of its operations as an accessory use in compliance with this Section, but coffee roasting as a main use would be allowed as a main use only in the I (Industrial) district.

A.    Allowable accessory uses. Accessory uses are allowed in conjunction with a main use as follows.

1.     Accessory retail sales. Accessory retail sales are allowed in compliance with Section 17.58.030 (Accessory Retail Uses), above.

2.     Residential accessory uses. Residential accessory uses are allowed in compliance with Article II (Zoning Districts and Allowable Land Uses).

3.     All other accessory uses. The City Planner shall determine whether any proposed accessory use not otherwise listed in this Section is:

a.     Customarily related to and commonly found with the proposed main use, and is allowable subject to the same land use permit as the main use; or

b.     Not customarily related to and commonly found with the proposed main use, and is prohibited.

B.     Timing of accessory use. An accessory use shall only be established at the same time as a main use, or after a main use has been established.

C.     Maximum area of accessory use. An accessory use determined by the City Planner to be allowable in compliance with this Section shall not exceed 25 percent of the floor area devoted to the main use.

 

17.58.060 Animal Raising and Keeping.
A.    Applicability. The standards of this Section shall apply to the raising and keeping of:

1.     Household pets—Includes cats, canaries, dogs, parrots, and other varieties of birds and animals, ordinarily kept as household pets;

2.     Exotic or wild animals—Includes foxes, monkeys, raccoons, snakes, etc;

3.     Fowl and other small animals and birds—Includes chickens, ducks, geese, pigeons, turkeys, and other fowl, and chinchillas, guinea pigs, hamsters, and all types of similar rodents; and

4.     Livestock and other large animals—Includes cows, donkeys, goats, horses, mules or ponies, ostriches, sheep, steer, and swine.

B.     Maximum number of animals. Table 3-12 identifies the maximum number of animals allowed on a single residential parcel or dwelling unit.

 

 

 

TABLE 3-12 MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE ANIMALS

Type of Animal

Maximum Number/Minimum Site Area

Special Standards

Household pets

Shall not exceed four dogs and/or four cats, over four months of age, per single family residential parcel and shall not exceed two dogs and/or two cats, over four months of age, per multifamily residential unit

Allowed in all dwelling units (1)

Exotic or wild animals

Subject to Minor Use Permit

Keeping of exotic or wild animals that require a permit from the Department of Fish Game may be permissible subject to the issuance of a Minor Use Permit, in compliance with Chapter 17.76 (Use Permits and Minor Use Permits)

Livestock, other large animals, fowl and other small animals and birds (2)

Minimum site area shall equal 0.5 acres for each animal unit (3, 4)

A maximum of 10 animal units, subject to the standards identified in Section 17.58.060(C) (Animal raising and keeping standards), below (5)

Notes:

(1)    The keeping of more than the maximum number of household pets may be permissible in RM and RH zoning districts subject to the issuance of a Minor Use Permit, in compliance with Chapter 17.76 (Use Permits and Minor Use Permits).

(2)    The keeping of livestock, other large animals, fowl and other non-household pet small animals and birds is allowed only in the RS and RL zoning districts.

(3)    A property owner shall have the full site area increment to receive the animal allotment; 0.5 acres for the first animal, and 1.4 acres is allowed only two animal units (not three). The keeping of one livestock or other large animal or 10 fowl or other small animal or bird on a parcel not meeting the minimum site area (0.5 acres) may be permissible subject to the issuance of a Minor Use Permit, in compliance with Chapter 17.76 (Use Permits and Minor Use Permits).

(4)    An animal unit is equal to one livestock or other large animal or 10 fowl or other small animal or bird.

(5)    The keeping of more than 10 animal units may be permissible subject to the issuance of a Minor Use Permit, in compliance with Chapter 17.76 (Use Permits and Minor Use Permits). The parcel shall meet the minimum site area requirements for the number of animal units to be kept on the parcel. For example, a parcel with an approved Minor Use Permit to keep 15 animal units shall have a minimum site area of 7.5 acres (0.5 acres per animal unit).

 

C.     Animal raising and keeping standards. These requirements of this subsection shall apply to the raising and keeping of allowable animals, except for household pets and exotic or wild animals.

1.     Site slope requirements. Animals shall not be allowed on slopes exceeding 30 percent.

2.     Erosion and drainage control plan required. An erosion and drainage control plan shall be submitted and approved by the City Engineer for the raising and keeping of animals on parcels over 20 percent in slope. The plan shall propose operational/management measures to prevent grazing to bare soil, and physical measures to prevent sediment transport from the site into waterways, streets, or onto adjoining properties;

 

3.     Existing uses conforming. Any residential property where animals are legally kept as of the effective date of this Development Code shall be deemed to be conforming. Any expansion of use shall be subject to the provisions of this Section;

4.     Site maintenance and animal care. The site shall be maintained and all animals shall be cared for in a manner that does not create a public health problem, or interfere with the public welfare of surrounding properties; and

5.     Water supply. An adequate supply of fresh water shall be available to the animals at all times, subject to the approval of the Amador County Health Officer.

 

17.58.070 Bed and Breakfast Inns.
This Section establishes standards for the development and operation of Bed and Breakfast Inns (B&Bs). The intent of these provisions is to ensure that compatibility between the B&B and any adjoining residential zoning districts/uses is maintained and enhanced.

A.    Applicability. Bed and Breakfast Inns (B&Bs) are allowed in the residential and PO zoning districts with a Minor Use Permit or Use Permit approval, in compliance with Chapter 17.76 (Use Permits and Minor Use Permits), and in the Commercial zoning districts with Zoning Clearance, in compliance with Chapter 17.72 (Zoning Clearance).

B.     Exterior appearance. The exterior appearance of the structure housing the B&B in a residential zoning district shall not be altered from its original single-family character except for a sign as allowed by subsection I, below and those structural modifications necessary to comply with the requirements of Title 24 of the California Building Code of Regulations.

C.     Fire safety. The B&B shall meet the requirements of the Jackson Fire Department.

D.    Guest rooms. The availability of guest rooms is limited to a maximum of three rooms in the Residential and PO zoning districts and five rooms in the other zoning districts. A Use Permit is required for additional rooms. Guest rooms shall not contain food preparation facilities.

E.     Internal access. All access to guest rooms shall be from within the B&B inn or the guest room shall be located in an approved detached living area.

F.     Limitation on services provided. Service shall be limited to the rental of bedrooms or suites; and meal/beverage service shall be provided for registered guests only. Separate/additional kitchens for guests are not allowed. Receptions, private parties, or similar activities, for which a fee is paid or which is allowable only as a condition of room rental, shall not be allowed.

G.    Off-street parking. Off-street parking shall be provided at a ratio of one space for each guest room plus two for the on-site owner/manager of the B&B. Parking shall be located, to the extent possible, out of the required front and side yard setbacks. Parking spaces for the disabled may be counted toward the required off-street parking.

H.    On-site management. The B&B shall be the main residence of the B&B owner or manager.

I.      Signs. Signs shall be limited to one on-site sign not to exceed six square feet in area and shall be installed and maintained in compliance with Chapter 17.54 (Sign Regulations). The design, location, and lighting of the sign shall ensure compatibility with the architecture of the B&B and the surrounding neighborhood.

J.      Site requirements. The proposed site shall generally conform to the standards of the applicable zoning district.

K.    Transient Occupancy Tax. B&Bs shall be subject to the Transient Occupancy Tax in compliance with Chapter 3.24 of the Municipal Code, and shall maintain guest registers to ensure accurate occupancy records.

 

17.58.075 Short-Term Rentals.
The purpose of this Section is to protect the character of the City’s residential and mixed-use neighborhoods by limiting and regulating short-term rental of dwelling units. The following provisions apply to all short-term rentals (STRs):

A.    Applicability. No person shall occupy, use, operate or manage, nor offer or negotiate to use, lease or rent, a dwelling unit for short-term rental occupancy unless issued a short-term rental (STR) permit or exempted under this Section. A permit is required for each dwelling unit even if located on the same legal lot. The standards of this Section shall supersede the standards elsewhere in the Development Code, unless otherwise stated.

B.     Application submittal requirements. The following information shall be submitted to the City along with a form approved by the City in order to apply for a STR permit.

1.     The name, address, email address and telephone number of the owner of the short-term rental for which the permit is to be issued, and the same for the authorized representative if different than the owner. An application may be submitted by an owner with the buyer as the applicant and upon written request, the approval will be granted to both the owner and the buyer.

2.     A floor plan identifying the number of bedrooms proposed for use.

3.     A diagram and/or photograph of the premises showing and indicating the number, location and dimensions of designated on-site and abutting on-street parking spaces that meet the minimum required number of parking spaces and maneuvering per Chapter 17.48 (Parking and Loading Standards).

4.     Acknowledgment by signature that the owner and authorized representative have read all the regulations relating to the operation of a short-term rental.

5.     Certification of the accuracy of the information submitted, and agreement to comply with the conditions of the permit.

6.     Consent to inspection to ensure compliance with this Section.

C.     Limits on permit transfer. Any STR application submitted after adoption of this Section, is specific to the owner of the dwelling unit or owner-authorized buyer for which the permit is issued. This means that the STR permit shall not run with the land, but shall terminate and be void with no further proceedings on sale or transfer of the real property which was rented pursuant to the STR permit.

Sale or transfer means any change of ownership during the lifetime of the permit holder, whether or not there is consideration, or after the death of the permit holder, except a change in ownership where title is held in survivorship with a spouse or domestic partner, or a transfer on the owner’s death to a trust which benefits only a spouse, child(ren) or domestic partner for the lifetime of the spouse, child(ren) or domestic partner. The survivor may not sell or transfer title, except that title may transfer among the survivors. A sale or transfer also does not mean: (1) the transfer of ownership from the owner(s) of the real property to or between the members of a limited liability company or partnership when the transfer involves the same owners; or (2) the transfer to a trustee, a corporation, a partnership, a limited partnership, a limited liability partnership, or other similar entity, if at least one owner is living at the time of transfer so long as that owner retains at least a 25 percent interest in the entity. The permit or nonconforming right shall terminate if the original owner ceases to own at least 25 percent interest in the entity. If the owner is a corporation, the shareholders of the corporation shall be considered the owners for purposes of this Section.

D.    Occupancy. The maximum occupancy for the dwelling shall be two persons per bedroom plus two additional persons. For example, a two-bedroom dwelling would have a maximum occupancy of six persons.

E.     Parking. One off-street parking space per bedroom is required:

1.     If the garage is to be utilized to meet the parking requirement, a photo of the interior of the garage shall be submitted to show the garage is available for parking. The garage shall continually be available for guest parking as long as the STR permit is valid.

F.     Prohibited use. No recreational vehicle, travel trailer, or tent or other temporary shelter shall be used in conjunction with the short-term rental.

G.    Short-term rental operating license. In addition to obtaining a STR permit under this Section, persons operating short-term rentals must register as required in and otherwise comply with Chapter 3.24 (Transient Occupancy Tax) and other applicable provisions of the Code. Failure to do so is grounds for permit suspension or revocation.

H.    Abandonment of use.

1.     Notwithstanding Chapter 17.130 (Nonconforming Uses, Structures and Parcels), if the STR ceases for a period of more than 12 months, the STR permit shall be void with no further proceedings.

2.     Failure to maintain the STR permit shall be considered abandonment of use.

3.     Temporary hardship exemption.

a.     A temporary hardship exemption from this Section may be granted by the City Planner or designee. The following hardships, including a submission of proof, may be acceptable to the City:

i.      Medical condition of the owner, spouse, domestic partner or immediate family member that jeopardizes the ability of the owner to operate the STR;

ii.     Death of a spouse, domestic partner or immediate family member that jeopardizes the ability of the owner to operate the STR; or

iii.    Structural integrity of the STR that deems it uninhabitable for tenants and is not self-imposed.

b.     A time limit may be set by the City Planner or designee, but shall not exceed six months. A one-time extension may be approved upon request if one of the conditions of subsection (H)(3)(a) of this Section still applies.

I.      Expiration of approval and initiation of use. If the STR does not initiate the use by renting the STR at least one night within the first 12 months of obtaining a STR permit, the STR permit shall be void with no further proceedings.

J.      Prior existing use.

1.     Existing permits. Any existing STR may continue as a legal nonconforming use provided:

a.     That the use is not abandoned under subsection (H) of this Section; and

b.     That the owner registers as required by this Section and Chapter 3.24 (Transient Occupancy Tax). The owner of the dwelling has the burden of establishing a valid prior approval when registering.

K.    House rules. Each STR permit shall be subject to the house rules set forth in this Section. The permittee shall provide the City Planner with a copy of the house rules prior to rental of the unit and shall promptly notify the City Planner in writing identifying any changes to the house rules. Prior to each rental of a unit, a copy of the house rules, the rental agreement, and the STR permit shall be posted in a prominent location inside the STR unit, including, at a minimum, the following:

1.     As part of the application for rental, the prospective renter shall sign an agreement acknowledging the house rules and promising to comply with them.

2.     The permittee shall limit overnight occupancy of the vacation rental to the specific number of renters designated in the permit, consistent with subsection (D) of this Section.

3.     The permittee shall limit the number of vehicles of overnight renters designated in the permit, and shall require overnight renters to utilize designated on-site parking spaces to the maximum extent possible.

4.     The permittee shall provide access to the garage of the residence if that area has been included in the determination of the number of available on-site spaces per this Code.

5.     The permittee shall provide appropriate refuse and recycling service for the STR. Property shall be free of debris both onsite and in the street.

6.     Quiet times shall be nine p.m. to seven a.m. Sunday through Thursday evenings and ten p.m. to seven a.m. Friday and Saturday evenings.

7.     The permittee shall ensure that the renters and/or guests of the vacation rental do not create unreasonable noise or disturbances, engage in disorderly conduct, or violate provisions of this Code or any State law pertaining to noise or disorderly conduct.

8.     The permittee shall, upon notification that renters and/or guests of the STR have violated any house rules promptly act to stop the violation and prevent a recurrence of the violation.

9.     Pool and hot tubs shall be adequately screened from adjacent properties to minimize noise impacts and shall have the hours of operation clearly posted adjacent to the facility.

10.   Exterior lighting shall also be adequately shielded from adjacent properties to minimize light pollution impacts in accordance with Chapter 17.43 (Lighting Regulations).

11.   It is prohibited to use the STR unit for any wedding, auction, commercial function, or other similar event that is inconsistent with the use of the property for transient occupancy in a residential neighborhood.

12.   Pets may be permitted by STR permittees, however the pet must be attended to at all times.

L.     Inspection. Any STR applications submitted after adoption of the ordinance adding this Section, shall be subject to inspection prior to commencement of the use by the City for compliance with this Section.

1.     The City Planner or designee may conduct a site visit upon an application for an STR to confirm the number of bedrooms stated on the application and the number, location and availability of on-site parking spaces. The site visit will be coordinated with the applicant and be conducted during normal business hours, and with reasonable notice.

2.     The City Planner or designee may visit and inspect the site of a STR on a prescribed schedule to ensure compliance with all applicable regulations, during normal business hours, and with reasonable notice and other procedural safeguards as necessary. Code violations shall be processed in accordance with Chapter 17.190 (Revocations and Modifications) and Chapter 17.200 (Enforcement). (Ord. 707 §3, 2019)

 

17.58.080 Child Day Care Facilities.
This Section establishes standards for the City review of child day care facilities, in compliance with State law, including the limitations on the City’s authority to regulate these facilities, in a manner that recognizes the needs of day care operators and at the same time minimizes the effects on surrounding residents. These standards apply in addition to the other applicable provisions of this Development Code and any requirements imposed by the California Department of Social Services through its facility licensing procedures. Licensing by the Department of Social services is required for child day care facilities.

A.    Standards for small family day care homes. The following standards shall apply:

1.     Permit requirements. Small family day care homes shall be a permitted use as part of a single family dwelling. A land use permit shall not be required to establish a small family day care homes provided the family day care home complies with the requirements of this subsection and State laws regulating small family day care homes.

2.     Primary use as residence required. The small family day care home shall be the principle residence of the day care provider, and the use shall be clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the property as a residence.

3.     Fire protection. The facility shall contain a fire extinguisher and smoke detector devices.

B.     Standards for large family day care homes. The following standards shall apply:

1.     Permit and notice requirements. Large family day care homes shall be a permitted use as part of a single family dwelling located in a residential zoning district. Permit processing for large family day care homes shall be subject to the following:

a.     A large family day care home shall require the approval of a nondiscretionary Large Family Day Care Permit by the City Planner. Instead of the public notice required by Chapter 17.180 (Public Hearings), property owners within 100 feet of the proposed site shall be provided notice of the application at least 10 days before the date of the City Planner’s decision on the entitlement. A public hearing shall not be held unless requested in writing by the applicant or other affected person(s).

b.     The notice shall clearly indicate that State law requires that the entitlement be issued, authorizing operation of the large family day care home on any parcel zoned for a single-family dwelling, subject to the applicable standards in this subsection. Further, the notice shall state that the determination may be appealed to the Planning Commission, in compliance with Chapter 17.140 (Appeals), but that the Planning Commission may only grant the appeal and reverse or modify the determination if the Planning Commission finds that the City Planner’s determination was contrary to City or State laws governing large family day care homes; and

c.     A Large Family Day Care Permit shall be issued if the City Planner determines that the proposed large family day care home will comply with the standards in this subsection.

 

d.     Refer to Section 17.200.050 (Initial Enforcement Action) if problems arise.

2.     Primary use as residence required. The large family day care home shall be the principle residence of the day care provider, and the use shall be clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the property as a residence.

3.     Fire protection. The facility shall contain a fire extinguisher and smoke detector devices and comply with the standards established by the Jackson Fire Department.

4.     Health and safety standards. Each facility shall be inspected by the City for compliance with the Housing Code and any regulations adopted by the State Fire Marshall concerning standards applicable to day care facilities; and each facility shall comply with all health and sanitation requirements administered by the Amador County Health Department.

5.     Noise standards. In order to protect adjoining residential dwellings from noise impacts, a facility within any residential zoning district may only operate up to 14 hours each day between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. and may only conduct outdoor activities between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. Additionally, the facility shall be in full compliance with Chapter 17.44 (Noise) for the subject zoning district.

6.     Off-street parking.

a.     Each facility shall have the number of parking spaces required for single-family dwellings, in compliance with Chapter 17.48 (Parking and Loading Standards), one additional space for the drop-off and pick-up of the children utilizing the facility to ensure that the children are not placed at risk and street traffic is not unduly interrupted, and one additional parking space for each person working at the facility, other than a person who resides at the home.

b.     The driveway parking spaces may be in tandem with the on-site garage spaces, in compliance with Chapter 17.48 (Parking and Loading Standards). The facility shall be provided with adequately designed off-street drop-off and pick-up areas and an off-street turnaround area to ensure that vehicles reentering the street will be able to do so without the need for backup maneuvers.

7.     Private road access.

a.     If the proposed day care home does not have access to a City-maintained road, the applicant shall join, form, or demonstrate that they are part of a private road maintenance agreement. If the private road is maintained by a homeowners association, participation in a Road Maintenance Association shall be included as part of the application and a Letter of Acknowledgment from the Association shall accompany the application. If a new road maintenance agreement is required, the City Engineer shall review the submitted agreement.

b.     As an alternative to entering into a road maintenance agreement with a homeowners association the day care provider may decide to be solely responsible for the maintenance of the private road. This decision by the day care provider shall be deemed a condition of the use of the property and shall be documented by a written declaration of that decision, which shall be recorded in the County Recorder’s Office.

8.     Separation standards. A proposed large family day care home shall be located so that no adjoining residentially-zoned parcel is bordered on more than one side by a care facility, and so that no other care facility is located within 300 feet of the proposed facility. These separation standards may be reduced by the City Planner through a Minor Use Permit, in accordance with Chapter 17.76 (Use Permits and Minor Use Permits).

9.     Signs. On-site signs shall be in compliance with Chapter 17.54 (Sign Regulations).

C.     Standards for child day care centers. The following standards shall apply, in addition to the standards in subsection B (Standards for large family day care homes), above:

1.     Indoor play areas. The facility shall be provided with indoor play areas in compliance with State requirements. Separate and clearly defined play and activity areas shall be provided for each age group, including infant, toddler, preschool, and school age children;

2.     Outdoor play areas. An outdoor play area shall be provided in the rear yard of the site, as follows:

7.     Minimum area. The play area shall have at least 75 square feet for each child, but not less than a total of 450 square feet; and

8.     Fencing. A six-foot high solid decorative fence or wall shall be constructed around all outdoor play and activity areas, except in the front yard or within a traffic safety sight area. Fences or walls shall provide for safety with controlled points of entry in compliance with Section 17.30.070 (Fences, Walls, and Hedges);

3.     Pools/spas. Swimming pools/spas shall not be installed, due to high risk and human safety considerations. Additionally, an existing pool/spa shall not remain on the parcel, unless determined by the City Planner that adequate, secure separation exists between the pool/spa and the facilities used by the children.

 

17.58.090 Churches, Community Centers, and Membership Organizations.
A.    Purpose. This Section establishes location criteria and standards for the development of churches/places of worship, community centers, membership organizations, and related accessory uses that provide for compatibility with adjoining land uses. (Related uses of the above including educational, day care, and major recreational facilities that are allowed in the applicable zoning district as a permitted or conditional use shall be applied for at the same time of the initial application for the church/place of worship, community center, or membership organization or a subsequent land use permit will be required to establish the use.)

B.     Location criteria. New facilities shall be located either:

1.     Located within or contiguous with zoning districts allowing multifamily, commercial, manufacturing, or public land uses; or

2.     With frontage on a road designated by the City as a collector road, or higher functional standard road.

C.     Access.

1.     Direct access to a collector road is not required, but all access shall have a minimum 24-foot wide paved roadway. If the proposed use does not have access to a City maintained road, the applicant shall join, form, or demonstrate that they are part of a private road maintenance agreement. If the private road is maintained by a homeowners association, participation in a Road Maintenance Association shall be included as part of the application and a Letter of Acknowledgment from the Association shall accompany the application. If a new road maintenance agreement is required, the City Engineer shall review the submitted agreement.

2.     As an alternative to entering into a road maintenance agreement the applicant may decide to be solely responsible for the maintenance of the private road. This decision by the applicant shall be deemed a condition of the use of the property and shall be documented by a written declaration of that decision, which shall be recorded in the County Recorder’s Office.

D.    Setbacks. A minimum setback of 25 feet is required from any residentially zoned parcel or any parcel with a residential use as its main use. At least 15 feet of the setback shall be landscaped with the intent of screening all structures and paved areas.

E.     Site coverage. All new facilities shall meet the lot coverage standards determined by Table 3-13.

 

TABLE 3-13 MAXIMUM SITE COVERAGE

Parcel Size

Maximum Coverage

2 acres or less

60%

2.01—5 acres

50%

Greater than 5 acres

40%

 

17.58.100 Accessory Dwelling Units.
The following supplemental regulations are intended to implement the general plan housing policy on accessory dwelling units, by allowing accessory or second dwelling units subject to zoning permit in accordance with Development Code, Article IV, Chapter 17.70 (Applications, Processing and Fees), and compliance with the standards listed below, except for those accessory dwelling units which only require a building permit as provided in subsection (H) of this Section. The accessory dwelling unit zoning clearance application shall be considered ministerially without any discretionary review or a hearing and shall be approved or denied within 120 days after receipt of a complete application.

A.    Design and development standards.

1.     The lot is zoned for single-family or multifamily use and contains an existing, single-family dwelling or a single-family dwelling will be constructed in conjunction with the accessory dwelling unit.

2.     An accessory dwelling unit shall be within or attached to the primary structure with a common wall (providing a minimum five lineal feet of attachment), and shall not exceed 50 percent of the existing living area, with a maximum increase in floor area of 1,200 square feet, nor be less than 150 square feet in size. Alternatively, the accessory dwelling unit may be detached from the primary structure and shall not exceed 1,200 square feet, nor be less than 150 square feet in size.

3.     An accessory dwelling unit shall comply with the development regulations in Development Code, Article II, Section 17.07.040 (Residential Zoning District General Development Standards), including, but not limited to, the regulations for yards, building height, stories, lot coverage, and floor area ratio for the zoning district in which it is located, except as modified by this Section.

4.     No setback shall be required for an existing garage that is converted to an accessory dwelling unit, and a setback of no more than five feet from the side and rear lot lines shall be required for an accessory dwelling unit that is constructed above a garage.

5.     An accessory dwelling unit shall include permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation on the same parcel as the single-family dwelling is situated.

6.     The exterior design, building materials, colors, window style, and exterior finishes shall be substantially the same as those on the existing dwelling.

7.     No passageway shall be required in conjunction with the construction of an accessory dwelling unit. Outside access to the secondary dwelling unit shall be located or screened so as not to be visible from the abutting street.

8.     An accessory dwelling unit shall meet the requirements of the building code, as adopted and amended by Title 14 of the Municipal Code, that apply to detached dwellings, as appropriate. Exception: An accessory dwelling unit is required to have fire sprinklers only if the primary residence is also required to have fire sprinklers.

9.     A new or separate utility connection directly between the accessory dwelling unit and the utility may be required. The connection may be subject to a connection fee or capacity charge that shall be proportionate to the burden of the proposed accessory dwelling unit, based upon either its size or the number of its plumbing fixtures, upon the water or sewer system. This fee or charge shall not exceed the reasonable cost of providing this service.

B.     Parking.

1.     Except as provided in subsection (B)(2):

a.     Accessory dwelling units must meet the following parking standards:

i.      For accessory dwelling units with no separate bedrooms, one off-street parking space shall be provided per unit.

ii.     For accessory dwelling units with at least one separate bedroom, one off-street parking space shall be provided per bedroom.

b.     If parking is required:

i.      The required parking spaces may be located on setback areas approved by the City Planner or tandem parking on an existing driveway, unless specific findings are made under subsection (B)(1)(b)(ii).

ii.     Parking arrangements in subsection (B)(1)(b)(i) may be prohibited if the zoning administrator makes specific findings that such parking arrangements are not feasible based upon specific site or regional topographical or fire or life safety conditions, or that such arrangements are not permitted anywhere in the jurisdiction.

iii.    When a garage, carport, or covered parking structure is demolished in conjunction with the construction of an accessory dwelling unit, the replacement spaces may be located in any configuration on the same lot as the accessory dwelling unit, including, but not limited to, as covered spaces, uncovered spaces, tandem spaces, or by the use of mechanical automobile parking lifts.

2.     Parking standards shall not be imposed on an accessory dwelling unit in any of the following circumstances:

a.     The accessory dwelling unit is located within one-half mile of public transit.

b.     The accessory dwelling unit is located within an architecturally and historically significant historic district.

 

c.     The accessory dwelling unit is part of the existing primary residence or an existing accessory structure.

d.     When on-street parking permits are required but not offered to the occupant of the accessory dwelling unit.

e.     When there is a car share vehicle located within one block of the accessory dwelling unit.

C.     Nonconforming units. If the existing primary dwelling unit is a legally nonconforming unit, an accessory dwelling unit may be constructed only if the nonconformity is not expanded and the accessory dwelling unit meets all current applicable zoning and building standards.

D.    No subdivision. No subdivision of land or air rights are authorized that would result in the accessory dwelling unit being located on a separate lot. The accessory dwelling unit shall not be intended for sale separate from the primary dwelling.

E.     Occupancy. The owner of a parcel containing an accessory dwelling unit shall occupy either the primary or the accessory dwelling unit. The city shall require recordation of a deed restriction providing for this restriction before issuance of the certificate of occupancy. The accessory dwelling unit may be rented.

F.     Preexisting units. An accessory dwelling unit constructed or converted without a building permit before adoption of the city’s accessory dwelling unit regulations must obtain a building or code compliance permit and zoning permit to legalize the use.

G.    One unit. There shall not be more than one accessory dwelling unit on any parcel.

H.    Exception. An accessory dwelling unit is exempt from the requirements of this Section and may proceed with a building permit if the unit meets all the requirements of subsection (H)(1):

1.     The accessory dwelling unit:

a.     Is one accessory dwelling unit per single-family lot located within a single-family residential zone;

b.     Is contained within the existing [living area] space of a single-family residence or accessory structure;

c.     Has independent exterior access from the existing residence; and

d.     The side and rear setbacks are sufficient for fire safety.

2.     If subparagraph requirements of subsection (H)(1) are met, then the applicant:

a.     Is required to install fire sprinklers in the accessory dwelling unit if the primary residence is also required to have fire sprinklers;

b.     Is not required to install a new or separate utility connection directly between the accessory dwelling unit and the utility, or to be charged a related connection fee or capacity charge.

c.     Shall record a deed restriction as provided in subsection (E) of this Section and obtain a building permit as required by Title 14 of the Municipal Code.

I.      Effect. An accessory dwelling unit that conforms to this Section shall:

1.     Be deemed an accessory use or an accessory building and not be considered to exceed the allowable density for the lot upon which it is located;

 

2.     Be deemed a residential use that is consistent with the general plan and the zoning designations for the lot;

3.     Not be considered in the application of any ordinance, policy, or program to limit residential growth; and

4.     Not be considered a new residential use for the purposes of calculating connection fees or capacity charges for utilities, including water and sewer service except in accordance with subsection (A)(9) of this Section. (Ord. 707 §4, 2019)

 

17.58.110 Drive-In and Drive-Through Facilities.
A.    Purpose and applicability. This Section establishes supplementary standards for drive-in restaurants and fast food establishments, with drive-through facilities, located within the C (Commercial) zoning district which conduct business while customers remain in their vehicles. Other types of drive-in and drive-through facilities are not permitted.

B.     Permit requirement. Drive-in restaurants and fast food or counter-service establishments, with drive-through facilities, shall require Use Permit approval, in compliance with Chapter 17.76 (Use Permits and Minor Use Permits).

C.     General standards. Drive-in and drive-through facilities shall be designed and operated to effectively mitigate problems of air pollution, congestion, excessive pavement, litter, noise, and unsightliness and shall comply with the on-site circulation standards in subsection E, below, which are not applicable to drive-in theaters or service stations.

D.    Accessory use required. Drive-thru facilities may only be accessory to an allowable main use.

E.     On-site circulation. Parcels with drive-through facilities shall be provided with internal circulation and traffic control devices as follows.

1.     Aisle design. Drive-thru aisles shall be located and designed as follows.

a.     The entrance/exit of any drive-thru aisle shall be at least 50 feet from an intersection of public rights-of-way (measured at the closest intersecting curbs) and at least 25 feet from the edge of any driveway on an adjoining parcel. The drive-thru aisle or stacking area (see following subsection (E)(2) shall not be located adjacent to a street frontage.

b.     Drive thru-aisles shall be designed with a minimum 10-foot interior radius at curves and a minimum 12-foot width.

2.     Stacking area. A clearly identified area shall be provided for vehicles waiting for drive-through service that is physically separated from other on-site traffic circulation.

 

a.     The stacking area shall accommodate a minimum of five cars for each drive-through window in addition to the vehicle(s) receiving service.

b.     The stacking area shall be located so that the area for five cars is located before their reaching the menu board.

c.     Separation of the stacking area from other traffic shall be by asphaltic or concrete curbing, or paint striping on at least one side of the lane.

3.     Walkways. Pedestrian walkways should not intersect the drive-thru drive aisles, but where they do, they shall have clear visibility, and emphasized by enhanced paving or marking.

F.     Screening. An eight-foot high solid decorative wall shall be constructed on each property line that is adjoining a residentially zoned/occupied parcel. The design of the wall and the proposed construction materials shall be subject to the approval of the City Planner.

G.    Signs.

1.     Directional signs. Each entrance to, and exit from, an aisle and the direction of flow shall be clearly designated by signs and pavement marking(s) or raised curbs.

2.     Menu boards. Menu boards shall not exceed 24 square feet in area, with a maximum height of six feet, and shall face away from public rights-of-way. Outdoor speakers shall be located at least 50 feet from any residentially zoned/occupied parcel.

H.    Minimum floor area for restaurants. To ensure that the drive-thru service facility is an accessory to a primary restaurant use, the minimum interior floor area for drive-thru restaurants shall be 1,000 gross square feet.

I.      Facility design within shopping centers. Drive-thru facilities within an integrated shopping center shall have an architectural style consistent with the theme established in the center. The architecture of any drive-thru facility shall provide compatibility with surrounding uses in terms of color, form, materials, scale, etc.

J.      Parking. No reduction in off-street parking requirements shall be granted a restaurant because drive-thru service facilities are provided.

K.    Public hearing notice. Whenever a hearing is held regarding a land use permit for a drive-through facility, notice procedures for the public hearing shall comply with the requirements of Section 65091(d) of the California Government Code.

 

17.58.114 Electrical Utility Facilities.
A.    Purpose. The following standards are established to ensure that the discretionary review of new electrical facilities would result in the approval of facilities that are compatible with surrounding structures and land use activities, in compliance with Chapter 17.76 (Use Permits and Minor Use Permits).

B.     Applicability. The standards shall apply to the following types of electrical facilities in compliance with State law (Government Code Sections 53091 and 53096):

1.     Electrical distribution lines of 100,000 volts or greater;

2.     Electrical substations within an electrical transmission system which receives electricity at 100,000 volts or greater; and

3.     The production or generation of electrical energy.

 

C.     Standards. All applicable electrical facilities shall comply with the following standards:

1.     All electrical facilities which produce or generate electrical energy shall be properly screened from public view. The extent and method (e.g., design, materials, etc.) of screening shall be subject to the approval of the City Planner;

2.     All Use Permits for electrical facilities shall be appropriately conditioned to ensure that the:

a.     Facility would be located, designed, operated, and continually maintained in a manner which further ensures that the facility will always remain compatible with, and will not cause any negative impacts upon, surrounding structures and land use activities;

b.     Facility would be reviewed at the end of the first full year of operation, and at least every five years thereafter, to ensure on going compliance with all conditions, rules, and regulations governing the operation of the facility;

c.     Owner/operator of the facility clearly displays all of the conditions, rules, and regulations governing the operation of the facility and conducts routine classes for all employees to review the expected levels of employee conduct to further ensure full compliance with the conditions, rules, and regulations;

3.     The owner/operator shall take all necessary steps to provide for the following on-going safety/security measures at electrical substations and facilities that produce or generate electrical energy:

a.     The owner/operator shall prevent the unauthorized entry of persons or animals by providing surveillance to control entry onto the facility; and

b.     Perimeter fencing shall be constructed of a material and at a height specified by the City Planner.

4.     The owner/operator shall cooperate with the City in complying with all of the following on-going monitoring measures:

a.     The City shall be authorized to enforce all conditions, rules, and regulations related to the facility, including entry onto the subject property to ensure compliance; and

b.     The owner/operator shall immediately distribute copies of all compliance reports as to facility operations, and copies of all inspection reports made by other local, Regional, State, or Federal agencies to the City Planner.

5.     The following additional conditions should be imposed by the Commission:

a.     Before issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy, the owner/operator shall document that all financial responsibility requirements imposed by State or Federal agencies have been met;

b.     The owner/operator shall indemnify, defend, and render the City harmless against all claims, actions, or liabilities relating to permit approval, and the subsequent development/operation of the electrical facility;

c.     The owner/operator shall prepare and submit an emergency response plan and annual preparedness report to the City Planner. The plan/report shall be initialed by each person at the facility who has emergency response assignments; and

d.     The City may employ any and all methods allowed by law to enforce the provisions of this Section, and related requirements of the Municipal Code.

D.    Additional findings. The following finding shall be made in addition to those findings identified in Section 17.76.030 (Findings and Decision) before granting the approval of a Use Permit for the proposed electrical facility: The electrical facility shall be located, designed, operated, and continually maintained in a manner which ensures that the facility will always remain compatible with, and will not cause any negative impacts upon, surrounding structures and land use activities, in compliance with Chapter 17.76 (Use Permits and Minor Use Permits).

 

17.58.120 Home Occupations.
This Section establishes standards for the development and operation of home occupations that are secondary to, and compatible with surrounding residential uses. A home occupation is an accessory commercial activity or business service use customarily conducted entirely within a dwelling, by its residents only, in a manner clearly incidental to the residential character of the site and surrounding neighborhood.

A.    Exempt activities. Home occupations conducted solely by residents of a housing unit that are limited to the use of a desk, telephone, personal computer and computer accessories, or other similar home office equipment and do not generate pedestrian or vehicular customer or delivery trips shall be exempt from the requirements for a Home Occupation Permit.

B.     Permit requirement. A Home Occupation Permit shall be obtained and posted in compliance with this Section for home occupations, which are allowed as accessory uses in all residential zoning districts. A statement of compliance with the operating standards identified in subsection D, below shall be signed before issuance of the Home Occupation Permit.

C.     Operating standards. Home occupations shall comply with the following operating standards:

1.     The home occupation shall be clearly secondary to the full-time use of the structure as a dwelling;

2.     The use shall not require any modification not customarily found in a dwelling, nor shall the home occupation activity be visible from the adjoining public rights-of-way or from neighboring parcels;

3.     The use shall not display window or advertising sign(s) (one name plate not exceeding one square foot in area may be allowed by the City Planner), merchandise or stock in trade, or other identification of the home occupation on the premises;

4.     The home occupation shall be confined to not more than 25 percent of the floor area of the main dwelling nor more than 400 square feet of floor area, whichever is greater, and not within an accessory structure. Storage shall not occur out-of-doors or within a required enclosed garage, that would eliminate or constrict required parking;

5.     The home occupation shall comply with all applicable provisions of the City Building Code;

6.     The residence shall have and maintain at least two on-site parking spaces;

7.     Only one vehicle, with a capacity not exceeding one ton may be used by the resident directly or indirectly in connection with a home occupation;

8.     Activities conducted and equipment or material used shall not change the fire safety or occupancy classifications of the premises. The use shall not employ the storage of pesticides or explosive, flammable, or hazardous materials;

9.     The home occupation shall not create dust, electrical interference, fumes, gas, glare, light, noise, odor, smoke, toxic/hazardous materials, vibration, or other hazards or nuisances; and

10.   The home occupation shall not generate pedestrian or vehicular customer or delivery greater than two trips per day. A trip for the purposes of this Section shall be defined as one entry trip and one exit trip from the parcel.

D.    Home occupations requiring Minor Use Permit approval. The following are activities that may not comply with the operating standards in subsection C above, but may be allowed with Minor Use Permit approval, in compliance with Chapter 17.76 (Use Permits and Minor Use Permits):

1.     A use that utilizes an accessory structure for the home occupation;

2.     A use exceeding 400 square feet or 25 percent of the floor area of the main dwelling, whichever is greater. In no case shall the use, including storage areas and accessory structures, exceed either 1,000 square feet or 40 percent of the floor area of the main dwelling, whichever is less;

3.     A use employing no more than one person living off-site and working at the dwelling at any one time, or more than two of the permanent residents;

4.     A use which entails food handling, processing, or packing;

5.     A use which includes hand woodworking or machine work;

6.     A one-chair barber shop or beauty salon; a use which involves home visits for three or more clients, patients or pupils at a time; direct product distribution; pet grooming; or any other use or occupation which the City determines is similar in nature to the previously listed uses;

7.     A single dwelling unit with more than one home occupation; and

8.     A use which generates pedestrian or vehicular customer or delivery traffic exceeding more than two trips per day. In no case shall vehicular customer and delivery traffic exceed more than 10 trips each day.

 

17.58.130 Emergency Shelters.
A.    Purpose. This Section establishes standards for the development and operation of emergency shelters to be compatible with surrounding land uses.

B.     Emergency shelters shall comply with the following operating standards:

1.     The cumulative total number of beds allowed within each emergency shelter shall be no more than 12;

2.     An emergency shelter may not be located within 300 feet of another emergency shelter;

3.     There shall be provided one parking space per employee and one parking space for every four beds (or fraction thereof);

4.     Services shall be limited to overnight accommodation and meals for residents and employees only. Admittance shall be between the hours of 7:00 am and 10:00 pm;

5.     Each shelter shall be operated by a responsible agency or organization that has experience in managing and/or providing social services;

6.     An on-site manager shall be present during operating hours;

7.     A written management plan addressing at a minimum staff training, security, neighborhood communication, client intake, loitering control, referral services, outdoor storage, refuse control, and facility maintenance shall be submitted to and approved by the Planning Department prior to operation.

 

Chapter 17.60 SURFACE MINING AND RECLAMATION STANDARDS
17.60.010 Purpose and Intent.
A.    The City of Jackson recognizes that the extraction of minerals is a historic use in the City of Jackson and to the needs of society and that the reclamation of mined lands is necessary to prevent or minimize adverse effects on the environment and to protect the public health and safety. The City of Jackson also recognizes that surface mining takes place in diverse areas where the geologic, topographic, climatic, biological, and social conditions are significantly different and that reclamation operations and the specifications may vary accordingly. The City of Jackson has no present mining operations within its municipal boundaries but needs to enact an ordinance to comply with the requirements of State law.

B.     The purpose and intent of this Chapter is to provide a permit process for the extraction of mineral resources, while regulating surface mining operations as required by California’s Surface Mining and Reclamation Act of 1975 (Public Resources Code Sections 2710 et seq.), as amended, hereinafter referred to as “SMARA,” Public Resources Code (PRC) Section 2207 (relating to annual reporting requirements), and State Mining and Geology Board regulations (hereinafter referred to as “State regulations”) for surface mining and reclamation practice (California Code of Regulations [CCR], Title 14, Division 2, Chapter 8, Subchapter 1, Sections 3500 et seq.), to ensure that:

1.     Adverse environmental effects are prevented or minimized and that mined lands are reclaimed to a usable condition which is readily adaptable for alternative land uses.

2.     The production and conservation of minerals are encouraged, while giving consideration to values relating to recreation, watershed, wildlife, range and forage, and aesthetic enjoyment.

3.     Residual hazards to the public health and safety are eliminated.

 

17.60.020 Definitions.
The definitions set forth in this Section shall govern the construction of this Chapter.

Area of Regional Significance. An area designated by the State Mining and Geology Board which is known to contain a deposit of minerals, the extraction of which is judged to be of prime importance in meeting future needs for minerals in a particular region of the State within which the minerals are located and which, if prematurely developed for alternate incompatible land uses, could result in the premature loss of minerals that are of more than local significance.

Area of Statewide Significance. An area designated by the Board which is known to contain a deposit of minerals, the extraction of which is judged to be of prime importance in meeting future needs for minerals in the State and which, if prematurely developed for alternate incompatible land uses, could result in the permanent loss of minerals that are of more than local or regional significance.

Borrow Pits. Excavations created by the surface mining of rock, unconsolidated geologic deposits or soil to provide material (borrow) for fill elsewhere.

Compatible Land Uses. Land uses inherently compatible with mining and/or that require a minimum public or private investment in structures, land improvements, and which may allow mining because of the relative economic value of the land and its improvements. Examples of such uses may include, but shall not be limited to, very low density residential, geographically extensive but low impact industrial, recreational, agricultural, silvicultural, grazing, and open space.

Haul Road. A road along which material is transported from the area of excavation to the processing plant or stockpile area of the surface mining operation.

Idle. Surface mining operations curtailed for a period of one year or more, by more than 90 percent of the operation’s previous maximum annual mineral production, with the intent to resume those surface mining operations at a future date.

Incompatible Land Uses. Land uses inherently incompatible with mining and/or that require public or private investment in structures, land improvements, and landscaping and that may prevent mining because of the greater economic value of the land and its improvements. Examples of such uses may include, but shall not be limited to, high density residential, low density residential with high unit value, public facilities, geographically limited but impact intensive industrial, and commercial.

Mined Lands. The surface, subsurface, and ground water of an area in which surface mining operations will be, are being, or have been conducted, including private ways and roads appurtenant to any such area, land excavations, workings, mining waste, and areas in which structures, facilities, equipment, machines, tools, or other materials or property which result from, or are used in, surface mining operations.

Minerals. Any naturally occurring chemical element or compound, or groups of elements and compounds, formed from inorganic processes and organic substances, including, but not limited to, coal, peat, and bituminous rock, but excluding geothermal resources, natural gas, and petroleum.

Operator. Any person who is engaged in surface mining operations, or who contracts with others to conduct operations on his or her behalf, except a person who is engaged in surface mining operations as an employee with wages as his or her sole compensation.

Reclamation. The combined process of land treatment that minimizes water degradation, air pollution, damage to aquatic or wildlife habitat, flooding, erosion, and other adverse effects from surface mining operations, including adverse surface effects incidental to underground mines, so that mined lands are reclaimed to a usable condition which is readily adaptable for alternate land uses and create no danger to public health or safety. The process may extend to affected lands surrounding mined lands, and may require backfilling, grading, resoiling, revegetation, soil compaction, stabilization, or other measures.

Stream Bed Skimming. Excavation of sand and gravel from streambed deposits above the mean summer water level or stream bottom, whichever is higher.

Surface Mining Operations. All, or any part of, the process involved in the mining of minerals on mined lands by removing overburden and mining directly from the mineral deposits, open-pit mining of minerals naturally exposed, mining by the auger method, dredging and quarrying, or surface work incident to an underground mine. Surface mining operations include, but are not limited to, in-place distillation or retorting or leaching, the production and disposal of mining waste, prospecting and exploratory activities, borrow pitting, streambed skimming, and segregation and stockpiling of mined materials (and recovery of same).

 

17.60.030 Incorporation by Reference.
The provisions of SMARA (PRC §§2710 et seq.), PRC Section 2207, and State regulations CCR Sections 3500 et seq., as those provisions and regulations may be amended from time to time, are made a part of this Chapter by reference with the same force and effect as if the provisions therein were specifically and fully set out herein, excepting that when the provisions of this Chapter are more restrictive than correlative State provisions, this Chapter shall prevail.

 

17.60.040 Scope.
Except as provided in this Chapter, no person shall conduct surface mining operations unless a permit, Reclamation Plan, and financial assurances for reclamation have first been approved by the City of Jackson. Any applicable exemption from this requirement does not automatically exempt a project or activity from the application of other regulations, ordinances or policies of the City of Jackson, including but not limited to, the application of CEQA, the requirement of Site Approvals or other permits, the payment of development impact fees, or the imposition of other dedications and exactions as may be permitted under the law. The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to all lands within the City of Jackson, public and private. This Chapter shall not apply to the following activities, subject to the above-referenced exceptions:

A.    Excavations or grading conducted for farming or on-site construction or for the purpose of restoring land following a flood or natural disaster.

B.     Onsite excavation and onsite earthmoving activities which are an integral and necessary part of a construction project that are undertaken to prepare a site for construction of structures, landscaping, or other land improvements, including the related excavation, grading, compaction, or the creation of fills, road cuts, and embankments, whether or not surplus materials are exported from the site, subject to all of the following conditions:

1.     All required permits for the construction, landscaping, or related land improvements have been approved by a public agency in accordance with applicable provisions of state law and locally adopted plans and ordinances, including, but not limited to, the California Environmental Quality Act (“CEQA,” Public Resources Code, Division 13, Sections 21000 et seq.).

2.     The City of Jackson’s approval of the construction project included consideration of the onsite excavation and onsite earthmoving activities pursuant to CEQA.

3.     The approved construction project is consistent with the general plan or zoning of the site.

4.     Surplus materials shall not be exported from the site unless and until actual construction work has commenced and shall cease if it is determined that construction activities have terminated, have been indefinitely suspended, or are no longer being actively pursued.

C.     Operation of a plant site used for mineral processing, including associated onsite structures, equipment, machines, tools, or other materials, including the onsite stockpiling and onsite recovery of mined materials, subject to all of the following conditions:

1.     The plant site is located on lands designated for industrial or commercial uses in the City of Jackson’s general plan.

2.     The plant site is located on lands zoned industrial or commercial, or are contained within a zoning category intended exclusively for industrial activities by the City of Jackson.

3.     None of the minerals being processed are being extracted onsite. All reclamation work has been completed pursuant to the approved Reclamation Plan for any mineral extraction activities that occurred onsite after January 1, 1976.

D.    Prospecting for, or the extraction of, minerals for commercial purposes and the removal of overburden in total amounts of less than 1,000 cubic yards in any one location of one acre or less.

E.     The minimum amount of surface mining operations that are required by federal law in order to protect a mining claim, if those operations are conducted solely for that purpose.

F.     Any other surface mining operations that the State Mining and Geology Board determines to be of an infrequent nature and which involve only minor surface disturbances.

G.    Emergency excavations or grading conducted by the Department of Water Resources or the Reclamation Board for the purpose of averting, alleviating, repairing, or restoring damage to property due to imminent or recent floods, disasters, or other emergencies.

H.    Road construction and maintenance for timber or forest operations if the land is owned by the same person or entity, and if the excavation is conducted adjacent to timber or forest operation roads. This exemption is only available if slope stability and erosion are controlled in accordance with Board regulations and, upon closure of the site, the person closing the site implements, where necessary, revegetation measures and post closure uses in consultation with the Department of Forestry and Fire Protection. This exemption does not apply to onsite excavation or grading that occurs within 100 feet of a Class One watercourse or 75 feet of a Class Two watercourse, or to excavations for materials that are, or have been, sold for commercial purposes.

I.      Excavations, grading, or other earthmoving activities in an oil or gas field that are integral to, and necessary for, ongoing operations for the extraction of oil or gas that comply with all of the following conditions: (1) the operations are being conducted in accordance with Division 3 (commencing with Section 3000); (2) the operations are consistent with the City’s General Plan or zoning applicable to the site; (3) the earthmoving activities are within oil or gas field properties under a common owner or operator; and, (4) no excavated materials are sold for commercial purposes.

 

17.60.050 Vested Rights.
No person who obtained a vested right to conduct surface mining operations prior to January 1, 1976, shall be required to secure a permit to mine, so long as the vested right continues and as long as no substantial changes have been made in the operation except in accordance with SMARA, State regulations, and this Chapter. Where a person with vested rights has continued surface mining in the same area subsequent to January 1, 1976, he or she shall obtain City of Jackson approval of a Reclamation Plan covering the mined lands disturbed by such subsequent surface mining. In those cases where an overlap exists (in the horizontal and/or vertical sense) between pre- and post-Act mining, the Reclamation Plan shall call for reclamation proportional to that disturbance caused by the mining after the effective date of the Act (January 1, 1976).

All other requirements of State law and this Chapter shall apply to vested mining operations.

 

17.60.060 Process.
A.    Applications for a Site Approval or Reclamation Plan for surface mining or land reclamation projects shall be made on forms provided by the Planning Department. Said application shall be filed in accord with this Chapter and procedures to be established by the City Planner. The forms for Reclamation Plan applications shall require, at a minimum, each of the elements required by SMARA (§§2772-2773) and State regulations, and any other requirements deemed necessary to facilitate an expeditious and fair evaluation of the proposed Reclamation Plan, to be established at the discretion of the City Planner. As many copies of the Site Approval application as may be required by the City Planner shall be submitted to the Planning Department.

B.     As many copies of a Reclamation Plan application as may be required shall be submitted in conjunction with all applications for Site Approvals for surface mining operations. For surface mining operations that are exempt from a Site Approval pursuant to this Chapter, the Reclamation Plan application shall include information concerning the mining operation that is required for processing the Reclamation Plan. All documentation for the Reclamation Plan shall be submitted to the City of Jackson at one time.

C.     Applications shall include all required environmental review forms and information prescribed by the City.

D.    Upon completion of the environmental review procedure and filing of all documents required by the City, consideration of the Site Approval or Reclamation Plan for the proposed or existing surface mine shall be completed pursuant to Municipal Code at a public hearing before the Planning Commission, and pursuant to Section 2774 of the Public Resources Code.

E.     Within 30 days of acceptance of an application for a Site Approval for surface mining operations and/or a Reclamation Plan as complete, the City shall notify the State Department of Conservation of the filing of the application(s). Whenever mining operations are proposed in the 100-year floodplain of any stream, as shown in Zone A of the Flood Insurance Rate Maps issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, and within one mile, upstream or downstream, of any state highway bridge, the Planning Department shall also notify the State Department of Transportation that the application has been received.

F.     The City shall process the application(s) through environmental review pursuant to the California Environmental Quality Act (Public Resources Code Sections 21000 et seq.) and the City of Jackson’s environmental review guidelines.

G.    Subsequent to the appropriate environmental review, the City shall prepare a staff report with recommendations for consideration by the Planning Commission.

H.    The Planning Commission shall hold at least one noticed public hearing on the Site Approval and/or Reclamation Plan.

I.      Prior to final approval of a Reclamation Plan, financial assurances (as provided in this Chapter), or any amendments to the Reclamation Plan or existing financial assurances, the Planning Commission shall certify to the State Department of Conservation that the Reclamation Plan and/or financial assurance complies with the applicable requirements of State law, and submit the plan, assurance, or amendments to the State Department of Conservation for review. The Planning Commission may conceptually approve the Reclamation Plan and financial assurance before submittal to the State Department of Conservation. If a Site Approval is being processed concurrently with the Reclamation Plan, the Planning Commission may simultaneously also conceptually approve the Site Approval. However, the Planning Commission may defer action on the Site Approval until taking final action on the Reclamation Plan and financial assurances. If necessary to comply with permit processing deadlines, the Planning Commission may conditionally approve the Site Approval with the condition that the Planning Department shall not issue the Site Approval for the mining operations until cost estimates for financial assurances have been reviewed by the State Department of Conservation and final action has been taken on the Reclamation Plan and financial assurances.

Pursuant to PRC Section 2774(d), the State Department of Conservation shall be given 30 days to review and comment on the Reclamation Plan and 45 days to review and comment on the financial assurance. The Planning Commission shall evaluate written comments received, if any, from the State Department of Conservation during the comment periods. Staff shall prepare a written response describing the disposition of the major issues raised by the State for the Planning Commission’s approval. In particular, when the Planning Commission’s position is at variance with the recommendations and objections raised in the State’s comments, the written response shall address, in detail, why specific comments and suggestions were not accepted. Copies of any written comments received and responses prepared by the Planning Commission shall be promptly forwarded to the operator/applicant.

J.      The Planning Commission shall then take action to approve, conditionally approve, or deny the Site Approval and/or Reclamation Plan, and to approve the financial assurances pursuant to PRC Section 2770(d).

K.    The City shall forward a copy of each approved Site Approval for mining operations and/or approved Reclamation Plan, and a copy of the approved financial assurances to the State Department of Conservation. By July 1st of each year, the Planning Department shall submit to the State Department of Conservation for each active or idle mining operation a copy of the Site Approval or Reclamation Plan amendments, as applicable, or a statement that there have been no changes during the previous year.

 

17.60.070 Standards for Reclamation.
All Reclamation Plans shall comply with the provisions of SMARA (Sections 2772 and 2773) and State regulations (CCR Sections 3500—3505). Reclamation Plans approved after January 15, 1993, Reclamation Plans for proposed new mining operations, and any substantial amendments to previously approved Reclamation Plans, shall also comply with the requirements for reclamation performance standards (CCR Sections 3700—3713).

A.    The City of Jackson may impose additional performance standards as developed either in review of individual projects, as warranted, or through the formulation and adoption of Citywide performance standards.

B.     Reclamation activities shall be initiated at the earliest possible time on those portions of the mined lands that will not be subject to further disturbance. Interim reclamation may also be required for mined lands that have been disturbed and that may be disturbed again in future operations. Reclamation may be done on an annual basis, in stages compatible with continuing operations, or on completion of all excavation, removal, or fill, as approved by the City of Jackson. Each phase of reclamation shall be specifically described in the Reclamation Plan and shall include (1) the beginning and expected ending dates for each phase; (2) all reclamation activities required; (3) criteria for measuring completion of specific reclamation activities; and (4) estimated costs for completion of each phase of reclamation.

 

17.60.080 Statement of Responsibility.
The person submitting the Reclamation Plan shall sign a statement accepting responsibility for reclaiming the mined lands in accordance with the Reclamation Plan. Said statement shall be kept by the Planning Department in the mining operation’s permanent record. Upon sale or transfer of the operation, the new operator shall submit a signed statement of responsibility to the Planning Department for placement in the permanent record.

 

17.60.090 Findings for Approval.
A.    Site Approvals. In addition to any findings required by the City of Jackson Code, Site Approvals for surface mining operations shall include a finding that the project complies with the provisions of SMARA and State regulations.

B.     Reclamation Plans. For Reclamation Plans, the following findings shall be required:

1.     That the Reclamation Plan complies with SMARA Sections 2772 and 2773, and any other applicable provisions;

2.     That the Reclamation Plan complies with applicable requirements of State regulations (CCR Sections 3500-3505 and 3700-3713).

3.     That the Reclamation Plan and potential use of reclaimed land pursuant to the plan are consistent with this Chapter and the City of Jackson’s General Plan and any applicable resource plan or element.

4.     That the Reclamation Plan has been reviewed pursuant to CEQA and the City of Jackson’s environmental review guidelines, and all significant adverse impacts from reclamation of the surface mining operations are mitigated to the maximum extent feasible.

5.     That the land and/or resources such as water bodies to be reclaimed will be restored to a condition that is compatible with, and blends in with, the surrounding natural environment, topography, and other resources, or that suitable off-site development will compensate for related disturbance to resource values.

6.     That the Reclamation Plan will restore the mined lands to a usable condition which is readily adaptable for alternative land uses consistent with the General Plan and applicable resource plan.

7.     That a written response to the State Department of Conservation has been prepared, describing the disposition of major issues raised by that Department. Where the City of Jackson’s position is at variance with the recommendations and objections raised by the State Department of Conservation, said response shall address, in detail, why specific comments and suggestions were not accepted.

 

17.60.100 Financial Assurances.
A.    To ensure that reclamation will proceed in accordance with the approved Reclamation Plan, the City of Jackson shall require as a condition of approval security which will be released upon satisfactory performance. The applicant may post security in the form of a surety bond, trust fund, irrevocable letter of credit from an accredited financial institution, or other method acceptable to the City of Jackson and the State Mining and Geology Board as specified in State regulations, and which the City of Jackson reasonably determines are adequate to perform reclamation in accordance with the surface mining operation’s approved Reclamation Plan. Financial assurances shall be made payable to the City of Jackson and the State Department of Conservation.

B.     Financial assurances will be required to ensure compliance with elements of the Reclamation Plan, including but not limited to, revegetation and landscaping requirements, restoration of aquatic or wildlife habitat, restoration of water bodies and water quality, slope stability and erosion and drainage control, disposal of hazardous materials, and other measures, if necessary.

C.     Cost estimates for the financial assurance shall be submitted to the Planning Department for review and approval prior to the operator securing financial assurances. The City Planner shall forward a copy of the cost estimates, together with any documentation received supporting the amount of the cost estimates, to the State Department of Conservation for review. If the State Department of Conservation does not comment within 45 days of receipt of these estimates, it shall be assumed that the cost estimates are adequate, unless the City of Jackson has reason to determine that additional costs may be incurred. The City Planner shall have the discretion to approve the financial assurance if it meets the requirements of this Chapter, SMARA, and State regulations.

D.    The amount of the financial assurance shall be based upon the estimated costs of reclamation for the years or phases stipulated in the approved Reclamation Plan, including any maintenance of reclaimed areas as may be required, subject to adjustment for the actual amount required to reclaim lands disturbed by surface mining activities since January 1, 1976, and new lands to be disturbed by surface mining activities in the upcoming year. Cost estimates should be prepared by a California registered Professional Engineer and/or other similarly licensed and qualified professionals retained by the operator and approved by the City Planner. The estimated amount of the financial assurance shall be based on an analysis of physical activities necessary to implement the approved Reclamation Plan, the unit costs for each of these activities, the number of units of each of these activities, and the actual administrative costs. Financial assurances to ensure compliance with revegetation, restoration of water bodies, restoration of aquatic or wildlife habitat, and any other applicable element of the approved Reclamation Plan shall be based upon cost estimates that include but may not be limited to labor, equipment, materials, mobilization of equipment, administration, and reasonable profit by a commercial operator other than the permittee. A contingency factor of 10 percent shall be added to the cost of financial assurances.

E.     In projecting the costs of financial assurances, it shall be assumed without prejudice or insinuation that the surface mining operation could be abandoned by the operator and, consequently, the City of Jackson or State Department of Conservation may need to contract with a third party commercial company for reclamation of the site.

F.     The financial assurances shall remain in effect for the duration of the surface mining operation and any additional period until reclamation is completed (including any maintenance required).

G.    The amount of financial assurances required of a surface mining operation for any one year shall be adjusted annually to account for new lands disturbed by surface mining operations, inflation, and reclamation of lands accomplished in accordance with the approved Reclamation Plan. The financial assurances shall include estimates to cover reclamation for existing conditions and anticipated activities during the upcoming year, excepting that the permittee may not claim credit for reclamation scheduled for completion during the coming year.

H.    Revisions to financial assurances shall be submitted to the City Planner each year prior to the anniversary date for approval of the financial assurances. The financial assurance shall cover the cost of existing disturbance and anticipated activities for the next calendar year, including any required interim reclamation. If revisions to the financial assurances are not required, the operator shall explain, in writing, why revisions are not required.

 

17.60.110 Interim Management Plans.
A.    Within 90 days of a surface mining operation becoming idle, the operator shall submit to the Planning Department a proposed Interim Management Plan (IMP). The proposed IMP shall fully comply with the requirements of SMARA, including but not limited to all Site Approval conditions, and shall provide measures the operator will implement to maintain the site in a stable condition, taking into consideration public health and safety. The proposed IMP shall be submitted on forms provided by the Planning Department, and shall be processed as an amendment to the Reclamation Plan. IMPs shall not be considered a project for the purposes of environmental review.

B.     Financial assurances for idle operations shall be maintained as though the operations were active, or as otherwise approved through the idle mine’s IMP.

C.     Upon receipt of a complete proposed IMP, the Planning Department shall forward the IMP to the State Department of Conservation for review. The IMP shall be submitted to the State Department of Conservation at least 30 days prior to approval by the Planning Commission.

D.    Within 60 days of receipt of the proposed IMP, or a longer period mutually agreed upon by the City Planner and the operator, the Planning Commission shall review and approve or deny the IMP in accordance with this Chapter. The operator shall have 30 days, or a longer period mutually agreed upon by the operator and the City Planner, to submit a revised IMP. The Planning Commission shall approve or deny the revised IMP within 60 days of receipt. If the Planning Commission denies the revised IMP, the operator may appeal that action to the City Council.

E.     The IMP may remain in effect for a period not to exceed five years, at which time the Planning Commission may renew the IMP for another period not to exceed five years, or require the surface mining operator to commence reclamation in accordance with its approved Reclamation Plan.

 

17.60.120 Annual Report Requirements.
Surface mining operators shall forward an annual surface mining report to the State Department of Conservation and to the City of Jackson on a date established by the State Department of Conservation, upon forms furnished by the State Mining and Geology Board. New mining operations shall file an initial surface mining report and any applicable filing fees with the State Department of Conservation within 30 days of permit approval, or before commencement of operations, whichever is sooner. Any applicable fees, together with a copy of the annual inspection report, shall be forwarded to the State Department of Conservation at the time of filing the annual surface mining report.

17.60.130 Inspections.
The City shall arrange for inspection of a surface mining operation within six months of receipt of the Annual Report to determine whether the surface mining operation is in compliance with the approved Site Approval and/or Reclamation Plan, approved financial assurances, and State regulations. In no event shall less than one inspection be conducted in any calendar year. Said inspections may be made by a state-registered geologist, state-registered civil engineer, state-licensed landscape architect, or state-registered forester, who is experienced in land reclamation and who has not been employed by the mining operation in any capacity during the previous 12 months, or other qualified specialists, as selected by the City. All inspections shall be conducted using a form approved and provided by the State Mining and Geology Board.

The City shall notify the State Department of Conservation within 30 days of completion of the inspection that said inspection has been conducted, and shall forward a copy of said inspection notice and any supporting documentation to the mining operator. The operator shall be solely responsible for the reasonable cost of such inspection.

 

17.60.140 Violations and Penalties.
If the City Manager or his or her designee, based upon an annual inspection or otherwise confirmed by an inspection of the mining operation, determines that a surface mining operation is not in compliance with this Chapter, the applicable Site Approval, any required permit and/or the Reclamation Plan, the City of Jackson shall follow the procedures set forth in Public Resources Code, Sections 2774.1 and 2774.2 concerning violations and penalties, as well as those provisions of the City of Jackson Development Code for revocation and/or abandonment of a Site Approval which are not preempted by SMARA.

 

17.60.150 Appeals.
Any person aggrieved by an act or determination of the City in the exercise of the authority granted herein, shall have the right to appeal to the Planning Commission or the City Council, whichever is the next higher authority. An appeal shall be filed on forms provided, within 15 calendar days after the rendition, in writing, of the appealed decision.

 

17.60.160 Fees.
The City of Jackson shall establish such fees as it deems necessary to cover the reasonable costs incurred in implementing this Chapter and the State regulations, including but not limited to, processing of applications, annual reports, inspections, monitoring, enforcement and compliance. Such fees shall be paid by the operator, as required by the City of Jackson, at the time of filing of the Site Approval application, Reclamation Plan application, and at such other times as are determined by the City of Jackson to be appropriate in order to ensure that all reasonable costs of implementing this Chapter are borne by the mining operator.

 

17.60.170 Mineral Resource Protection.
Mine development is encouraged in compatible areas before encroachment of conflicting uses. Mineral resource areas that have been classified by the State Department of Conservation’s Division of Mines and Geology or designated by the State Mining and Geology Board, as well as existing surface mining operations that remain in compliance with the provisions of this Chapter, shall be protected from intrusion by incompatible land uses that may impede or preclude mineral extraction or processing, to the extent possible for consistency with the City of Jackson’s General Plan. In accordance with PRC Section 2762, the City of Jackson’s General Plan and resource maps will be updated to reflect mineral information (classification and/or designation reports) within 12 months of receipt from the State Mining and Geology Board of such information. Land use decisions within the City of Jackson will be guided by information provided on the location of identified mineral resources of regional significance. Conservation and potential development of identified mineral resource areas will be considered and encouraged. Recordation on property titles of the presence of important mineral resources within the identified mineral resource areas may be encouraged as a condition of approval of any development project in the impacted area. Prior to approving a use that would otherwise be incompatible with mineral resource protection, conditions of approval may be applied to encroaching development projects to minimize potential conflicts.

 

17.60.180 Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase of this Chapter is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by the decision of a court of competent jurisdiction, it shall not affect the remaining portions of this Chapter.

 

 

 

Chapter 17.62 TEMPORARY USES AND EVENTS
17.62.010 Purpose of Chapter.
This Chapter provides standards for short-term commercial uses and events that may not meet the normal development or use standards of the applicable zoning district, but may otherwise be acceptable because of their temporary nature.

 

17.62.020 Applicability.
A.    Scope of requirements. This Chapter identifies the provisions (exempt uses, allowable uses, development standards, etc.) to assist in the review and determination on a Temporary Use Permit to ensure basic health, safety, and community welfare standards are met, and only suitable temporary uses with the minimum necessary conditions or limitations consistent with the temporary nature of the use are approved.

B.     Permit requirements. The provisions of this Chapter shall be applied together with Chapter 17.80 (Temporary Use Permits), which identifies the following additional information regarding the processing and review of a Temporary Use Permit:

1.     Purpose of a Temporary Use Permit;

2.     Applicability of a Temporary Use Permit;

3.     Findings and Decision on a Temporary Use Permit;

4.     Conditions of Approval to be imposed on a Temporary Use Permit; and

5.     Post Approval Procedures for an approved Temporary Use Permit.

C.     Allowed uses. Only those temporary uses and events identified in Section 17.62.030 (Exempt Temporary Uses and Events), Section 17.62.050 (Requirements for Specific Temporary Uses and Events), and Tables 2-2 (Allowed Uses for Residential Zoning Districts), 2-5 (Allowed Uses for Commercial, Office, and Manufacturing Districts), and 2-7 (Allowed Uses for Special Purpose Districts) shall be allowed. All other temporary uses of land shall be prohibited.

 

17.62.030 Exempt Temporary Uses and Events.
The following temporary uses and events are not subject to the requirements of this Chapter, and are also not subject to the permit requirements established by Article II (Zoning Districts and Allowable Land Uses).

A.    Community events. Community events as identified by City Council resolution.

B.     Garage sales. Garage sales, as defined by this Development Code.

C.     Mobile vending units. Mobile (vehicle) vending and food preparation units that are not located in any single area for a period exceeding two hours.

D.    Parades and street events. Parades and other temporary events within a public right-of-way, provided that all requirements of the Public Works Director and Police Chief are met.

E.     Temporary uses and events on public lands. Temporary uses and events conducted on land or within a structure under the control and ownership of a public agency, provided that all requirements of the public agency and the Police Chief are met.

 

17.62.040 General Requirements for All Temporary Uses.
A.    Cumulative time limits. Temporary uses shall not be allowed on or within a parcel, shopping center, professional center, or business park for more than 90 days in any calendar year.

B.     Building Permits. Any new structure or any new electrical service connection shall require a Building Permit unless specifically exempted by the City Building Code.

C.     County Health Department approval. All temporary uses are, where applicable, subject to the issuance of a Certificate of Operation from the Amador County Health Department for all temporary uses involving the handling of foods.

D.    Parking. Adequate temporary parking facilities, pedestrian and vehicular circulation, including vehicular ingress and egress and public transportation shall be provided in compliance with the requirements of the City Planner. The City Planner may require parking areas to be surfaced with a minimum of two inches of crushed rock or other surface(s).

E.     Pedestrian and display areas. The City Planner may require all pedestrian traffic and display areas not located within an existing paved area to be covered with green grass or a minimum of two inches of sawdust, wood shavings, or other surface(s).

F.     Signs. Signs shall be substantially attached to the stand, vehicle, or other structures used for the temporary sale of goods and the maximum allowable aggregate sign area shall be 16 square feet. The location of signs shall be approved by the City Planner.

G.    Site restoration.

1.     The subject site shall be restored to its original condition within five days from the date of termination of the permit.

2.     The City Planner may require the submission of a performance bond or other surety measures, in compliance with Section 17.84.040 (Performance Guarantees), satisfactory to the City Planner, to ensure that any temporary facilities or structures used will be removed from the site within a reasonable time following the event, the property will be cleaned of debris, litter, or any other evidence of the temporary event upon completion or removal of the event, restored to the former condition, and shall continue to be used in compliance with this Development Code.

H.    Issuance of Permit. Temporary Use Permits shall be issued no more than 30 days in advance of the initial date of operation.

I.      Fixed period of time. The City Planner may set a fixed period of time for the permit. Where not specified, the period of time shall not exceed the time limits established for the temporary use in Section 17.62.050 (Requirements for Specific Temporary Uses and Events).

J.      Operating hours. The City Planner may regulate operating hours and days, including limitation of the duration of the temporary use, as identified in subsection H, above.

K.    Nuisance factors. The Site Plan Review Committee may apply conditions to regulate nuisance factors including prevention of glare or direct illumination on adjoining parcels, dirt, dust, gases, heat, noise, odors, smoke, waste, and vibration.

L.     Screening required. The Site Plan Review Committee may require temporary outdoor sales areas to be screened from adjoining public rights-of-way by temporary decorative walls, fences, and/or landscaping.

M.    Security. Security and safety measures shall be provided in compliance with the requirements of the Police Chief.

N.    Setbacks. Appropriate setbacks shall be maintained to ensure adequate separation from adjoining land uses and a safe environment for pedestrians and vehicles, subject to the approval of the Site Plan Review Committee.

O.    Waste collection and disposal. Provisions shall be made for solid, hazardous and toxic waste collection, recycling and/or disposal, in compliance with the requirements of the Site Plan Review Committee.

P.     Other conditions. Any other conditions which will ensure the operation of the proposed temporary use or event in an orderly and efficient manner and in full compliance with the purpose/intent of this Chapter.

 

17.62.050 Requirements for Specific Temporary Uses and Events.
The following temporary uses and events are subject to the permit requirements established by Article II (Zoning Districts and Allowable Land Uses), and shall comply with the following standards.

A.    Commercial filming. Commercial filming may be authorized on properties within residential, commercial/manufacturing, and special purpose zoning districts.

B.     Construction offices/yards.

1.     A contractor’s construction office and/or yard may be authorized during construction or remodeling of a permanent multifamily residential, commercial, or manufacturing structure, or a public infrastructure project when a valid Building Permit or similar authorization is in force for the approved construction project.

2.     The office and/or yard may be located off-site from the construction project.

3.     The permit shall expire upon completion of the construction project, or the expiration of the companion Building Permit, authorizing the construction project, whichever first occurs.

C.     Material processing.

1.     Temporary on-site material processing may be authorized during construction or remodeling of a permanent structure when a valid Building Permit is in force for the approved construction project.

2.     The permit shall expire upon completion of the construction project, or the expiration of the companion Building Permit, authorizing the construction project, whichever first occurs.

D.    Seasonal sales lots. Christmas tree and pumpkin and associated sales lots or the sale of other seasonal products and temporary residence/security trailers, when determined by the City Planner to be necessary for the sales event, may be authorized for a parcel or site for not more than 60 days in a single calendar year.

E.     Soil remediation. On-site soil remediation activities may be authorized for not more than 30 days.

F.     Temporary outdoor displays, events, sales, and services.

1.     Shall be for an on-site business and tied directly to products and services provided by the business.

2.     Shall comply with the standards identified in Section 17.62.060 (Conditions of Approval), below.

3.     May be authorized for a parcel or site for not more than 30 days in a single calendar year and for not more than 30 days in any 90-day period.

G.    Temporary uses, non-profit organization.

1.     The temporary use shall be directly conducted, staffed, and operated by the non-profit organization.

2.     An event sponsored by a non-profit organization with individual for-profit vendors or stands (e.g. arts craft fair) shall not be allowed under this subsection.

3.     The temporary use(s) may be authorized for a parcel or site for not more than 30 days in a single calendar year and for not more than 30 days in any 90-day period.

H.    Temporary work trailers.

1.     The trailer or portable structure(s) being used as a temporary work site for employees of a business may be authorized during construction or remodeling of a permanent commercial or manufacturing structure when a valid Building Permit is in force for the approved construction project.

2.     The permit shall expire upon completion of the construction project, or the expiration of the companion Building Permit, authorizing the construction project, whichever first occurs.

 

17.62.060 Conditions of Approval.
In approving an application for a Temporary Use Permit, the City Planner may impose conditions deemed reasonable and necessary to ensure that the approval will be in compliance with this Chapter and the findings required by Section 17.80.030 (Findings and Decision). The conditions may address any pertinent factors affecting the operation of the temporary use or event, and may include the following:

A.    Time limits. Provision for a fixed period of time as specified by the permit, or where not specified, not to exceed 90 days for a temporary event;

B.     Nuisance mitigation. Regulation of nuisance factors including prevention of glare or direct illumination on adjoining parcels, dirt, dust, gases, heat, noise, odors, smoke, waste, and vibration;

C.     Hours of operation. Regulation of operating hours and days, including limitation of the duration of the temporary event, as identified in subsection A above;

D.    Parking. Provision for adequate temporary parking facilities, pedestrian, and vehicular circulation, including vehicular ingress and egress, and public transportation, if applicable, in compliance with Chapter 17.48 (Parking and Loading Standards);

E.     Performance guarantees. Submission of a performance bond or other surety measures, in compliance with Section 17.84.040 (Performance Guarantees), satisfactory to the City Planner, to ensure that any temporary facilities or structures used will be removed from the site within a reasonable time following the event, the property will be cleaned of debris, litter, or any other evidence of the temporary event upon completion or removal of the event, restored to the former condition, and shall continue to be used in compliance with this Development Code;

F.     Sanitary and medical facilities. Provision for sanitary and medical facilities, as appropriate;

G.    Screening. Temporary outdoor sales areas screened from adjoining public rights-of-way by temporary decorative walls, fences, and/or landscaping, subject to the approval of the City Planner, and in compliance with Section 17.30.110 (Screening and Buffer Requirements);

H.    Security and safety. Provision for security and safety measures, if applicable;

I.      Setbacks. Appropriate setbacks shall be maintained to ensure adequate separation from adjoining land uses and a safe environment for pedestrians and vehicles, subject to the approval of the Site Plan Review Committee;

J.      Signs. Regulation of signs, in compliance with Chapter 17.54 (Sign Regulations);

K.    Location of structures and facilities. Regulation of temporary structures and facilities, including placement, height and size, location of equipment, and open spaces, including buffer areas and other yards;

L.     Waste collection. Provision for solid, hazardous and toxic waste collection, recycling, and/or disposal;

M.    Compliance with applicable standards. A requirement that the approval of the requested Temporary Use Permit is contingent upon a finding, by the City Planner, that the operation will be in compliance with the applicable provisions of this Section, the Development Code, and successful approval of any/all required permits from another department(s) or governing agency; and

N.    Other conditions. Other conditions that will ensure the operation of the proposed temporary event in an orderly and efficient manner and in full compliance with the purpose/intent of this Section.

 

 

 

Chapter 17.64 TRAILER PARKS
17.64.010 General Requirements.
The general requirements set forth in this Section are established for trailer parks.

A.    Independent Trailers Only. Only independent trailer coaches shall be permitted in trailer parks. The only exception is that residents of trailer parks may own and park within the trailer park a second dependent or independent trailer coach provided that the second trailer coach is not occupied or attached to any utility service.

B.     Minimum square footage of floor space. No trailer coach shall be permitted in any trailer park in the City unless it contains more than 240 square feet of living space. The only exception are those trailers established in accord with Section A above (Independent Trailers Only) as second trailers and provided they are not occupied or attached to any utility service.

C.     Renting or Leasing Prohibited. It is unlawful for any person to rent or hold for rent or lease any trailer coach in a trailer park. The only exception shall be in those individual cases where any owner of a trailer coach parked in a trailer park for various personal reasons rents the trailer on a temporary basis for a period not to exceed one year.

D.    Telephone. The trailer park operator shall cause to be provided at all times at least one accessible public telephone for the use of trailer park residents.

E.     Reserved.

F.     Trailer Park Register. There shall be a register provided in each trailer park in which shall be entered all such information as is required by the Trailer Park Act, Division 13, Part 2, of the Health and Safety Code of the State of California as herein adopted by reference, and in which shall be entered in addition the total square footage of floor space of each trailer coach.

G.    Trailer Park Operator. Every trailer park shall have a resident trailer operator on the premises at all times. The trailer park operator shall be charged with the keeping of the trailer park register and has the responsibility of conducting the trailer park business in compliance with the provisions of this Chapter and of applicable State laws.

H.    Applicability of Plumbing, Electrical and Building Ordinances. All plumbing, electrical, building and other work on or at any camp licensed under this Chapter shall be in accordance with City ordinances regulating such work, unless these ordinances are specifically made inapplicable under the terms of this Chapter.

I.      Parking in Public Places. It is unlawful, within the City limits, for any person to park or allow to park any trailer, detached camper, mobile home, motor home or boat on any street, alley or highway, or other public place, or on any tract of land owned by any person, occupied or unoccupied, within the City, except as provided in this Chapter.

J.      Temporary Stopping or Parking. Emergency or temporary stopping or parking is permitted on any street, alley or highway for not longer than one hour subject to any other and further prohibitions, regulations, or limitations imposed by the traffic and parking regulations or ordinances for that street, alley or highway.

K.    Parking—Camping Outside Trailer Parks. No person shall camp overnight, nor shall any person park or occupy any trailer, attached or detached camper, mobile home, motor home, or boat on the premises of any occupied dwelling or on any lot which is not a part of the premises of any occupied dwelling or on any other public or private property situated outside an approved trailer camp except:

1.     The parking of only one unoccupied trailer, attached or detached camper, motor home or boat in an accessory private garage, building, or in the yard of any district is permitted provided no living quarters shall be maintained or any business practiced in it while the trailer, attached or detached camper, motor home, or boat is so parked or stored: except the parking of one unoccupied attached camper or motor home is permitted on any street, alley or highway, provided the attached camper or motor home is used by the owner as a primary vehicle for daily transportation and is under no circumstances so parked purely for storage purposes.

2.     The parking of one occupied trailer, mobile home, or motor home is permitted on any parcel or land purchased by the occupant for the purpose of constructing a permanent business or dwelling thereon; provided the occupant obtains from the City a building permit approving the construction prior to such occupation, and provided the City Building Official issues a special permit to the occupant approving the setback location.

3.     The parking of a trailer, mobile home, or motor home which houses a health, educational, or other institutional facility is permitted in any reasonable and convenient location in the City, for any period of time not to exceed 48 hours, provided a special permit therefor is obtained from and issued by the Chief of Police. The parking of any such vehicle for a period of time exceeding the 48 hours shall require the issuance of a special permit by the City Building Official as provided in paragraph 2 of this subsection.

4.     Permit Parking of Recreational Vehicles. The parking of an occupied trailer, mobile home, camper, motor home, or vehicle, any and all of which collectively described as self-contained camping unit, is permitted for camping purposes, outside trailer parks, only in designated areas where public parking is permitted, for a limited period of time not to exceed 48 hours.

This subsection shall be administered and enforced by the Chief of Police pursuant to rules and regulations adopted by resolution of the City Council. (Ord. 712 §2, 2019)

 

17.64.020 Establishment.
A.    Use permit requirements. Trailer parks shall be established only by use permit in appropriate zones as set forth in Article II of this Development Code. In applying for a use permit of the construction of a trailer park, the applicant shall provide the following:

1.     The name and address of applicant;

2.     The location and legal description of the trailer park;

3.     A complete plan of the requirements for such as contained in all applicable ordinances; and

4.     All items required by subsection B below unless a conditional use permit is requested or granted.

B.     Alteration or enlargement. A trailer park is “enlarged or altered” when additional structures or trailer sites or accommodations for additional trailer coaches are established in the trailer park or on adjacent land owned or operated by the same person. A use permit is required before alteration or enlargement of existing trailer parks is permitted. The information required by subsection A above and in connection with alteration or enlargement or existing trailer parks but only for the portion of the trailer park to be affected directly by the proposed alteration or enlargement.

C.     Conditional use permit—Issuance conditions. Prior to granting a use permit a conditional use permit may be issued for a period not to exceed six months. The conditional use permit shall be subject to such conditions as the Planning Commission and/or City Council may establish. Among these conditions shall be:

1.     Plans and specifications of all buildings, improvements and other facilities such as electrical wiring, water service pipes, gas service pipes, and sewer services, constructed or to be constructed with the trailer park;

2.     A complete landscaping plan setting forth the types of planting to be provided and there location;

3.     Such further information as may be requested by the Planning Commission designed to determine if the proposed trailer park will comply with all the applicable requirements;

4.     A final map for recordation which shall be approved by the City Council upon recommendation of the City Engineer;

5.     Final plans and specifications of all aspects, including landscaping, of the proposed trailer or mobile home park and shall be approved by the City Council upon recommendation of the City Engineer;

6.     All final maps, plans, specifications, or anything else required under this Chapters shall be submitted 90 to 120 days prior to the date upon which the City Council will be requested or required to act;

7.     All items required under this Section shall be in sets of four and be supplied by the developer to the following:

a.     One copy to the City Clerk for submission to the City Council,

b.     Two copies to the City Engineer, and

c.     One copy to the City Attorney;

8.     All costs of review, inspection and compliance by all city departments shall be charged to and borne by the developer. The cost shall include 15 percent for overhead costs and payroll taxes and employee benefits.

No use permits shall issue until the developer has paid in full by cashier’s check the aforesaid costs as determined by the City Clerk and approved by the City Council.

D.    Conditional use permit restrictions. Conditional use permits authorized by the City Council for trailer park developments shall be in force and effective for only six months unless specified for longer or shorter periods of time. If construction of the trailer park is not begun and continued during the period for which the conditional use permit is issued, then the permit shall become void. The Planning Commission shall determine whether or not construction has begun and is proceeding according to a reasonable schedule.

E.     Use permit—Time Period. A use permit issued pursuant to this Chapter shall be for an indefinite period unless otherwise specified in the use permit shall be revocable by the City Council at any time it is determined that the park is not in accordance with the requirements of this Chapter or is conducted in an unsanitary, un-safe or improper manner or is or will become a nuisance.

F.     Parcel location review—Hearing. Persons seeking to establish or enlarge trailer parks in Jackson may request a formal public hearing before the Planning Commission prior to submitting detailed plans and specifications as set forth in this. The purpose of the hearing shall be to enable the Planning Commission to review the location of the proposed trailer park and determine propriety in relationship to the overall development patterns of the City, the objectives of the master plan, and adjacent land uses. All Planning Commission findings shall be subject to review and final determination of the City Council. A parcel location review is not a substitute for the conditional use permit application requirement nor does it relieve the obligation to meet all the requirements of the chapter relative to conditional use permits.

 

17.64.030 Plan Requirements.
A.    Conformance requirements. Plans submitted for construction of proposed trailer parks shall conform to and meet the minimum requirements set forth in this Chapter.

B.     Minimum trailer site. Each site in a trailer park used for trailer coach parking shall be not less than 2,800 square feet exclusive of recreational areas, roadways, visitor parking areas and accessory buildings or service areas. Individual trailer sites of 2,800 square feet may include area provided for off-street vehicle parking for a single vehicle in conjunction with the trailer itself. Each site of 2,800 square feet shall be clearly defined and marked.

C.     Minimum clearance. Trailer coaches shall be located on parking sites so that there shall be at least a 20-foot clearance between trailers; provided, however, that with respect to trailer parked end-to-end, end-to-end clearance may be less than 20 feet but not less than 10 feet. No trailer coach shall be located closer than 10 feet from any building within the trailer park or from any dwelling existing outside the trailer park.

D.    Minimum roadways. Roadways shall be provided in such a pattern as to provide reasonable and convenient traffic circulation within the trailer park and so that every trailer site fronts upon such a roadway. All roadways shall be of sufficient width to permit two-way traffic. If automobiles parking is to be prohibited on these roadways, then the minimum paved width of the roadway shall be 30 feet. If automobile parking is to be permitted on one side only, the minimum paved width of the roadway shall be 35 feet. If automobile parking is to be permitted on both sides of the roadway, the minimum paved width of the roadway shall be 40 feet. Parking rules shall be enforced by the trailer park operator.

E.     Automobile parking. There shall be provisions for at least one automobile parking space adjacent to each trailer site. Automobile parking spaces shall be not less than 10 feet by 20 feet each. In addition, there shall be automobile parking spaces provided for visitors, equivalent to one space for every eight trailer sites.

F.     Trailer recreation areas. Every trailer park shall include a central recreation area with a minimum space of 125 square feet per trailer site in the trailer park. This area may include land used for community clubhouse, swimming pool, shuffleboard courts, and similar activity areas. If factors exist which make it desirable to have the recreational space decentralized, several recreation areas, the total aggregate areas of which meet the above requirement, may be established with the approval of the City Council.

G.    Landscaping. In conjunction with the preparation of a plan for landscaping the trailer park, the following are minimum requirements. Each trailer site shall have plantings maintained thereon. Any portion of the trailer park fronting on a public street shall be landscaped with trees, shrubs, and/or flowers and maintained.

H.    Park lighting. Lighting equipment shall be such that there shall not be less than five tenths average foot candle for protective lighting per square foot the full length of all roadways during the hours from one-half hour after sunset to one-half hour before sunrise of each succeeding day. Individual lamps for such lighting shall be so located that the maximum distance between them does not exceed 100 feet. All light bulbs shall be enclosed in globes of a type approved by the Planning Commission.

I.      Fencing and setbacks. The Planning Commission shall recommend and the City Council determine the fencing and setback requirements in relation to each individual proposed trailer park development.

J.      Refuse areas. Separate areas screened by either fencing or plantings of a height not less than four and one-half feet shall be established adjacent to roadways for deposit of refuse including garbage, rubbish and other waste. Refuse containers shall conform with City Ordinances.

K.    Laundry yards. No laundry drying lines shall be permitted within any trailer site.

L.     Utilities. Each trailer site within all trailer parks shall be served with a direct lateral connection to the out-fall sewerage system of the City; and each such trailer site shall be furnished with a domestic water supply served by the water utility serving the City. An abundant supply of hot water shall be supplied at all times for bathing, washing and laundry facilities contained within a separate service building upon the site, provided for that purpose.

 

17.64.040 Sign Standards.
The following standards and conditions shall apply to all signs: Signs shall in no way endanger the health and safety by causing distraction to operators of motor vehicles on the streets and highways. Location, lighting, and color of signs shall be such as to cause no confusion with public signs or traffic signals. No blinking, flashing of animated signs visible from any street or highway shall be permitted. Lighting shall not be a nuisance to adjoining properties or to residential trailers on the premises.

A.    Identification and directional signs. The following signs may be permitted:

1.     Identification signs which advertise the trailer park may be permitted provided they are located on the subject property. These signs shall not exceed one square foot of area for each lineal foot of frontage along the street from which there is access to the trailer park, provided that signs for any one trailer park shall not exceed 100 square feet of sign area on any one frontage;

2.     Directional signs related to the location of the trailers and facilities on the premises, provided they are located on the subject property.

3.     These signs shall not exceed 10 square feet in area.

B.     Plan submission and review. Plans and elevations for all signs to be erected in conjunction with any trailer park shall be submitted along with other construction plans as part thereof and shall be subject to review and change upon recommendation of the Planning Commission and determination of the City Council.

 

17.64.050 Enforcement.
A.    Violation Licenses revocation. The City Council is authorized to revoke any license issued pursuant to the terms of this Chapter, if, after due investigation, they determine that the holder thereof has violated any of the provisions of this Chapter, or that any trailer, trailer camp, or tourist camp is being maintained in an unsanitary or unsafe manner or is a nuisance.

B.     Violation Penalty. Any person found guilty of violating any provisions of this Chapter shall be punished as set forth in Section 1.20.010.

Article IV. Land Use and Development Permit Procedures
Chapter 17.70 APPLICATIONS, PROCESSING, AND FEES
17.70.010 Purpose of Article.
This article provides procedures and requirements for the preparation, filing and processing of applications for land use permits and other entitlements required by this Development Code.

 

17.70.020 Authority for Land Use and Zoning Decisions.
Land use and development decisions are under the jurisdiction of the City Council, Planning Commission, City Manager, City Planner, Building Official, City Engineer, Site Plan Review Committee (consisting of the City Planner, City Engineer, and Building Official) and Design Review Committee. For more information regarding administrative responsibilities, refer to Chapter 17.120 (Administrative Responsibilities). Table 4-1 (Review Authority) identifies the City official or body responsible for reviewing and making decisions on each type of application, land use permit, and other entitlements required by this Development Code.

 

17.70.030 Concurrent Permit Processing.
When a single project incorporates different land uses or features so that this Development Code requires multiple land use permit applications, and/or the project involves a land use permit application and a Tentative Map, all the applications shall be reviewed, and approved or denied, concurrently by the highest level review authority assigned by Table 4-1 to any of the required applications. (For example, a project that requires a Zoning Map amendment and a Use Permit shall be reviewed, and approved or denied by the City Council, where a Use Permit application by itself would normally be reviewed and acted upon by the Planning Commission.)

 

 

TABLE 4-1 REVIEW AUTHORITY

 

 

Role of Review Authority (1)

 

 

Type of Decision

Design Review Committee (2)

City

Planner (3)

Site Plan Review Committee (3)

Planning Commission

City Council

Administrative and Amendments

 

 

 

 

Development Code amendment

 

 

 

Recommend

Decision

General Plan amendment

 

 

 

Recommend

Decision

Interpretations

 

Decision

 

Appeal

Appeal

Zoning Map amendment

 

 

 

Recommend

Decision

Land Use Permits/Development Approvals

 

 

 

Demolition Review

Recommend

 

 

Decision

Appeal

Development Agreement

 

 

 

Recommend

Decision

Development Permit

 

 

 

Decision

Appeal

Historic Design Review

Decision

 

 

Appeal

Appeal

Historic Variance

Decision

 

 

Appeal

Appeal

Master Plan

Recommend

 

 

Recommend

Decision

Minor Use Permit

 

 

Decision

Appeal

Appeal

Planned Development

 

 

 

Decision

Appeal

Planned Development Amendment

 

 

 

Decision

Appeal

Sign Permit

 

Decision

 

Appeal

Appeal

Specific Plan

 

 

 

Recommend

Decision

Temporary Use Permit

 

 

Decision

Appeal

Appeal

Use Permit

 

 

 

Decision

Appeal

Variance

 

 

 

Decision

Appeal

Zoning Clearance

 

Decision

 

Appeal

Appeal

Subdivision Applications

 

 

 

 

Certificate of Compliance

 

 

Decision

 

Appeal

Final Map

 

 

 

 

Notification (4)

Lot Line Adjustment

 

 

 

 

Decision

Reversions, 2-4 parcels

 

 

Decision

Appeal

Appeal

Reversions, 5+ parcels

 

 

 

Decision

Appeal

Tentative Map, 2-4 parcels

 

 

 

Decision

Appeal

Tentative Map, 5+ parcels

 

 

 

Decision

Appeal

Voluntary Parcel Merger

 

 

Decision

Appeal

Appeal

Notes:

(1)    “Recommend” means that the review authority makes a recommendation to a higher decision-making body; “Decision” means that the review authority makes the final decision on the matter; “Appeal” means that the review authority may consider and decide upon appeals of an earlier decision, in compliance with Chapter 17.140 (Appeals).

(2)    In the event there is no Design Review Committee, the Planning Commission will have authority.

(3)    The City Planner and Site Plan Review Committee may refer any matter under their jurisdiction directly to the Commission, so that the Commission may instead make the decision.

(4)    The review authority for parcel map and final map is the City Engineer.

 

17.70.040 Application Preparation and Filing.
A.    Application contents. The preparation and filing of applications for land use permits, amendments (e.g., General Plan, Zoning Map, or Development Code), and any other matters pertaining to this Development Code shall comply with the following requirements:

1.     Applications shall include the forms provided by the Planning Department, and all information and materials required by the Application Content Requirements list provided by the Planning Department for the specific type of application;

2.     Applications shall be filed with the Department; and

3.     It is the applicant’s responsibility to provide evidence in support of the findings required for the approval of the application by this article.

B.     Eligibility for filing. Applications may be made by the owner of the subject property or by a lessee or any other person, with the written consent of the property owner.

C.     Time for filing. Any land use permit required by this Development Code shall be filed with the City Planner, processed and approved before the approval of any Building, Grading, or other construction permit or other authorization required by the Municipal Code or this Development Code for the proposed use or structure.

 

17.70.050 Application Fees.
The City Council shall, by resolution, establish a schedule of fees for permits, amendments, and other matters pertaining to this Development Code. The schedule of fees may be changed or modified only by resolution of the City Council. Processing shall not commence on any application until all required fees have been paid.

A.    Refunds and withdrawals. Recognizing that filing fees cover the costs of public hearings, mailing, posting, transcripts, and staff time involved in processing applications, refunds due to a denial are not allowed, except in the case of an appeal hearing by the City Council in compliance with Section 17.140.030 (Filing and Processing of Appeals). In the case of a withdrawal, the City Planner may authorize a partial refund based upon the City Planner’s determination of pro-rated costs to-date and the status of the application at the time of withdrawal.

B.     City Council payment of fees. The City Council may elect to pay the filing fees in only the following situations:

1.     Applications made by tax supported Governmental agencies (e.g., school district, etc.);

2.     Applications made by charitable organizations as defined by resolution of the City Council; or

3.     Applications made in compliance with established City Council policy on the City Council’s payment of fees.

 

17.70.060 Initial Application Review/Environmental Assessment.
All applications filed with the Planning Department in compliance with this Development Code shall be initially processed as follows:

A.    Completeness review. The City Planner shall review all applications for completeness and accuracy before they are accepted as being complete for processing.

1.     Notification of applicant. The applicant shall be informed within 30 days of submitting an application, as required by the State law (Government Code Section 65943), either that the application is complete and has been accepted for processing, or that the application is incomplete and that additional information, specified in writing, shall be provided before it can be accepted for processing.

2.     Appeal of determination. Where the City Planner has determined that an application is incomplete, and the applicant believes that the application is complete and/or that the information requested by the City Planner is not required, the applicant may appeal the determination in compliance with Chapter 17.140 (Appeals).

3.     Environmental information. The City Planner may require the applicant to submit additional information needed for the environmental review of the project in compliance with subsection C, below.

4.     Expiration of application. If the applicant does not provide sufficient information to complete an application within 90 days after notification that the application is incomplete, the application shall be deemed withdrawn, unless an extension is granted by the City Planner. A new application, including fees, plans, exhibits, and other materials that will be required to commence processing of any development project on the same property, may then be filed in compliance with this article.

B.     Referral of application. At the discretion of the City Planner, or where otherwise required by this Development Code, State or Federal law, any application filed in compliance with this Development Code may be referred to any public agency that may be affected by or have an interest in the proposed land use activity.

C.     Environmental assessment.

1.     All development applications shall be reviewed as required by the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA), to determine whether the proposed project is exempt from the requirements of CEQA or is not a project as defined by CEQA, whether a Negative Declaration may be issued, or whether an Environmental Impact Report (EIR) shall be required.

2.     These determinations and, where required, the preparation of environmental documents shall comply with the CEQA Guidelines.

 

17.70.070 Application Review and Decision.
A.    Project review procedures. Each application shall be analyzed by the City Planner to ensure that the proposed uses/activities and development are consistent with the content, purpose, and intent of this Development Code, any applicable design guidelines, the CEQA Guidelines, the General Plan, and any applicable Specific Plan. Additionally, any application which may involve substantial grading shall require the submittal of preliminary grading plans for review and recommendation by the City Engineer.

B.     Notice and hearings. A land use permit application will be scheduled for a public hearing only after the City Planner has determined the application complete, in compliance with Section 17.70.060(A) (Initial Application Review/Environmental Assessment - Completeness Review). Noticing of the public hearing will be given in compliance with Chapter 17.180 (Public Hearings).

 

17.70.080 Appeals.
The decision of the City Planner, Site Plan Review Committee, Design Review Committee or Planning Commission, as applicable, to approve or deny any land use permit shall be considered final unless an appeal is filed in compliance with Chapter 17.140 (Appeals). The decision of the City Planner, Site Plan Review Committee, Design Review Committee, or Planning Commission, or any condition of approval, is appealable to the City Council.

 

17.70.090 Post Approval Procedures.
The following procedures shall apply following the approval of the permit or entitlement.

A.    Expiration and extensions. Time limits for the expiration of approved land use permits, and procedures for obtaining extensions of time are established by Chapter 17.84 (Permit Implementation, Time Limits, and Extensions).

B.     Phasing. Requirements for the development of approved projects in multiple phases are established by Chapter 17.84 (Permit Implementation, Time Limits, and Extensions).

C.     Building Permit. Building Permits may be issued after all applicable terms and conditions of the land use permit approval have been satisfied. Any land use permit issued in compliance with this Development Code shall conform to all applicable provisions of this Development Code.

D.    Certificate of Occupancy. The Certificate of Occupancy may be issued after all conditions have been fulfilled to the satisfaction of the City Planner.

E.     Minor changes. The City Planner may approve minor changes (e.g., colors, elevations, exterior materials, hours of operation, landscaping, walls/fences, etc.) to required conditions and operating standards of an approved land use permit. The minor changes shall be in compliance with Section 17.84.070 (Changes to an Approved Project).

F.     Major changes. The original review authority may approve major changes to required conditions and operating standards of an approved permit or entitlement, in compliance with Section 17.84.070 (Changes to an Approved Project). The requirements and procedures contained in this Development Code shall apply to any application for a major change, which shall constitute a project requiring environmental review under CEQA.

G.    Performance guarantee. The applicant/owner may be required to provide adequate performance security in compliance with Section 17.84.040 (Performance Guarantees) for the faithful performance of any/all conditions of approval imposed by the review authority.

H.    Revocation. The original review authority may revoke or modify a land use permit approval in compliance with Chapter 17.190 (Revocations and Modifications).

 

 

 

Chapter 17.72 ZONING CLEARANCE
17.72.010 Purpose of Chapter.
This Chapter establishes procedures for the review, and approval or denial of Zoning Clearances, which are required by the City to verify that a requested land use activity and/or structure is an allowed land use within the applicable zoning district, and complies with the development standards and any design guidelines applicable to the land use or the zoning district of the site.

 

17.72.020 Applicability.
Where Article II (Zoning Districts and Allowable Land Uses) requires Zoning Clearance, the City Planner shall evaluate the proposed use or structure in compliance with this Chapter.

A.    Eligibility for Zoning Clearance. A Zoning Clearance may be issued by the City Planner where an existing, new, or modified nonresidential structure(s) containing up to 7,500 square feet of total gross floor area (5,000 square feet in the Historic Commercial and Industrial/Manufacturing zoning districts) or disturbing up to 26,000 square feet of total site area is proposed to be used or constructed or where an existing, new, or modified residential structure(s) with 10 or less residential units is proposed to be used or constructed. Refer to Section 17.06.040(B)(1)(a) (Zoning District Regulations).

B.     Other permits. A Zoning Clearance shall be required before the approval of a Building, Grading, or other construction permit or other authorization required by the Municipal Code or this Development Code for the proposed use or construction.

C.     Incremental or phased development projects. Incremental or phased developments shall be treated on a cumulative basis. The approval of a Development Permit, in compliance with Chapter 17.74 (Development Permits) shall be required for additions to projects that would bring (1) the total project floor area for nonresidential structure(s) to 7,500 square feet or more (5,000 square feet or more for projects located within the Historic Commercial and Industrial zoning districts); (2) the total disturbance area to 26,000 square feet or more; or (3) the total number of residential units to eleven or more units.

 

17.72.030 Review and Decision.
A.    Project review procedures. Each application shall be analyzed by the City Planner to ensure that the application is consistent with the content, purpose, and intent of this Chapter, this Development Code, any applicable design guidelines, the General Plan, and any applicable Specific Plan.

B.     Issuance of a Zoning Clearance.

1.     Time for decision. The City Planner shall take appropriate action on the Zoning Clearance within 30 days of finding the application complete in compliance with Section 17.70.060 (Initial Application Review/Environmental Assessment).

2.     Public notice. Notice of the City Planner’s intent to take action on the issuance of a Zoning Clearance shall be required for all new multifamily residential, commercial, and industrial projects and substantial additions (e.g., an addition of at least 25 percent of the gross floor area of the existing structure) in the following manner:

a.     Notice shall include:

(1)    A general explanation of the matter to be considered; and a general description, in text or by diagram, of the location of the real property that is the subject of the notice;

(2)    The date on which the City Planner may take action on the issuance of the Zoning Clearance; and

(3)    The location and available times that the application may be reviewed by the public.

b.     The notice shall be mailed or delivered to:

(1)    The owner(s) of the property being considered or the owner’s agent, and the applicant, if different from the owner;

(2)    All owners of real property as shown on the County’s latest equalized assessment roll within 500 feet of the boundary of the property which is the subject of the Zoning Clearance; and

(3)    Any person who has filed a written request for notice with the City Planner and has paid the fee set by the most current Schedule of Fees for the notice.

c.     The notice shall be posted in City Hall; and

d.     The notice shall be mailed, delivered, and posted at least 14 days prior to the City Planner taking action on the issuance of the Zoning Clearance.

3.     Required findings. The City Planner shall issue the Zoning Clearance, with or without conditions, only if all of the following findings can be made:

a.     The proposed development is allowed by Article II (Zoning Districts and Allowable Land Uses) within the applicable zoning district, and complies with all applicable provisions of this Development Code, the Municipal Code, and the Public Improvement and Engineering Standards;

b.     If applicable, the proposed development is consistent with the design guidelines, achieves the overall design objectives of the design guidelines, and would not impair the design and architectural integrity and character of the surrounding neighborhood;

c.     The Zoning Clearance approval is in compliance with the requirements of the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) and there would be no potential significant adverse effects upon environmental quality and natural resources that would not be properly mitigated and monitored, unless a Statement of Overriding Considerations is adopted; and

d.     There are adequate provisions for public and emergency vehicle access, fire protection, sanitation, water, and public utilities to ensure that the proposed development would not be detrimental to public health and safety. Adequate provisions shall mean that distribution and collection facilities and other infrastructure are installed at the time of development and in operation prior to occupancy of buildings and the land, and all development fees have been paid prior to occupancy of buildings and the land.

e.     The proposed development is consistent with all applicable regulations of the Amador County Department of Environmental Health and the City of Jackson Fire Department for the transport, use, and disposal of hazardous materials.

4.     Effective date. The Zoning Clearance shall not be valid until the companion Building and/or Grading Permit is issued or, where no Building and/or Grading Permit is required, a written determination is made by the City Planner.

5.     Appeals. Appeals shall be submitted in writing, and filed with the City Clerk, on a City application form, within 10 days from the date of the City Planner’s action on the issuance of the Zoning Clearance, in compliance with Chapter 17.140 (Appeals).

C.     Time limits, expiration. The Zoning Clearance shall be valid for the same time period that the companion Building and/or Grading Permit is in force or 120 days, where no Building and/or Grading Permit is required. Construction shall commence and shall be completed in accordance with the time limits established by Section 17.84.050 (Time Limits, Phasing, and Extensions).

 

17.72.040 Conditions of Approval.
In approving a Zoning Clearance, the City Planner may impose specific development conditions relating to the construction (both on- and off-site improvements), establishment, maintenance, location, and operation of the proposed activity, as the City Planner finds are reasonable and necessary to ensure that the approval will be in compliance with the findings required by Section 17.72.030(B)(3) (Review and Decision -Issuance of a Zoning Clearance - Required Findings).

 

 

Chapter 17.73 SITE PLAN REVIEW
17.73.010 Purpose.
This Chapter establishes procedures for the review and approval or denial of a Site Plan, which is required by the City to verify that a requested land use activity and/or structure is an allowed land use within the applicable zoning designation and complies with the development standards and any design guidelines applicable to the land use or the zoning designation of the site.

 

17.73.020 Site Plan Review Committee.
The Site Plan Review Committee, comprised of the City Planner, City Engineer and City Building Inspector, is established for the purpose of investigating the land use, design layout and other features of proposed development in keeping with the purpose set forth in Section 17.73.010 (Purpose).

 

17.73.030 Site Plan Review.
Each development site plan submitted to the City shall be analyzed by the Site Plan Review Committee to ensure that the application is consistent with the content, purpose, and intent of this Chapter, this Development Code, any applicable design guidelines, the landscaping ordinance, the General Plan and any applicable Specific or Master Plan except as otherwise provided in Government Code 65961 or any successor section thereto.

 

17.73.040 Site Plan Approval.
The Site Plan Review Committee shall approve a site plan if the following findings can be made:

A.    The proposed development is:

1.     An allowed use within the applicable zoning district, and complies with all applicable provisions of this Title, the Development Code, and the Standard Specifications; and

2.     Consistent with the General Plan, and any Specific or Master Plan.

B.     The Site Plan is in compliance with the requirements of the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA); and

C.     There are adequate provisions for public and emergency vehicle access, pedestrian access, fire protection, sanitation, water, drainage, erosion control, and public utilities to ensure that the proposed development would not be detrimental to public health and safety. Adequate provisions shall mean that distribution and collection facilities and other infrastructure are installed at the time of development and in operation prior to occupancy of buildings and the land, and all development fees have been paid prior to occupancy of buildings and the land.

D.    In approving a site plan, the Site Plan Review Committee shall have authority to impose such conditions as it deems necessary to protect the best interests of the surrounding neighborhood and the public health, safety, and welfare in line with the standards set forth in this title and with the general plan.

 

17.73.050 Administration.
The provisions of this Chapter shall be administered by the Building Official and his or her authorized representatives. All other officers and employees of the City shall assist and cooperate with the Building Official in administering and enforcing the provisions of this Chapter. No permits shall be issued to start construction, reconstruction, alteration, remodeling or any other change to any building or site layout until the site plan has been approved pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter and to applicable provisions of this title.

 

17.73.060 Exceptions.
It is not possible to anticipate all situations that may arise or to prescribe standards applicable to every situation. Therefore, the Site Plan Review Committee shall have the authority to vary from the strict application of the applicable Municipal Codes and standards where the Committee finds that the proposed project substantially complies with the applicable City standards and allowing such an exception to be approved will result in an environmentally or aesthetically superior project than would have otherwise been authorized.

 

17.73.065 Review Period.
Upon receipt of a complete site plan review application, the Site Plan Review Committee shall have 60 days to review the application and approve, conditionally approve, or deny it unless prevented to do so for reasons beyond the City’s control. If no action is taken within that time, or any mutually agreed extension, the application shall be deemed approved.

Site plan review approvals shall be valid for a period of one year, but may be extended without the filing of a new application for an additional one year period by a written agreement between the City Manager (or his or her designee) and the applicant.

 

17.73.070 Appeals.
A.    Any applicant for a building permit under the provisions of this Chapter who is dissatisfied with the decision of the Site Plan Review Committee may appeal such decision to the Planning Commission by filing with the City Clerk a written notice of appeal. Such notice must be filed within 10 calendar days after the date on which the decision of the Site Plan Review Committee is made, and shall set forth the specific ground or grounds of such appeal. The City Clerk shall forthwith set the matter for hearing before the Planning Commission and shall cause notice thereof to be mailed to the applicant not less than five days before such hearing. Such hearing may be continued from time to time, and upon the conclusion thereof, the Planning Commission shall promptly make a final decision in the matter.

B.     Any applicant dissatisfied with the decision of the Planning Commission may appeal such decision to the City Council by following the same procedure as described above.

 

Chapter 17.74 DEVELOPMENT PERMITS
17.74.010 Purpose of Chapter.
A.    This Chapter establishes procedures for the review, and approval or denial of Development Permits, which are required by Article II (Zoning Districts and Allowable Land Uses) for land use activities with total project floor area of 7,500 square feet or more or total disturbance area of 26,000 square feet or more, or eleven or more residential units.

B.     The review process begins with the recognition that the proposed use/construction is allowed in the zoning district, and focuses on issues related to site layout and design in order to arrive at the best utilization of the subject site and compatibility of design with surrounding properties.

C.     The process includes the filing of a site plan with the City Planner to verify compliance with all applicable land use development standards, any applicable design guidelines, and the requirements of other City departments.

 

17.74.020 Applicability.
A.    When required. Development Permit approval may be granted by the Planning Commission for land use activities or structure(s) identified in Article II (Zoning Districts and Allowable Land Uses) as an allowed use as follows:

1.     An existing, new, or modified nonresidential structure(s) that contains or would contain 7,500 square feet or more of total gross floor area is proposed to be used or constructed;

2.     Disturbance of 26,000 square feet or more of the subject site. Disturbance includes graded areas, landscaped areas, parking and access areas, structures, and other portions of the site to be improved; and/or

3.     An existing, new, or modified residential structure(s) that contains or would contain eleven or more residential units is proposed to be used or constructed.

B.     Incremental or phased development projects. Incremental or phased developments shall be treated on a cumulative basis. Additions to projects that would bring the total project square footage to 7,500 square feet or the total disturbance area to 26,000 square feet or more, or the total number of multifamily residential units to eleven or more requires the approval of a Development Permit. Modifications or additions to nonresidential structure(s) that contain 7,500 square feet or more of total gross floor area or residential structure(s) that contain eleven or more residential units shall require the approval of a new Development Permit or modifications of a Development Permit unless the modifications or additions may be authorized by the City Planner as a minor change to an approved project in compliance with Section 17.84.070(B)(1) (Changes to an Approved Project - Extent of changes allowed- Minor changes).

C.     Other permits. A Development Permit shall be required before the approval of any Building, Grading, or other construction permit, or other authorization required by the Municipal Code or this Development Code for the proposed use or construction.

 

17.74.030 Findings and Decision.
Following a public hearing, the Planning Commission shall record the decision in writing with the findings upon which the decision is based. The Planning Commission may approve a Development Permit application, with or without conditions, only if all of the following findings can be made:

A.    The proposed development is:

1.     Allowed by Article II (Zoning Districts and Allowable Land Uses) within the applicable zoning district with the approval of a Development Permit, and complies with all applicable provisions of this Development Code, the Municipal Code, and the Public Improvement and Engineering Standards; and

2.     Consistent with the General Plan, and any applicable Specific Plan.

B.     The proposed development is consistent with the design guidelines, achieves the overall design objectives of the design guidelines, and would not impair the design and architectural integrity and character of the surrounding neighborhood;

C.     The Development Permit approval is in compliance with the requirements of the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) and there would be no potential significant adverse effects upon environmental quality and natural resources that would not be properly mitigated and monitored, unless a Statement of Overriding Considerations is adopted; and

D.    There are adequate provisions for public and emergency vehicle access, fire protection, sanitation, water, and public utilities and services to ensure that the proposed development would not be detrimental to public health and safety. Adequate provisions shall mean that distribution and collection facilities and other infrastructure are installed at the time of development and in operation prior to occupancy of buildings and the land, and all development fees have been paid prior to occupancy of buildings and the land;

E.     The subject site is:

1.     Physically suitable for the type and density/intensity of development being proposed;

2.     Adequate in size and shape to accommodate the use and all fences and walls, landscaping, loading, parking, yards, and other features required by this Development Code; and

3.     Served by streets adequate in width and pavement type to carry the quantity and type of traffic generated by the proposed development.

F.     The proposed development is consistent with all applicable regulations of the Amador County Department of Environmental Health and the City of Jackson Fire Department for the transport, use, and disposal of hazardous materials.

 

17.74.040 Conditions of Approval.
In approving a Development Permit, the Planning Commission may impose specific development conditions relating to the construction (both on- and off-site improvements), establishment, maintenance, location, and operation of the proposed activity, as it finds are reasonable and necessary to ensure that the approval will be in compliance with the findings required by Section 17.74.030 (Findings and Decision).

 

 

 

Chapter 17.76 USE PERMITS AND MINOR USE PERMITS
17.76.010 Purpose of Chapter.
A.    This Chapter establishes procedures for the review, and approval or denial of Use Permits and Minor Use Permits, which are required by Article II (Zoning Districts and Allowable Land Uses) for land use activities which may be desirable in the applicable zoning district and compatible with adjacent land uses, but whose effects on a site and surroundings cannot be determined before being proposed for a particular location.

B.     The review process begins with the evaluation of the proposed use/construction to determine if the activity should be allowed on the subject site.

C.     The process includes the review of the configuration, design, location, and potential impact(s) of the proposed use/construction by comparing it to established development standards and design guidelines.

 

17.76.020 Applicability.
A Use Permit shall be required before the approval of any Building, Grading, or other construction permit or other authorization required by the Municipal Code or this Development Code for the proposed use or construction in the following manner:

A.    Minor Use Permits. A Minor Use Permit may be granted by the Site Plan Review Committee for the following land use activities or structure(s) in addition to those listed in Article II (Zoning Districts and Allowable Land Uses) as requiring a Minor Use Permit:

1.     Soil remediation activities which are intended to last 30 days or more; and

2.     Any existing, new, or modified land use activity or structure(s) identified in Article II (Zoning Districts and Allowable Land Uses) as requiring a Minor Use Permit where a structure(s) that contains or would contain up to 7,500 square feet in total gross floor area or disturbs or would disturb up to 26,000 square feet of total site area is proposed to be used or constructed.

B.     Use Permits. Use Permits may be granted by the Planning Commission for:

1.     Any land use activity or structure(s) identified in Article II (Zoning Districts and Allowable Land Uses) as requiring a Use Permit; and

2.     Any existing, new, or modified land use activities or structure(s) identified in Article II as requiring a Minor Use Permit that contains or would contain 7,500 square feet or more in total gross floor area (5,000 square feet or more in the Historic Commercial and Industrial/Manufacturing zoning districts) or disturbs or would disturb 26,000 square feet or more of total site area.

C.     Other permits. A Use Permit or Minor Use Permit shall be required before the approval of any Building, Grading, or other construction permit, or other authorization required by the Municipal Code or this Development Code for the proposed use or construction.

 

17.76.030 Findings and Decision.
Following a public hearing, the Site Plan Review Committee (Minor Use Permit) or Planning Commission (Use Permit), as applicable, shall record the decision in writing with the findings upon which the decision is based. The Site Plan Review Committee may refer the application to the Planning Commission for review and decision. The Site Plan Review Committee or Planning Commission may approve a Use Permit application, with or without conditions, only if all of the following findings can be made:

A.    The proposed development is:

1.     Allowed by Article II (Zoning Districts and Allowable Land Uses) within the applicable zoning district with the approval of a Use Permit and complies with all other applicable provisions of this Development Code, the Municipal Code, and the Public Improvement and Engineering Standards; and

2.     Consistent with the General Plan and any applicable Specific Plan.

B.     The proposed development is consistent with the design guidelines, achieves the overall design objectives of the design guidelines, and would not impair the design and architectural integrity and character of the surrounding neighborhood;

C.     The Use Permit approval is in compliance with the requirements of the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) and there would be no potential significant adverse effects upon environmental quality and natural resources that would not be properly mitigated and monitored, unless a Statement of Overriding Considerations is adopted;

D.    The design, location, size, and operating characteristics of the proposed development would be compatible with the existing and future land uses in the vicinity;

E.     Granting the Use Permit would not be detrimental to the public health, safety, or welfare of the City, or injurious to the property or improvements in the vicinity and zoning district in which the property is located;

F.     The site for the proposed use is:

1.     Physically suitable for the type and density/intensity of development being proposed;

2.     Adequate in size and shape to accommodate the use and all fences and walls, landscaping, loading, parking, yards, and other features required by this Development Code; and

3.     Served by streets adequate in width and pavement type to carry the quantity and type of traffic generated by the proposed development.

G.    There are adequate provisions for public and emergency vehicle access, fire protection, sanitation, water, and public utilities and services to ensure that the proposed development would not be detrimental to public health and safety. Adequate provisions shall mean that distribution and collection facilities and other infrastructure are installed at the time of development and in operation prior to occupancy of buildings and the land, and all development fees have been paid prior to occupancy of buildings and the land.

H.    The proposed development is consistent with all applicable regulations of the Amador County Department of Environmental Health and the City of Jackson Fire Department for the transport, use, and disposal of hazardous materials.

 

17.76.040 Conditions of Approval.
A.    Review authority may impose conditions. In approving a Use Permit, the Site Plan Review Committee or Planning Commission may impose specific development conditions relating to the construction (both on- and off-site improvements), establishment, maintenance, location, and operation of the proposed activity, as it finds are reasonable and necessary to ensure that the approval will be in compliance with the findings required by Section 17.76.030 (Findings and Decision).

B.     Examples of appropriate conditions. Appropriate conditions may include but not be limited to buffers, hours of operation, landscaping and maintenance, lighting, off-site improvements, parking, performance guarantees, periodic review of the permit with authority to modify or add new conditions based on the results of the review, property maintenance, signs, specified duration for the permit, surfacing, traffic circulation, etc.

 

 

 

Chapter 17.77 HISTORIC DESIGN REVIEW
17.77.010 Purpose of Chapter.
This Chapter establishes procedures for the comprehensive review of development to implement the requirements of the Historic Commercial (hc) Zone and the goals and policies of the General Plan.

 

17.77.020 Applicability of Historic Design Review.
A.    When required. All projects that require a land use or building permit or will affect the exterior appearance of any building or property within the HC zone shall be subject to Historic Design Review in compliance with this Chapter. In addition, public projects such as sidewalk installation, traffic circle installation, and other streetscape and pedestrian / bicycle improvement projects within the HC district shall be subject to Historic Design review.

B.     Building permits. No building permit shall be issued for any project until the project has been evaluated through the Historic Design Review process, and a Certificate of Appropriateness has been granted, and the appropriate land use permit has been issued.

 

17.77.030 Historic Design Review Procedures.
A.    Commencement of review. The Historic Design Review process is initiated when the City Planner receives a complete application. The application package shall include all plans, elevations, specifications, sample materials, signage, etc. as specified in the application and any additional information required by the City Planner in order to conduct a thorough review of the proposed project. The materials in the application should be of presentation quality.

B.     Review with other permits. Historic Design Review for projects that require the approval of a discretionary permit (e.g. Conditional Use Permit, Variance, etc.) shall occur concurrently with the review of the discretionary permit application, and the final determination shall be made by the highest level of review authority acting on the project application. The City Planner shall prepare a report for the review authority outlining the findings and any conditions relating to the Historic Design Review prior to the review authority’s consideration of the project. The report containing findings and any conditions shall also be forwarded to the applicant prior to consideration by the review authority.

C.     Review by Design Review Committee. The Historic Design Review application shall be forwarded to the Design Review Committee (DRC) for review. The DRC shall review the application in accordance with the requirements of this Chapter and the Historic Design Guidelines and forward a recommendation of approval, conditional approval, or denial to the City Planner. The City Planner may exempt applications from review by the DRC if the application is minor in nature or a quorum of the DRC cannot be called within a reasonable period of time for the City Planner to review the land use permit within the time limits imposed by this Development Code.

D.    Factors to be considered. In conducting a Historic Design Review for a particular project, the City Planner shall consider the location, design, site plan configuration and the overall effect of the proposed project upon surrounding properties in general. Historic Design Review shall be conducted by comparing the proposed project to applicable General Plan policies, adopted development standards, Historic Design Guidelines, and other applicable ordinances of the City.

E.     Reference to Historic Design Guidelines. In reviewing projects subject to the requirements of this Section, the City Planner shall refer to Chapter 17.20.080 (Historic Corridor (hc) Overlay) in order to provide guidance to applicants seeking to comply with the requirements of this Chapter.

F.     Action, conditions. The City Planner may approve or recommend approval of a Certificate of Appropriateness in accordance with Section 17.77.040 (Findings and Decision for Certificate of Appropriateness). The City Planner may impose conditions to ensure that the project would meet all of the required findings. Conditions may relate to both on- and off-site improvements that are necessary to mitigate project-related impacts, and to carry out the purpose and requirements of the respective zoning district.

G.    Revised plans. Where conditions are imposed that may substantially alter a proposed project, the applicant may be requested to submit revised plans at the discretion of the City Planner.

 

17.77.040 Findings and Decision for Certificate of Appropriateness.
A.    Approval. The City Planner or review authority may grant a Certificate of Appropriateness with or without conditions, only if all of the following findings can be made:

1.     The project, including its character, scale and quality of design, is consistent with the purpose of this Chapter, and all applicable development standards and historic design guidelines;

2.     With regard to a designated historic resource, the proposed work will neither adversely affect the significant architectural features of the designated historic resource nor adversely affect the character of historical, architectural, or aesthetic interest or value of the designated resource and its site;

3.     With regard to any property located within the Historic Commercial Zone, the proposed work conforms to the Historic Design Guidelines for the district and does not adversely affect the character of the district;

4.     In case of construction of a new improvement, addition, building, or structure upon a designated historic resource site, the exterior of such improvements will not adversely affect and will be compatible with the use and exterior of existing designated historic resources, improvements, buildings, natural features, and structures on said site.

5.     The proposed project is consistent with the General Plan.

B.     Denial. A denial of a Certificate of Appropriateness shall be accompanied by a statement of the reasons for denial. The City Planner shall make recommendations to the applicant concerning changes, if any, in the proposed action that would cause the City Planner to reconsider its denial and shall confer with the applicant and attempt to resolve as quickly as possible the differences between the owner and the City Planner. The applicant may resubmit an amended application or reapply for a building or demolition permit that takes into consideration the recommendations of the City Planner.

17.77.050 Conformance to Plans.
A.    All work performed under a Building Permit for which project drawings and plans received a Certificate of Appropriateness shall conform to the approved drawings and plans and any conditions of approval.

B.     Any modifications to or deviations from the drawings and plans approved under this Chapter shall be approved by the City Planner. In the case of a discretionary permit, the City Planner may approve minor modifications but the original review authority shall review and approve any major modifications.

 

 

 

Chapter 17.78 PLANNED DEVELOPMENTS
17.78.010 Purpose of Chapter.
A.    This Chapter is intended to promote and encourage maximum flexibility in site planning, property development, design, and open space areas, while protecting the public health, safety, welfare, integrity, and character of the City, and ensuring consistency with the General Plan and any applicable Specific Plan.

B.     Planned Developments are encouraged and expected to produce a comprehensive development of greater quality than those normally resulting from the more traditional development review process.

C.     Project review shall determine whether the proposed planned development should be approved by weighing the public need for, and the benefit(s) to be derived from, the proposed development against the potential negative effect(s) it may cause.

 

17.78.020 Applicability.
A.    Use of Planned Development. A Planned Development may be requested by a property owner for any residential development project in any residential zoning district, any commercial development in any commercial zoning district, any industrial/manufacturing development project in any manufacturing zoning district, or any development in the Public zoning district.

1.     The approval of a Planned Development may adjust or modify, where necessary and justifiable, all applicable development standards (e.g., building envelope, off-street parking, street layout, etc.) identified in this Development Code, with the exception of density/intensity provisions;

2.     A Planned Development may authorize a land use activity that is not otherwise allowed in the applicable zoning district by Article II (Zoning Districts and Allowable Land Uses) provided the review authority finds that the primary uses of the planned development are allowed in the applicable zoning district and the planned development maintains the characteristics and purpose of the applicable zoning district; and

3.     Approval of a Planned Development shall be required before the approval of any Building, Grading, or other construction permit, or other authorization required by the Municipal Code or this Development Code for the proposed use or construction.

B.     Compliance with General Plan. Strict compliance with the purpose and intent of the General Plan and any applicable Specific Plan shall be required.

 

17.78.030 Application Filing.
The applicant shall prepare and submit an application and project plan to the Planning Department. The project plan shall be professionally prepared and shall include all information required by the City Planner.

 

17.78.040 Findings and Decision.
Following a hearing the Planning Commission shall record the decision in writing with the findings upon which the decision is based. The Planning Commission may approve and/or modify, in whole or in part, with specific development conditions or deny a Planned Development. The Planning Commission may approve a Planned Development, only if all of the following findings can be made:

A.    The proposed development is:

1.     Allowed within the subject zoning district;

2.     Generally complies with all of the applicable provisions of this Development Code and Public Improvement and Engineering Standards relating to both on- and off-site improvements that are necessary to accommodate maximum flexibility in site planning and property development and to carry out the purpose, intent, and requirements of the respective zoning district, including prescribed development standards and applicable design guidelines; and

3.     Consistent with the General Plan and any applicable Specific Plan.

B.     The proposed project would produce a comprehensive development of superior quality (e.g., appropriate variety of structure placement and orientation opportunities, appropriate mix of land uses and structure sizes, high quality architectural design, increased amounts of landscaping and open space, improved solutions to the design and placement of parking facilities, etc.) than which might otherwise occur from the strict application of the provisions and standards identified in this Development Code;

C.     The proposed development is consistent with the design guidelines, achieves the overall design objectives of the design guidelines, and would not impair the design and architectural integrity and character of the surrounding neighborhood;

D.    There are adequate provisions for public and emergency vehicle access, sanitation, water, and public utilities and services to ensure that the proposed development would not be detrimental to public health and safety. Adequate provisions shall mean that distribution and collection facilities and other infrastructure are installed at the time of development and in operation prior to occupancy of buildings and the land, and all development fees have been paid prior to occupancy of buildings and the land;

E.     The design, location, size, and operating characteristics of the proposed development would not be detrimental to the public health, safety, or welfare of the City, or injurious to the property or improvements in the vicinity and zoning district in which the property is located;

F.     The approval of the Planned Development is in compliance with the requirements of the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) and there would be no potential significant adverse effects upon environmental quality and natural resources that could not be properly mitigated and monitored, unless a Statement of Overriding Considerations is adopted; and

G.    The subject site is:

1.     Physically suitable for the type and density/intensity of development being proposed;

2.     Adequate in size and shape to accommodate the use and all fences and walls, landscaping, loading, parking, yards, and other features required by this Development Code; and

3.     Served by streets adequate in width and pavement type to carry the quantity and type of traffic generated by the proposed development.

H.    The proposed development is consistent with all applicable regulations of the Amador County Department of Environmental Health and the City of Jackson Fire Department for the transport, use, and disposal of hazardous materials.

 

17.78.050 Conditions of Approval.
In approving a Planned Development, the Planning Commission may impose specific development conditions relating to the construction (both on- and off-site improvements), maintenance, on-site location, and operation of the proposed activity, as it finds are reasonable and necessary to ensure that the approval will be in compliance with the findings required by Section 17.78.040 (Findings and Decision). The conditions may relate to improvements that are necessary to accommodate maximum flexibility in site planning and property development and to carry out the purpose, intent, and requirements of the respective zoning district.

 

 

Chapter 17.80 TEMPORARY USE PERMITS
17.80.010 Purpose of Chapter.
This Chapter provides for short-term commercial activities that may not meet the normal development or use standards of the applicable zoning district, but may otherwise be acceptable because of their temporary nature.

 

17.80.020 Applicability.
A.    City Planner’s review. This Chapter establishes a process for the City Planner’s review of a proposed temporary use to ensure basic health, safety, and community welfare standards are met, and only suitable temporary uses with the minimum necessary conditions or limitations consistent with the temporary nature of the use are approved.

B.     Related provisions. This Chapter shall be considered and used together with the Allowed Uses and Permit Requirements tables in Article II (Zoning Districts and Allowable Land Uses) and Chapter 17.62 (Temporary Uses and Events), which identifies the following additional information regarding the applicability of a Temporary Use Permit:

1.     Exempt Temporary Uses and Events;

2.     Allowable Temporary Uses and Events; and

3.     General Requirements for all Temporary Uses.

 

17.80.030 Findings and Decision.
The City Planner may approve or conditionally approve a Temporary Use Permit application if the following findings can be made. The City Planner may instead refer any Temporary Use Permit application to the Site Plan Review Committee or Planning Commission for review and decision.

A.    Adequate parking would be provided in areas not located within the public right-of-way or affecting an existing parking area so as to interfere with more than 10 percent of on-site parking, established disabled accessible parking, or with vehicular or pedestrian circulation;

B.     The proposed temporary use is in compliance with all applicable City, State, and Federal laws;

C.     The Fire Chief has determined that the proposed use would not create a fire safety hazard;

D.    The subject property is located within a commercial, industrial, or public use zoning district;

E.     If the use is occurring on City owned property, permission from the City Manager or his or her designee has been obtained;

F.     Operation of the use would not create adverse traffic safety impacts nor result in detrimental impacts upon the neighborhood in which it is to be located;

G.    The establishment, maintenance, or operation of the temporary use would not be detrimental to the public health, safety, or welfare of persons residing or working in the neighborhood of the proposed use; and

H.    Approved measures for removal of the use and site restoration have been required to ensure that no changes to the site will limit the range of possible future land uses otherwise allowed by this Development Code.

 

17.80.040 Conditions of Approval.
In approving a Temporary Use Permit, the City Planner may impose any conditions deemed reasonable and necessary to ensure that the approval will be in compliance with the findings required by Section 17.80.030 (Findings and Decision). Standards for floor areas, heights, landscaping areas, off-street parking, setbacks, and other structure and property development standards that apply to the category of use or the zoning district of the subject site shall be used as a guide for determining the appropriate development conditions/standards for the temporary use. However, the City Planner may grant an adjustment from the specific requirements as deemed necessary or appropriate.

 

17.80.050 Post Approval Procedures.
The following procedures, in addition to those identified in Chapters 17.70 (Applications, Processing, and Fees) and 17.84 (Permit Implementation, Time Limits, and Extensions), shall apply following the approval of a Temporary Use Permit:

A.    Condition of site following temporary use. Each site occupied by a temporary use shall be cleaned of debris, litter, or any other evidence of the temporary use upon completion or removal of the use, and shall thereafter be used in compliance with the provisions of this Development Code. The City Planner may require a cash surety as a condition of approval to ensure the site restoration and adequate cleanup after the use is finished; and

B.     Revocation. The City Planner may revoke or modify a Temporary Use Permit with only a 24-hour notice, in compliance with Chapter 17.190 (Revocations and Modifications).

 

 

Chapter 17.82 VARIANCES AND HISTORIC VARIANCES
17.82.010 Purpose of Chapter.
This Chapter provides for modifications and adjustments of the standards of this Development Code only when, because of special circumstances applicable to the property, including location, shape, size, surroundings, or topography, the strict application of this Development Code deprives the property owner privileges enjoyed by other property owners in the vicinity and under identical zoning districts.

 

17.82.020 Applicability.
A.    Adjustments allowed. The Site Review Committee may grant an adjustment from the requirements of this Development Code governing only the following development standards, unless the requested adjustment(s) involves a project that is otherwise part of a permit, entitlement, or modification requiring Planning Commission action. In those instances, the Planning Commission shall have the authority to review and decide the Variance application at the same time that they consider the companion permit, entitlement, or modification:

1.     Dimensional standards (e.g., building coverage, distance between structures, landscape, parcel area and paving requirements, parcel dimensions, setbacks, and structure heights);

2.     Number and dimensions of off-street parking and drive areas, loading spaces, and landscaping, lighting, or parking requirements, except as otherwise provided in this Development Code; and

3.     Sign regulations (other than prohibited signs).

B.     Adjustments prohibited. The power to grant Variances does not include the authority to allow a use of land not normally allowed in the applicable zoning district by Article II (Zoning Districts and Allowable Land Uses), or to modify residential density regulations.

C.     Historic Variances. Variances from the requirements of this Development Code applicable to historic resources are subject to Section 17.82.050 (Historic Variances).

 

17.82.030 Findings and Decision.
Following a public hearing, the Site Plan Review Committee shall record the decision in writing with the findings upon which the decision is based, in compliance with State law (Government Code Section 65906). The Site Plan Review Committee may refer the application to the Planning Commission for review and decision. The Site Plan Review Committee or Planning Commission may approve a Variance with or without conditions, only if all of the following findings can be made:

A.    General findings. The following findings are required for all Variances:

1.     There are special circumstances applicable to the property (e.g., location, shape, size, surroundings, or topography), so that the strict application of this Development Code deprives the property owner privileges enjoyed by other property owners in the vicinity and under identical zoning districts;

2.     The Variance authorized does not constitute a grant of special privilege inconsistent with the limitations upon other properties in the vicinity and in the same zoning district;

3.     The approval of the Variance is in compliance with the requirements of the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) and there would be no potential significant adverse effects upon environmental quality and natural resources that could not be properly mitigated and monitored, unless a Statement of Overriding Considerations is adopted;

4.     Granting the Variance:

a.     Does not allow a use or activity which is not otherwise expressly allowed in the applicable zoning district;

b.     Would not be detrimental to the public health, safety, or welfare, or injurious to the property or improvements in the vicinity and zoning district in which the property is located; and

c.     Is consistent with the General Plan and any applicable Specific Plan.

5.     The Variance is the minimum departure from the requirements of this Development Code necessary to grant relief to the applicant, consistent with paragraphs 1 and 2 above.

B.     Findings for off-street parking variances. For a nonresidential development project proposing to locate a portion of the required parking at an off-site location, or provide in-lieu fees or facilities instead of the required on-site parking spaces, the following findings shall be made in a positive manner, in compliance with State law (Government Code Section 65906.5):

1.     The Variance will be an incentive to, and a benefit for, the subject nonresidential development; and

2.     The Variance will facilitate access to the subject nonresidential development by patrons of public transit facilities.

 

17.82.040 Conditions of Approval.
In approving an application for a Variance, the Site Plan Review Committee or Planning Commission may impose conditions relating to the construction (both on- and off-site improvements), establishment, maintenance, location, and operation of the proposed activity, as it finds are reasonable and necessary to ensure that the approval will be in compliance with the findings required by Section 17.82.030 (Findings and Decision).

 

17.82.050 Historic Variances.
A.    Purpose. This Section provides for modifications and adjustments of the development standards of this Development Code only when the strict application of this Development Code may impair the ability of a historic resource to be properly used for adaptive reuse and/or to be altered in a manner that will have the least impact upon its historic character and the surrounding area. The intent of this Chapter is to grant Historic Variances only to the extent that they are necessary to achieve the objectives stated and no further.

B.     Applicability.

1.     No property shall be eligible for a Historic Variance unless and until such property is designated as a historic resource by the City Council.

2.     In the event that a property loses its status as a historic resource, the provisions of this Chapter shall thereafter be rendered inapplicable to such property.

3.     Variances to the development standards of Chapter 17.77 (Historic Design Review) and Chapter 17.20.060 (Historic Corridor (hc) Overlay) shall be processed in accordance with their respective provisions.

C.     Application filing, processing, and review. An application for Historic Variance shall be processed in the same manner as Variances as described in Section 17.82.030 (Findings and Decision), except as modified by the requirements of this Section. Prior to the Site Plan Review Committee taking action on the application, the application shall be forwarded to the Design Review Committee (DRC) for review. The DRC shall review the application in accordance with the requirements of this Section and Chapter 17.20.060 (Historic Corridor (hc) Overlay) and forward a recommendation to the review authority.

D.    Findings and decision. Following a public hearing, the Site Plan Review Committee shall record the decision in writing with the findings upon which the decision is based. The Site Plan Review Committee may refer the application to the Planning Commission for review and decision. The Site Plan Review Committee or Planning Commission may approve a Historic Variance with or without conditions, only if all of the following findings can be made:

1.     The Historic Variance is necessary to provide for the appropriate adaptive reuse of an existing historic resource building, and/or to provide for the design and alteration of a historic resource building in a manner that will enhance its historic and functional use and utility;

2.     The historic resource is being preserved or will retain its integrity as a historic resource. Any improvements, alterations, or modifications will not cause the survey rating category of the historic resource to be downgraded;

3.     The Historic Variance will not prevent the use from being able to adequately function on the site;

4.     The Historic Variance will not adversely impact property or public rights-of-way within the neighborhood and Historic Commercial Zone;

5.     The Historic Variance is the minimum departure from the requirements of this Development Code necessary to grant relief to the applicant, consistent with subsections (D)(1) and (D)(2) above; and

6.     The granting of the Historic Variance is consistent with the General Plan.

E.     Conditions of approval. In approving an application for a Historic Variance, the Site Plan Review Committee or Planning Commission may impose conditions relating to the construction (both on- and off-site improvements), establishment, maintenance, location, and operation of the proposed activity, as it finds are reasonable and necessary to ensure that the approval will be in compliance with the findings required by Section 17.82.050(D) (Variances and Historic Variances - Findings and Decision).

 

 

Chapter 17.83 DEMOLITION REVIEW
17.83.010 Purpose of Chapter.
This Chapter establishes procedures and criteria for the review of demolition requests of historic resources in order to implement the requirements of the General Plan.

 

17.83.020 Applicability of Demolition Review.
A.    When required. Any and all actions that will result in the removal, relocation, tearing down, or demolition of a historic resource, or portion thereof, shall be subject to Demolition Review in compliance with this Chapter. This includes, but is not limited to, total demolition of a resource, or portion thereof, or partial demolition that is so extensive that it would result in the lowering of the survey rating for the resource.

Section 15064.5(a) of the California Environmental Quality Act Guidelines shall be used to determine what should be considered a historic resource.

B.     Building permits. No building permit shall be issued for any demolition until the demolition has been evaluated through the Demolition Review process.

 

17.83.030 Demolition Review Procedures.
A.    Commencement of review. The Demolition Review process is initiated when the City Planner receives completed applications for Demolition Review. The application packages shall include all plans, elevations, specifications, sample materials, etc. as specified in the application and any additional information required by the City Planner in order to conduct a thorough review of the proposed demolition.

B.     Review with other permits. Demolition Review in conjunction with projects that require the approval of a discretionary permit (e.g. Conditional Use Permit, Variance, etc.) shall occur concurrently with the review of the discretionary permit application, and the final determination shall be made by the highest level of review authority in compliance with Table 4-1 (Review Authority) and Section 17.70.030 (Concurrent Permit Processing). The City Planner shall prepare a report for the review authority outlining the findings and any conditions relating to the Demolition Review prior to the review authority’s consideration of the project. The report containing findings and any conditions shall also be forwarded to the applicant prior to consideration by the review authority.

C.     Review by Design Review Committee. The Demolition Review application shall be forwarded to the Design Review Committee for review. The Committee shall review the application in accordance with the requirements of this Chapter and the Historic Design Guidelines and forward a recommendation of approval, conditional approval, or denial to the Planning Commission.

D.    Factors to be considered. In conducting a Demolition Review for a particular project, the Planning Commission shall consider the classification category of the historic resource (Category A, B, or C below) and the location and the overall effect of the proposed demolition upon surrounding properties and the Historic Corridor in general. Demolition Review shall be conducted by comparing the proposed demolition to applicable General Plan policies, adopted development standards, design guidelines, CEQA Guidelines Section 15064.5 (Determining the Significance of Impacts to Archeological and Historical Resources), and other applicable ordinances of the City. The Planning Commission may require an Environmental Impact Report be prepared for demolition of structures listed on the National Register.

E.     Action, conditions. The Planning Commission may approve or recommend approval of the design of a proposed demolition in compliance with Section 17.83.040 (Findings and Decision). The Planning Commission may impose conditions upon the demolition to ensure that the project would meet all of the required findings.

F.     Exemption. The Planning Commission may exempt a Demolition Review application from the requirements of this Chapter and authorize the removal or demolition of a historic resource if the historic resource poses an immediate danger to the health, safety, or welfare of the occupants, the owner, or that of the general public, and immediate action must be taken on the application to safeguard the public health, safety, and welfare.

 

17.83.040 Findings and Decision.
A.    The Design Review Committee may refer any application to the Planning Commission for review and decision.

B.     Category A (Essential Rating) and Category B (Contributing Rating) Resources. The Demolition Review Committee may grant Demolition Review approval with or without conditions, only if one of the following findings can be made:

1.     The historic resource poses an immediate danger to the health, safety, or welfare of the occupants, the owner, or that of the general public; there are no other reasonable actions that may be taken by the City or property owner to eliminate or reduce the immediate danger to an acceptable and safe level; and the historic resource must be demolished immediately to safeguard the public health, safety, and welfare; or

2.     The historic resource must be removed from the site in order for the property to be utilized for a public structure or use which substantially benefits the public.

C.     Category C (Supporting Rating) Resources. The Design Review Committee may grant Demolition Review approval with or without conditions, only if one of the following findings can be made:

1.     Maintaining the resource is not economically feasible based on policies, criteria, and guidelines adopted by the City Council.

2.     Within one year of the demolition of the resource, the resource will be replaced by a building reconstructed to replicate the resource from a period of the historic significance of the resource and the reconstruction of the building is done in accordance with the “Standards for Reconstruction and Guidelines for Reconstructing Historic Buildings” as set forth in the Secretary of the Interior’s Standards for the Treatment of Historic Properties.

3.     The historic resource poses an immediate danger to the health, safety, or welfare of the occupants, the owner, or that of the general public; there are no other reasonable actions that may be taken by the City or property owner to eliminate or reduce the immediate danger to an acceptable and safe level; and the historic resource must be demolished immediately to safeguard the public health, safety, and welfare.

4.     The historic resource must be removed from the site in order for the property to be utilized for a public structure or use which substantially benefits the public.

5.     The project is not considered historic as defined by Section 15064.5(a) (Determining the Significance of Impacts to Archeological and Historical Resources) of the California Environmental Quality Act Guidelines.

In those cases where the Design Review Committee authorizes the demolition of a Category C historic resource, the City Planner or review authority shall, to the satisfaction of the City Planner, require that as much of the materials from the original structure be used in a new building on the site and/or that the historic building form of the original be replicated in development on the site.

 

17.83.050 Enforcement.
In addition to the legal remedies set forth in Section 17.200.070 (Legal Remedies), the City may choose to undertake any or all of the following legal actions to impose sanctions for violations of this Chapter.

A.    Any conviction of an infraction or misdemeanor under the provisions of this Development Code for violating any provision of this Chapter shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000.

B.     Within 18 months of the date of demolition of a historic resource demolished in violation of this Chapter, or permits issued in compliance with this Chapter, the owner of the property shall replace the historic resource with a building reconstructed to replicate the resource from a period of the historic significance of the resource, and the reconstruction of the building shall be done in accordance with the “Standards for Reconstruction and Guidelines for Reconstructing Historic Buildings” as set forth in the Secretary of the Interior’s Standards for the Treatment of Historic Properties.

C.     On properties on which an historic resource has been demolished in violation of this Chapter, or permits issued in compliance with this Chapter, the City shall not approve or authorize any change in the use of land or structures, including such non-structural uses such as parking lots, for a period of five years from the date of demolition of the historic resource. The City shall not approve or authorize an increase in floor area or lot coverage which was in existence prior to demolition of the historic resource for an approved replacement use for a period of five years from the date of demolition of the historic resource.

 

 

Chapter 17.84 PERMIT IMPLEMENTATION, TIME LIMITS, AND EXTENSIONS
17.84.010 Purpose of Chapter.
This Chapter provides requirements for the implementation or “exercising” of the land use permits or entitlements specified by this Development Code, including time limits and procedures for granting extensions of time.

 

17.84.020 Effective Date of Permits.
A.    Effective after appeal period. Development Permits, Planned Developments, Temporary Use Permits, Use Permits, and Variances shall become effective the day after the appeal period has ended, provided that no appeal of the review authority’s approval has been filed in compliance with Chapter 17.140 (Appeals).

B.     Appeal of City Planner’s action. If the appeal of a decision by the City Planner is filed in a timely manner, the permit or entitlement shall be placed on hold pending the final decision on the appeal by the Planning Commission.

C.     Planning Commission’s action. If the appeal of a decision by the City Planner is denied by the Planning Commission, the permit or entitlement shall become effective on the day after the appeal period has ended, provided that no appeal of the Planning Commission’s action has been filed.

D.    Appeal of Site Plan or Design Review Committees and Planning Commission’s action. If the appeal of a decision by the Site Plan or Design Review Committees or Planning Commission is filed in a timely manner, the permit or entitlement shall be placed on hold pending the final decision on the appeal by the City Council.

E.     City Council’s action is final.

F.     If the City Council denies the appeal on a decision by the Site Plan or Design Review Committees or Planning Commission, or modifies the approval of the permit or entitlement, the permit or entitlement shall become effective immediately following the City Council‘s action.

G.    If the appeal of a decision by the Planning Commission is approved and the permit or entitlement is denied by the City Council on appeal, the permit or entitlement shall be deemed void.

 

17.84.030 Applications Deemed Approved.
Any land use permit application deemed approved in compliance with State law (Government Code Section 65956) shall be subject to all applicable provisions of this Development Code, which shall be satisfied by the applicant before any Building Permit is issued or a land use not requiring a Building Permit is established.

 

17.84.040 Performance Guarantees.
A permit applicant may be required by conditions of approval, or by action of the City Planner, to provide adequate performance guarantees (e.g., bonds, cash deposits, certified letter of credit, etc.) to ensure the faithful performance of any or all conditions of approval imposed by the review authority. The City Planner shall be responsible for setting the amount of the required performance guarantee, after consultation with the City Building Official.

 

17.84.050 Time Limits, Phasing, and Extensions.
A.    Time limits. Unless conditions of approval establish a different time limit, any land use permit or entitlement, except a Zoning Clearance, not exercised within two years of approval, including any extension(s), whichever is greater, shall be deemed expired. A Zoning Clearance not exercised within one year of the issuance of the building and/or grading permit, or 120 days where no building and/or grading permit is required, shall be deemed expired.

1.     The permit shall not be deemed exercised until the permittee has obtained a Building Permit and diligently pursued construction, or has actually commenced the allowed use on the subject property in compliance with the conditions of approval, for uses that do not require a Building Permit. Diligent pursuit shall require, at a minimum, the completion of the installation of the foundation(s) for all structure(s) on the property.

2.     Any permit or entitlement which was approved before the adoption of this Development Code without a specific time limit, shall be exercised within two years of approval, or the time periods allowed to complete a Building Permit, including any extensions, whichever is greater, or the permit shall be deemed expired.

3.     For permits or entitlements without provisions for phasing, the use of the property including the construction of all structures and other features of the project, as shown in the approved permit, shall be completed within four years from the date of approval of the permit. Projects granted one two-year extension, in compliance with subsection C, below, shall require completion within six years from the original date of approval of the permit. Permits not completed within these time periods shall be deemed expired.

B.     Phasing.

1.     Authorization for phasing required. Where the permit or entitlement provides for development in two or more phases or units in sequence, the permit or entitlement shall not be approved until the review authority has approved the final development plan for the entire project site. The project applicant shall not be allowed to develop one phase in compliance with the pre-existing base zoning district and development standards and then develop the remaining phases in compliance with this Development Code.

2.     Maximum interval between phases. Construction shall commence for each phase of a multi-phase project within two years after construction has commenced on the previous phase, or the land use permit shall be deemed expired. If the application for the permit also involves the approval of a Tentative Map, the phasing shall be consistent with the Tentative Map and the permit or entitlement shall be exercised before the expiration of the companion Tentative Map.

C.     Extensions of time. Upon the filing of a request for extension by the applicant, the original review authority may extend the time to establish an approved use.

1.     The applicant shall file a written request for an extension of time with the City Planner in advance of the expiration date, together with the filing fee required by the City’s Schedule of Fees. If the application also involves the approval of a tentative map, the extension shall be consistent with the tentative map extension, in compliance with State law (Government Code Section 66452.12) and Section 17.96.150 (Extensions of Time for Tentative Maps).

2.     If the permit or approval being considered for extension originally required a noticed public hearing, the review authority shall hold a public hearing on the proposed extension of a permit, and give notice, in compliance with Chapter 17.180 (Public Hearings).

3.     Consideration of extension.

a.     The review authority shall determine whether the permittee has made a good faith effort to exercise the permit and that the request is still in compliance with this Development Code, the General Plan, and any applicable Specific Plan.

b.     The burden of proof is on the permittee to establish, with substantial evidence, why the permit should be extended.

c.     If the review authority determines that the permittee has proceeded in good faith, has exercised due diligence in seeking to establish the permit and that the request is still in compliance with this Development Code, the General Plan, and any applicable Specific Plan, the review authority may grant an extension of the permit for a period of up to a total of two additional years.

d.     The review authority may impose conditions on the approved extension deemed reasonable and necessary to ensure that the approval will remain in compliance with the findings required by this article for the applicable land use permit, and to bring the project into compliance with the General Plan and this Development Code.

e.     On Tentative Map extensions, the review authority shall either approve, without new conditions, or deny the extension.

 

17.84.060 Time Extensions for Building Permits.
A.    City Planner’s review. The City Planner shall review all applications for time extensions for Building Permits before they are granted by the Building Official.

B.     Purpose of review. The City Planner’s review shall determine that the development project, covered by the Building Permit, remains in full compliance with this Development Code.

C.     Findings. The Building Official shall not grant the requested time extension if:

1.     Substantial work in compliance with the original permit has not occurred; and

2.     The City Planner finds that the project described in the Building Permit is not in compliance with any applicable provision of this Development Code.

 

17.84.070 Changes to an Approved Project.
Any development or new land use authorized through a Development Permit, Planned Development, Temporary Use Permit, Use Permit, or Variance shall be established only as approved by the review authority and subject to any conditions of approval imposed on the project, except where changes to the project are approved in compliance with this Section.

A.    Application requirements. An applicant shall request desired changes in writing, and shall also furnish appropriate supporting materials and an explanation of the reasons for the request. Changes may be requested either before or after construction begins, or establishment and operation of the approved land use.

B.     Extent of changes allowed. Generally, minor changes to an approved project may be authorized by the City Planner while major changes shall only be authorized by the original review authority, unless expressly stated otherwise by the conditions of approval imposed on the project, as follows:

1.     Minor changes. The City Planner may authorize minor changes to an approved site plan, architecture, or the nature of the approved use if the changes:

a.     Are consistent with all applicable provisions of the Development Code;

b.     Do not involve a feature of the project that was a specific consideration by the review body in taking action in the adoption of findings in a negative declaration or environmental impact report (EIR) for the project;

c.     Do not involve a feature of the project that was a basis for conditions of approval for the project that imposed limitations, restrictions, or requirements upon the feature above and beyond the requirements of this Development Code or that was a specific consideration by the review body in taking action in the approval permit;

d.     Do not result in an expansion of the use greater than 10 percent of the total floor area, 10 percent of any outdoor activity area(s), or 10 percent of the total site disturbance area(s); and

e.     Do not involve a substantial change to the site plan or the building design.

2.     Major changes.

a.     Major changes to the project which involve features described in subsections B.1.b., B.1.c., B.1.d., and B.1.e above shall only be approved by the review authority through a new land use permit application or modification of a land use permit, processed in compliance with this Development Code.

b.     If a new land use permit application, or modification of a land use permit, is subsequently approved by the review authority, any previously approved land use permit shall be deemed void and superseded by the new land use permit, or modification.

c.     If any of the matters identified above originally required a noticed public hearing, the review authority shall hold a public hearing on the proposed/requested change(s), and give notice, in compliance with Chapter 17.180 (Public Hearings).

 

17.84.080 Resubmittals.
A.    Time limit for resubmittals. When an application for a land use permit, or modification to a land use permit, is denied, no application for the same or substantially similar permit or modification for the same site shall be filed in whole, or in part, within six months of the date of denial, except as may be specified at the time of denial.

B.     Action of City Planner. The City Planner shall determine whether the new application is for a land use permit, or modification, which is the same or substantially similar to the previously denied permit, or modification.

C.     Effective date. The decision of the City Planner shall become effective the day after the appeal period has ended, provided that no appeal of the City Planner’s decision has been filed in compliance with Chapter 17.140 (Appeals).

 

17.84.090 Covenants of Easement.
A.    Covenant may be required. When necessary to achieve the land use goals of the City, the City may require a property owner(s) holding property in common ownership to execute and record a Covenant of Easement in favor of the City and providing for air access, emergency access, landscaping, light, and parking access, or for open space. The Covenant may be imposed as a condition of approval by the City Planner, Site Plan Review Committee, Planning Commission, or City Council.

B.     Form of Covenant. The Covenant of Easement shall describe the real property to be subject to the easement and the real property to be benefited by the easement. The Covenant shall also identify the approval or permit granted which relied upon or required the Covenant. The form of the Covenant shall be approved by the City Attorney.

C.     Effect of Covenant. The Covenant shall be effective when recorded and shall act as an easement in compliance with State law (Chapter 3 (commencing with Section 801) of Title 2 of Part 2 of Division 2 of the Civil Code), except that it shall not merge into any other interest in the real property. Civil Code Section 1104 shall be applicable to conveyance of the affected real property. From and after the time of its recordation, the Covenant shall impart notice to all persons to the extent afforded by the recording laws of the State. Upon recordation, the burdens of the Covenant shall be binding upon, and the benefits of the Covenant shall inure to, all successors-in-interest to the real property.

D.    Enforceability of Covenant. The Covenant shall be enforceable by the successor(s)-in-interest to the real property benefited by the Covenant and the City. Nothing in this Section creates standing in any person, other than the City, and any owner of the real property burdened or benefited by the Covenant, to enforce or to challenge the Covenant or any requested amendment or release.

E.     Release of Covenant. The Covenant may be released by the City at the City’s discretion, at the request of any person, in accordance with Chapter 17.88 (Vacations).

F.     Fees. The City may impose fees to recover the City’s reasonable cost of processing a request for a release. Fees for the processing shall be specified in the City’s Schedule of Fees.

 

 

 

Chapter 17.86 LOT LINE ADJUSTMENTS
17.86.010 Purpose of Chapter.
This Chapter provides procedures for the preparation, filing, review, and approval or denial of applications for Lot Line Adjustment, in compliance with Government Code Section 66412(d).

 

17.86.020 Applicability.
The Lot Line Adjustment procedure shall be used only for the purpose of relocating lot lines between two or more adjoining parcels, where land taken from one parcel is added to an adjacent parcel and where no more parcels are created than originally existed. A Lot Line Adjustment may result in fewer parcels than originally existed. A Lot Line Adjustment shall be processed in compliance with this Chapter. For the purposes of this Chapter, an “adjacent parcel” is one that directly touches at least one of the other parcels involved in the adjustment.

 

17.86.030 Adjustment Application and Processing.
A Lot Line Adjustment application shall be prepared, filed and processed in compliance with this Section.

A.    Application content. A Lot Line Adjustment application shall include all information and other materials prepared as required by the Lot Line Adjustment Preparation and Contents instruction list, provided by the Planning Department.

B.     Processing. Lot Line Adjustment applications shall be submitted to the City Planner and shall be processed according to the procedures specified by Chapter 17.70 (Applications, Processing and Fees). An environmental assessment in compliance with Section 17.70.060 (Initial Application Review/Environmental Assessment) may be required or may be waived in compliance with Section 15305 of the CEQA Guidelines.

 

17.86.040 Lot Line Adjustment Standards.
The parcels proposed in a Lot Line Adjustment shall be designed to conform with all applicable standards of Articles II (Zoning Districts and Allowable Land Uses) and III (Site Planning and General Development Standards); except that an adjustment involving existing nonconforming parcels and/or parcels with existing nonconforming development may be approved provided that:

A.    The adjustment will not have the effect of creating a greater number of nonconforming parcels than exist before adjustment and will not cause a parcel that was nonconforming before the adjustment to become more nonconforming as a result of the adjustment, except where the review authority determines that the adjustment will substantially improve the conditions of the pre-adjustment parcel and development;

B.     Any existing conforming development on a parcel will not become nonconforming as a result of the adjustment; and

C.     Where existing development was nonconforming before the adjustment, the adjustment itself will not increase the nonconformity, except where the review authority determines that the adjustment will substantially improve the conditions of the pre-adjustment parcel and development.

 

17.86.050 Approval or Denial of Adjustment.
A.    Public hearing. A public hearing shall not be required for a Lot Line Adjustment.

B.     Findings and decision. The City Council, may approve a Lot Line Adjustment, with or without conditions, only if all of the following findings can be made:

1.     The Lot Line Adjustment does not create a greater number of parcels than originally existed;

2.     The parcels resulting from the Lot Line Adjustment and development on those parcels conform to all applicable requirements of this Chapter, this Development Code, and Title 14 (Building and Construction) of the Municipal Code;

3.     Existing utilities, infrastructure, and easements, including but not limited to streets, driveways, sewer mains, water mains, and electrical lines, will not be adversely affected by the Lot Line Adjustment, or if utilities, infrastructure, or easements will be adversely affected, conditions have been applied to the approval of the Lot Line Adjustment to facilitate their relocation.

 

17.86.060 Conditions of Approval.
In approving a Lot Line Adjustment, the City Council as applicable may impose specific development conditions as it finds are reasonable and necessary to ensure that the approval will be in compliance with the findings required by Section 17.86.050(B) (Approval or Denial of Adjustment - Findings and Decision).

 

17.86.070 Completion of Adjustment.
Within 24 months after approval of a Lot Line Adjustment, the adjustment process shall be completed as set forth in this Section through the recordation of a deed, after all conditions of approval have been satisfied.

A.    Completion by deed.

1.     A Lot Line Adjustment shall not be considered legally completed until either a grant deed or a quit claim deed signed by the record owners has been recorded in compliance with this Section.

2.     The applicant shall submit deeds and a plat map to the City Engineer for review, approval, and signature in compliance with subsection C of this Section, before recordation of the grant deed or quit claim deed.

3.     The legal descriptions provided in the deeds shall be prepared by a qualified registered civil engineer, or a licensed land surveyor licensed or registered in California.

B.     Completion by record of survey. If the City Engineer determines that a record of survey is required by Section 8762 et seq. of the Business and Professions Code, a Lot Line Adjustment shall not be considered legally completed until a record of survey has been checked by the City Surveyor and sent to the County Surveyor for approval and to the County Recorder for recordation.

C.     Review and approval by City Engineer. The City Engineer shall:

1.     Examine the deeds to ensure that all record title owners have consented to the adjustment;

2.     Examine the deeds to ensure that any deeds of trust or similar encumbrances will be modified to reflect the new parcel descriptions;

3.     Verify that all conditions of approval have been satisfactorily completed and that the deeds and plat map are in substantial compliance with the Lot Line Adjustment as approved by the review authority;

4.     If satisfied that the deeds and plat map comply with the above requirements, place an endorsed approval upon the plat map; and

5.     After approval of the legal descriptions and plat map, assemble the deeds and return them to the applicant for recordation.

D.    Expiration. The approval of a Lot Line Adjustment, including a Lot Line Adjustment that was approved before the effective date of this Development Code, shall expire and become void if the adjustment has not been completed in compliance with this Section within 24 months of approval.

 

 

 

Chapter 17.88 VACATIONS
17.88.010 Purpose of Chapter.
This Chapter establishes procedures for the review, and approval or denial of the vacation of streets and public easements and the release of covenants of easements, which is required by State law and the City to ensure that the street or easement is not necessary for present or prospective public use.

 

17.88.020 Applicability.
Any and all requests for the abandonment, vacation, and/or release of streets and public easements shall be evaluated in compliance with this Chapter and Section 8300 of the Streets and Highways Code.

 

17.88.030 Findings and Decision.
A request for the vacation of a street or public service easement or the release of a covenant of easement shall be reviewed and processed in compliance with this Section.

A.    Minor street vacation. A request for the vacation of a street may be approved, with or without conditions, by the City Council by resolution without public hearing or notice only if the conformity of the request with the General Plan has been considered and one of the following findings can be made:

1.     The street has been superseded by relocation of the street and utilities; the relocation of the street would not cut off all access to a person’s property which, prior to relocation, adjoined the street; and the street is not necessary for present or prospective public use;

2.     The street has been impassable for vehicular traffic for a period of five consecutive years, no public money was expended for maintenance on the street during such period, there are no in-place public utility facilities that are in use or would be affected by the vacation, and the street is not necessary for present or prospective public use; or

3.     The excess right-of-way of the street is not required for street purposes, there are no in-place public utility facilities that are in use or would be affected by the vacation, and the excess right-of-way is not necessary for present or prospective public use.

The resolution of summary vacation shall be recorded by the City with the Office of the County Recorder.

B.     Minor public service easement vacation. A request for the vacation of a public service easement may be approved, with or without conditions, by the City Council by resolution without public hearing or notice only if the conformity of the request with the General Plan has been considered and one of the following findings can be made:

1.     The easement has not been used for the purpose for which it was dedicated or acquired for five consecutive years immediately preceding the requested vacation, and the easement is not necessary for present or prospective public use;

2.     The date of dedication or acquisition of the easement is less than five years, and more than one year, immediately preceding the requested vacation, the easement was not used continuously since that date, and the easement is not necessary for present or prospective public use; or

3.     The easement has been superseded by relocation, there are no other public facilities located within the easement, and the easement is not necessary for present or prospective public use.

The resolution of summary vacation shall be recorded by the City with the Office of the County Recorder.

C.     Major street and public service easement vacation. A request for the vacation of a street or public service easement not meeting the requirements of subsections A and B of this Section may be approved, with or without conditions, by the City Council by resolution if all of the findings can be made:

1.     The request was considered at a public hearing and noticed in accordance with the requirements of Sections 8322 and 8323 of the Streets and Highways Code;

2.     The request was referred to the Planning Commission for their review, and the Planning Commission reported on the conformity of the request with the General Plan; and

3.     The street or public service easement is not necessary for present or prospective public use.

The resolution of summary vacation shall be recorded by the City with the Office of the County Recorder.

D.    Release of covenant of easement. A covenant of easement may be released, with or without conditions, by the review body if all of the findings can be made:

1.     A public hearing was held and noticed in accordance with Chapter 17.180 (Public Hearings) to consider the release of the covenant of easement;

2.     The covenant of easement and the restriction on the property are no longer necessary to achieve the land use goals of the City, and the approval of the release is consistent with the General Plan.

The release may be affected either by the Site Plan Review Committee, Planning Commission, or City Council, depending upon which review body imposed the requirement of the covenant. A notice of the release of the covenant of easement shall be recorded by the City Clerk with the Office of the County Recorder.

Article V. Subdivisions
Chapter 17.90 SUBDIVISION MAP APPROVAL REQUIREMENTS
17.90.010 Title.
This article is and may be cited as the City of Jackson Subdivision Ordinance.

 

17.90.020 Purpose of Article.
The regulations in this article are intended to supplement, implement, and work with the Subdivision Map Act, Sections 66410 et seq. of the California Government Code (hereafter referred to as the Map Act). This Article is not intended to replace the Map Act, and must be used in conjunction with the Map Act in the preparation of applications, and the review, approval, and construction of proposed subdivisions.

 

17.90.030 Applicability.
The Map Act and this Development Code require that the subdivision of an existing parcel into two or more proposed parcels be first approved by the City. In general, the procedure for subdivision first requires the approval of a Tentative Map, and then the approval of a Parcel Map or Final Map to complete the subdivision process. The Tentative Map review process evaluates the compliance of the proposed subdivision with the standards of this Development Code, and the appropriateness of the proposed subdivision design. Parcel and Final Maps are precise engineering documents that detail the location and dimensions of all parcel boundaries in an approved subdivision and, after approval, are recorded in the office of the County Recorder.

A.    Tentative Map requirements. Any subdivision or resubdivision of land shall require the filing and approval of a Tentative Map (see Chapter 17.96, Tentative Map Filing and Processing), except as otherwise provided by Section 17.90.040 (Exemptions from Subdivision Approval Requirements), and except for the following.

1.     Exemptions from Tentative Map requirements. The following subdivisions shall require the filing and approval of a Parcel Map without a Tentative Map:

a.     The original, unsubdivided parcel contains less than five acres, each proposed parcel abuts upon a maintained public street, and no dedications or improvements are required by this article; or

b.     Each parcel created by the division has a gross area of 20 acres or more and has approved access to a maintained public street; or

c.     The parcel(s) have approved access to a public street which comprises part of a tract of land zoned for industrial or commercial development, and which has City approval for street alignments and widths; or

d.     Each parcel created by the division has a minimum gross area of 40 acres, or is not less than a quarter of a quarter Section.

2.     Condominium construction. The construction of a condominium project on a single parcel shall require the filing and approval of a Parcel or Final Map, without a Tentative Map, when in compliance with Section 17.100 (Condominiums, Condominium and Mobilehome Park Conversions).

B.     Parcel and Final Map requirements. A Parcel or Final Map shall be required as follows:

1.     Parcel Map. The filing and approval of a Parcel Map (Chapter 17.98—Parcel Maps and Final Maps) shall be required for a subdivision creating four or fewer parcels, with or without a designated remainder in compliance with Chapter 1, Article 2 of the Map Act, except for a subdivision that has been granted a waiver of Parcel Map requirements in compliance with Section 17.98.030 (Waiver of Parcel Map).

2.     Final Map. The filing and approval of a Final Map (Chapter 17.98—Parcel Maps and Final Maps) shall be required for a subdivision of five or more parcels.

C.     Conflicts with Map Act. In the event of any perceived conflicts between the provisions of this article and the Map Act, the Map Act shall control.

 

17.90.040 Exemptions from Subdivision Approval Requirements.
As provided by Article 1, Chapter 1 of the Map Act, the following subdivisions do not require the filing or approval of Tentative, Parcel or Final Maps.

A.    Agricultural leases. Leases of agricultural land for the cultivation of food or fiber, or the grazing or pasturing of livestock.

B.     Boundary line agreements. Boundary line or exchange agreements to which the State Lands review authority or a local agency holding a trust grant of submerged lands is a party.

C.     Cellular antenna facilities. The leasing or licensing of a portion of a parcel, or the granting of an easement, Use Permit, or similar right on a portion of a parcel, to a telephone corporation as defined in Public Utilities Code Section 234, exclusively for the placement and operation of cellular radio transmission facilities, including antenna support structures, microwave dishes, structures to house cellular communications transmission equipment, power sources, and other incidental equipment.

D.    Cemeteries. Land dedicated for cemetery purposes under the Health and Safety Code.

E.     Commercial/industrial financing or leases. The financing or leasing of:

1.     Offices, stores or similar spaces within commercial or industrial buildings; existing separate commercial or industrial buildings on a single parcel; or

2.     The financing or leasing of any parcel or portion of a parcel, in conjunction with the construction of commercial or industrial buildings on the same site, if Article II of this Development Code (Zoning Districts and Allowable Land Uses) requires a land use permit for the project.

F.     Condominium conversions. The conversion of:

1.     A community apartment project or a stock cooperative to condominiums, if the conversion satisfies the requirements of Map Act Sections 66412(g) or 66412(h), respectively; or

2.     The conversion of certain mobile home parks to condominiums as provided by Map Act Section 66428(b).

G.    Lot Line Adjustments. A Lot Line Adjustment processed in compliance with Chapter 17.86 (Lot Line Adjustments).

H.    Mineral leases. Mineral, oil or gas leases.

I.      Public agency or utility conveyances. Any conveyance of land, including a fee interest, an easement, or a license, to or from a governmental agency, public entity, public utility or a subsidiary of a public utility for rights-of-way. The City Planner may determine, based on substantial evidence, that public policy necessitates the application of the subdivision regulations of this Development Code in an individual case for any of the aforementioned. In cases where no Tentative Map, Parcel or Final Map is required, the applicable public agency or public utility must:

1.     Complete the subdivision by a recorded document which describes the new parcels; and

2.     Comply with all other applicable provisions of this article, including offers of dedication and improvements.

J.      Residential financing or leases. The financing or leasing of: apartments, or similar spaces within apartment buildings, mobile home parks or trailer parks; or accessory residential units in compliance with Section 17.58.100 (Detached Living Areas).

K.    Separate assessments. Any separate assessment under Section 2188.7 of the Revenue and Taxation Code.

L.     Wind energy conversion systems (WECS). The leasing of, or granting of an easement to a parcel or portion of a parcel in conjunction with the financing, installation, and sale or lease of a WECS.

 

17.90.050 Review Authority for Subdivision Applications.
The authority to review and approve Tentative Maps, Parcel and Final Maps, Certificates and Conditional Certificates of Compliance, and exceptions to subdivision standards in compliance with this article, is determined by Section 17.70.020 (Authority for Land Use and Zoning Decisions), and the provisions of this article.

 

17.90.060 Exceptions to Subdivision Standards.
An exception to any of the provisions of this article may be requested by a subdivider in compliance with this Section. An exception shall not be used to waive or modify provisions of the Map Act.

A.    Application. An application for an exception shall be submitted on forms provided by the Planning Department together with the required filing fee. The application shall include a description of each standard and requirement for which an exception is requested, together with the reasons why the subdivider believes the exception is justified.

B.     Filing and processing. A request for an exception may be filed with the Tentative Map application to which it applies, or after approval of the Tentative Map. An exception shall be processed and acted upon in the same manner as the Tentative Map, concurrently with the Tentative Map if the exception request was filed at the same time. City approval of an exception shall not be considered as Tentative Map approval and shall not extend the time limits for expiration of the map established by Section 17.96.140 (Expiration of Approved Tentative Map).

C.     Approval of exception. The review authority for the Tentative Map shall not grant an exception unless all the following findings are first made:

1.     There are exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or conditions applicable to the proposed subdivision, including size, shape, topography, location, or surroundings, that are not due to any action of the subdivider subsequent to the enactment of this Development Code;

2.     The exception is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a substantial property right possessed by other property in the vicinity and zoning district and denied to the proposed subdivision;

3.     Granting the exception will not be materially or envionmentally detrimental to the public welfare or environmentally nor injurious to the property or improvements in the immediate vicinity and or zoning district in which the property is located; and

4.     The exception will not affect the consistency of the proposed subdivision with the General Plan or any applicable Specific Plan.

In granting an exception, the review authority shall secure the same objectives of the regulations for which the exception is requested and shall impose whatever conditions it deems necessary to protect the public health, safety, general welfare and convenience, and to mitigate any environmental impacts or potential impacts in compliance with the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA).

 

17.90.070 Violations and Enforcement.
The City may enforce the provisions of this article and take action against violations of the provisions of this article and/or the Map Act, in compliance with Map Act Chapter 7 (Enforcement and Judicial Review), and Chapter 17.200 (Enforcement) of this Development Code. Enforcement measures may include the withholding of permits for development in compliance with Map Act Section 66499.34, the recordation of Notices of Violation in compliance with Map Act 66499.36, or any other procedure authorized by the Map Act or this Development Code.

 

17.90.080 Notice of Judicial Challenge.
At least 30 days prior to filing any judicial action or proceeding to attack, review, set aside, void or annul the decision of the City Council concerning a Tentative, Parcel or Final Map, or any of the proceedings, acts or determinations taken, done or made prior to the decision, or to determine the reasonableness, legality or validity of any condition attached thereto, written notice shall be served upon the City Council detailing the nature of the conduct or action intended to be challenged. This Section is not intended to extend or burden in any way the statute of limitations provided in Map Act Section 66499.37.

 

 

Chapter 17.91 RESOURCE CONSTRAINTS AND PRIORITY ALLOCATION
17.91.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this Chapter is to ensure that all of the City’s resources including, not limited to, road, water, and sewer capacity, be available to support the construction of housing affordable to those who live and work in the City.

 

17.91.020 Definitions.
“Affordable dwelling unit” means either a “low income dwelling unit,” or a “very low income dwelling unit,” or a “moderate income dwelling unit” as defined by the State Department of Housing and Community Development.

“Applicant” means the person applying for discretionary review.

“Development project” means any project undertaken for the purpose of development, as defined in the Subdivision Map Act (Government Code Sections 66410, et seq.), and shall specifically include any tentative parcel map, tentative subdivision map, final parcel map, final subdivision map, preliminary development plan, or final development plan of five or more lots.

“Dwelling” means a building or structure, or portion thereof, designed for residential occupancy with facilities for cooking, sleeping, and bathing; provided, however, dwelling shall not mean any building or structure designed primarily for transient residents, such as hotels or motels.

“Dwelling unit” means one or more rooms in a dwelling designed for occupancy by one person, or group of people, with a common entry and a common cooking facility.

“HEUs” means “Housing Equivalent Units,” and are an allotment made by the City in accordance with this policy which must be obtained by an applicant by allocation prior to applying for any new discretionary development.

“Reasonable certainty” means that the applicant has provided documentation to the satisfaction of the Planning Commission and City Council which establishes that the financing necessary for the public facilities and services required to serve the development is secured. Furthermore, it establishes that the required public facilities and services will be completed in a timely manner. In analyzing “reasonable certainty,” the Planning Commission and City Council shall consider: (a) the availability of interim capacity of existing facilities, including an analysis of current unused/unallocated capacity and the City’s obligation to provide the capacity to future applicants; and (b) the availability of financing for the new public facilities serving the applicant’s project, including an analysis of financing from other development projects which benefit from the public facilities; and (c) the anticipated date of completion of construction of the permanent public facilities which will serve the project.

 

17.91.030 Applicability and Exceptions.
A.    The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to all new development of private property within the City, which requires discretionary approval by the Planning Commission or City Council except as specifically set forth in this Section.

B.     Exceptions.

1.     Variances for existing structures;

2.     Conditional Use Permits for existing structures;

3.     Boundary Line Adjustments;

4.     Amendments to a Planned Unit Development (PUD) or Planned Development overlay (pd) which do not increase project size, allowable level of development, or require the use of any additional water, sewer or road capacity;

5.     Any discretionary action for affordable housing projects intended for very-low, low, and moderate income persons;

6.     Subdivision of parcels with existing structures (i.e., subdividing duplex parcels for individual ownership);

7.     Subdivision of four or less parcels assuming the subdivision utilizes the entire property (no “remainder” lots), the intended use is consistent with the General Plan Land Use Designation and Zoning, further subdivision is prohibited, and the subdivision does not require extension of public facilities or infrastructure;

8.     Expansion of community medical facilities necessary to the provision of emergency care and treatment for residents of the City;

9.     Such other exceptions as the City Council may approve by resolution after a public hearing; and

10.   Exceptions required by the order of a court of competent jurisdiction.

 

17.91.040 Establishment of Housing Equivalent Units.
A.    In January of each year the City Council, with recommendations from the Planning Commission, shall establish by resolution the Housing Equivalent Units (HEUs) that will be available. HEUs would be based upon the public facility and resource constraints that exist in the City of Jackson and the status of planned infrastructure improvements. Infrastructure improvements would be those prescribed in the City’s Circulation Element of the General Plan, the Amador County Regional Transportation Plan, the Amador Water Agency’s Urban Water Resource Plan, and the City’s Waste Water Treatment Plant Facilities Plan. Other facility and resource management plans should be used if available. Unused HEUs from previous years should be considered when establishing the current year HEUs.

B.     As part of the HEUs establishment process, the City Council shall determine what percentage of HEUs shall be available for ministerial projects. This percentage shall be based on analysis of the likelihood that vacant properties within the City of Jackson will develop which do not require discretionary review given the historical rate of development of these types of properties.

 

17.91.050 Development Criteria for Allocation of Housing Equivalent Units.
A.    The City Council shall also annually establish by resolution development criteria for allocation of HEUs. The development criteria will apply to projects intending to request an HEU allocation. The criteria will consist of, but not be limited to, the following:

1.     Economic benefit or detriment to the City of Jackson of the proposed project;

2.     Improvements to be provided as a result of the proposed development which help to alleviate existing infrastructure constraints including:

a.     Road improvements to preserve or enhance levels of service.

b.     Recreational amenities for the use by the public including both active and passive opportunities and facilities.

c.     Sewer treatment plant improvements or new facilities.

d.     School facilities and improved opportunities for higher education.

3.     Provisions for affordable and workforce housing in excess of minimum requirements;

4.     Projects which in-fill around existing development;

5.     Site development constraints; and/or sensitivity to the Motherlode style;

6.     Contribute to the restoration and revitalization of downtown Jackson.

 

17.91.060 Notice of Intent to Develop Required.
A.    Immediately following the establishment of the available annual Housing Equivalent Units and Development Criteria, the Planning Department will advertise in the local newspaper along with at least one metropolitan newspaper (i.e. Stockton Record or Sacramento Bee) availability of housing equivalent units and will begin accepting Notices of Intent to Develop.

B.     The Notice of Intent to Develop shall be required for each project subject to this policy and seeking development approval in the calendar year specified in the developer’s notice. Developers intending to apply for more than one project must complete a separate Notice of Intent to Develop for each development project. The Planning Department will work with applicants of proposed commercial developments to determine the appropriate HEU allotment to request.

C.     Completed Notices of Intent to Develop shall be submitted to the Planning Department by March 31 of each year. Each Notice shall be signed by the property owner or his or her authorized agent. In order to meet the minimum standards required to obtain an allocation, the applicant shall provide documentation to the satisfaction of the Planning Commission and City Council that the public facilities and services required to serve the development project, including each of the elements outlined below, are (1) included in existing capacity funded by the applicant, or (2) there is reasonable certainty that the needs of the development project will be satisfied at the time that the need arises. The term “reasonable certainty” is defined in Definitions section of this document. The public facilities and services to be analyzed by the Planning Commission and City Council for each notice shall include the following information:

1.     Project size (number of housing units or square footage of commercial structures, and acreage) and type of use (single-family residential, professional office, commercial, etc.);

2.     Phasing (geographic and/or chronologic if over more than the applicable calendar year);

3.     Number of bedrooms per housing unit or suites for commercial or office buildings;

4.     Anticipated price per unit or rental range;

5.     Project amenities (private or public);

6.     Public improvements (on and off-site);

7.     Notice submittal date;

8.     Estimated development application submittal date;

9.     Number of HEUs requested (for commercial developments staff will work with the developer to determine this number);

10.   A brief narrative describing how the proposed project satisfies the City Council’s Development Criteria; and

11.   Any other information considered pertinent by the Planning Director.

D.    The number of HEUs requested on the Notice of Intent to Develop shall not be construed as a guarantee that the developer will either receive that number of allotments from the City Council or that the project will be approved for that number of units.

17.91.070 Allocation of Housing Equivalent Units.
A.    By April 30th of each year, the Planning Commission shall have reviewed all Notices of Intent to Develop submitted for consistency with the Development Criteria established by the City Council and made recommendations for the allotment of HEUs. Along with the Development Criteria, all Notices of Intent to Develop shall be reviewed to determine their impact upon the following public facilities and services:

1.     The water system to be utilized (including supply source, storage, treatment, and distribution);

2.     The wastewater system to be utilized (including conveyance and treatment);

3.     The storm drainage system (including permanent facilities and interim ponds prior to construction of the permanent facilities);

4.     The roadway system (including regional highways, streets and interchanges, transit, bikeways, local streets, traffic signals, and other public right-of-way improvements;

5.     The park system (including mini parks, neighborhood parks, and community parks);

6.     Public buildings (including buildings for city hall, police, fire, public works maintenance, community meeting facilities, libraries, and aquatics);

7.     Police protection services and facilities;

8.     Fire protection services and facilities; and

9.     School facilities.

B.     By May 31st of each year the City Council shall have reviewed all Notices of Intent to Develop submitted and the recommendations of the Planning Commission and will award an allotment of the HEUs.

C.     The allocation of HEUs to a specific project is not a commitment in any way that the Planning Commission or City Council will eventually approve the project, nor is it a commitment by the City Council to grant additional allotments to said project in future years. Projects receiving allocations must be designed to be constructed as a complete unit with no requirement that future allotments be granted to complete the project.

 

17.91.080 Entitlement Application.
A.    Upon receiving an allocation, developers shall submit all applications for the entitlements they are requesting no later than December 31st of the year that the developer received the allotment of HEUs. Failure to do so will result in a forfeit of their HEU allotment.

B.     A development project that has forfeited its allotment may submit a new Notice of Intent to Develop during subsequent years’ notice periods; however, a prior allotment that has been forfeited is not a guarantee of return of the allotment.

C.     Once an application has been submitted and deemed complete by the Planning Director, a project must complete the development review and entitlement process (including certification of any environmental documents) on or before December 31st of the year following the year for which the HEU was granted or said HEU allotment shall be forfeited.

D.    Early in each calendar year the City Council shall review the status of projects with HEU allocations allotted the previous year. The City Council may, at its discretion, and with appropriate findings, extend the December 31st deadline for project approvals and forfeiture of allotments at any time. Allocations will, however, automatically expire upon expiration of the tentative parcel or subdivision map.

E.     Projects completing the development review process within the appropriate time frame set forth above shall be considered by the City to have received the necessary allocations.

 

17.91.090 Chapter Amendment Process.
Any proposals to amend this Chapter shall require, the following actions:

A.    Proposed amendments to the policy shall be reviewed at a Planning Commission public hearing. The Planning Commission shall forward a recommendation regarding the proposed amendments to the City Council;

B.     The City Council shall hold a public hearing and consider Planning Commission recommendation prior to taking action on the proposed amendment; and

C.     Proposed amendments to the policy shall be noticed in the local newspaper a minimum of 10 days prior to the Planning Commission and the City Council public hearings.

 

17.91.100 Competitive Process.
A.    When more Housing Equivalent Units are requested than are available, the City Council will determine which proposed project(s) best meet the needs of the City of Jackson and its citizens. Proposed projects will be evaluated and ranked based upon the development criteria identified in the annual resolution adopted by the City Council, which may include, but not be limited to, the following:

1.     Overall project quality—outstanding, good, average, below average;

2.     Environmental and site constraints;

3.     Internal and external street circulation and layout;

4.     Open space preservation;

5.     Landscaping and architectural design quality;

6.     Contribution to City facilities;

7.     Affordable/workforce housing contribution;

8.     Economic impact on the City;

9.     Environmental and historic preservation features.

B.     The project or projects with the highest ranking will receive priority for allocation. If that chosen project does not proceed, through the application process the allocation will be made available to the next highest priority project.

 

17.91.110 Violations of Ordinance and Penalties.
No person or entity shall construct or cause to be constructed any development on private property within the City without compliance with the terms of this ordinance. Violations of this ordinance shall be punishable as set forth in Section 1.20 of the Municipal Code or any successor section thereto.

 

 

 

Chapter 17.92 SUBDIVISION DESIGN AND IMPROVEMENTS
17.92.010 Purpose of Chapter.
This Chapter in conjunction with the City’s Improvement Standards, establishes standards for the design and layout of subdivisions, and the design, construction or installation of public improvements within subdivisions. The purpose of these standards is to ensure, through careful site evaluation and design, the creation of new parcels that are compatible with existing neighborhoods, the natural environment, the health and safety of City residents, and are consistent with the General Plan and any applicable Specific Plan.

 

17.92.020 Applicability of Design and Improvement Standards.
The requirements of this Chapter apply to subdivisions, and Conditional Certificates of Compliance, in addition to all applicable requirements of this Development Code, as follows:

A.    Design standards. The standards in Sections 17.92.030 through 17.92.180 of this Chapter apply to the design of all proposed subdivisions, in addition to all applicable requirements of the City Engineer and the Improvements Standards.

B.     Subdivision improvement standards—Conditions of approval. The applicable subdivision improvement and dedication requirements of this Chapter and any other improvements and dedications required by the review authority in compliance with Section 17.96.060 (Tentative Map Approval or Denial), shall be described in conditions of approval adopted for each approved Tentative Map, Section 17.96.070 (Conditions of Approval). The design, construction or installation of all subdivision improvements shall comply with the City’s Improvement Standards.

C.     Conflicting provisions. In the event of conflicts between the provisions of this Chapter and other provisions of this Development Code, or other provisions of the Municipal Code, the most restrictive provisions shall control.

D.    Extent of improvements required. As required by Section 66411.1(a) of the Map Act, improvements required for subdivisions of four or fewer parcels shall be limited to the dedication of rights-of-way, easements, and the construction of reasonable offsite and onsite improvements for the parcels being created.

E.     Oversizing of improvements. At the discretion of the review authority, improvements required to be installed by the subdivider for the benefit of the subdivision may also be required to provide supplemental size, capacity, number, or length for the benefit of property not within the subdivision, and may be required to be dedicated to the City. If required, a portion of the cost of these oversized improvements shall be reimbursed to the subdivider in compliance with Map Act Sections 66485 et seq.

F.     Exceptions. Exceptions to the provisions of this Chapter may be requested and considered in compliance with Section 17.90.060 (Exceptions to Subdivision Standards).

 

17.92.030 Access, Circulation, Streets.
Proposed subdivisions shall be designed to provide adequate access from each new parcel to a City street, State highway, or County road. Street systems to be constructed with new subdivisions shall be designed in compliance with the City’s Improvement Standards.

A.    General access and circulation requirements. The subdivider shall provide a comprehensive street system, designed in compliance with the General Plan and constructed in accordance with the City’s Improvement Standards.

1.     Street design shall provide for safe vehicular operation at a specified design speed.

2.     Public streets shall be required when:

a.     The street is shown as an arterial or collector on a master street and highway plan, the General Plan, or any other specific or precise plan;

b.     The street will be used by the general public as a through access route; or

c.     A public street is necessary for special needs including bus routes, public service access, bicycle routes and pedestrian access.

Private streets are allowed only in compliance with subsection F of this Section.

B.     Alternative standards. The review authority may consider and approve proposed access and street design solutions that differ from the provisions of this Section, and the requirements of the City Engineer, where deemed necessary to properly address the characteristics of adjacent land uses and/or anticipated traffic volumes, or to maintain neighborhood character.

C.     Access to subdivision. Every subdivision shall be designed to have access to a City street, State highway, or County road. Access shall be provided by:

1.     The subdivision abutting a City street, County road, or State highway, where the length of the subdivision along the street, the street right-of-way, and the width of the right-of-way will accommodate the construction of all road improvements required by this Section; or

2.     The subdivision being connected to a City street, State highway, or County road by a non-exclusive right-of-way easement for street, utility, and appurtenant drainage facilities purposes, where the easement shall be:

a.     Offered for dedication unless the review authority determines the easement may be permitted as a private road in compliance with subsection F of this Section;

b.     Unencumbered by any senior rights that might serve to restrict its proposed use; and

c.     Of a width and location to accommodate the construction of all improvements required by the City’s Improvement Standards.

D.    Access to new parcels. Parcels within a proposed subdivision shall be provided access as follows.

1.     City street access required. Each parcel within a proposed subdivision shall be provided access by being located on an existing City street or a new City street designed and improved in compliance with subsection C of this Section, or to a private street if allowed by subsection F of this Section.

2.     Access denial. Access to a State Highway or City street shall be prohibited as follows. Reservation strips shall be dedicated to the State or City, as appropriate, where required to control access over certain lot lines, or over the ends of street stubs.

a.     When a State highway or a street classified as an arterial in the Circulation Element of the General Plan passes through or abuts a proposed subdivision, direct access to the highway or arterial shall not be permitted from proposed parcels.

b.     The review authority may also deny access to a City street, County road, or private street, at any location where it determines that traffic safety will be compromised by uncontrolled access; provided that each parcel shall have at least one point of physical and legal access to a City street, of sufficient width to accommodate a driveway in compliance with Section 17.48.080 (Driveways and Site Access) of this Development Code.

3.     Frontage roads. When lots are proposed to front on a major arterial or State highway, the review authority may require the subdivider to dedicate and improve a service or frontage road separate from the arterial or highway.

4.     Alleys. Alleys may be proposed as part of residential or nonresidential subdivisions. When a subdivision is proposed in an area zoned commercial or industrial, the subdivider may be required to dedicate and improve alleys in accordance with the City’s Improvement Standards.

E.     Design and improvement of proposed streets. New streets proposed or required within a new subdivision or adjacent to a new subdivision shall be located and designed as follows, and in compliance with the requirements of the City Engineer.

1.     Alignment. The alignment of streets shown on a Tentative Map shall be:

a.     Consistent with the Circulation Element of the General Plan, and/or any adopted street alignment plan, where applicable; and

b.     Located to be in alignment with existing adjacent streets by continuation of their centerlines, or by adjustments by curves.

c.     Cul-de-sac and dead end streets shall be discouraged.

2.     Right-of-way and surfaced width. The width of the right-of-way and improved surface of streets shown on a Tentative Map shall comply with the City’s Improvement Standards, and the requirements of the City Engineer.

3.     Access to unsubdivided property. When a proposed subdivision abuts vacant land that is designated by the General Plan for future subdivision and development, the review authority may require that streets to be constructed and/or rights-of-way established within the proposed subdivision to be extended to the boundary of the property to provide access to the future development.

4.     Improvements to existing streets. When an existing City street provides access to, passes through, or is contiguous with a proposed subdivision, the review authority may require dedication of additional right-of-way and/or improvements to be made to the City street in compliance with the General Plan, and the City’s Improvement Standards if they determine that the proposed subdivision will create the need for the improvements, or where the subdivider otherwise agrees to the improvements.

5.     Length of loop, cul-de-sac, and other dead-end streets. The length of loop, cul-de-sac, and other dead-end streets shall comply with the City’s Improvements Standards.

F.     Private roads. Private roads are allowed as provided in this Section. Private roads shall not be permitted except where the review authority determines that a private street system will adequately serve the proposed subdivision, will not be a substantial detriment to adjoining properties and will not disrupt or prevent the establishment of an orderly circulation system in the vicinity of the subdivision.

1.     Design and improvement standards. Private roads shall be designed and improved as set forth in subsections B and C and in accordance with the City’s Improvement Standards;

2.     Security and conditions. The review authority may require any guarantees and conditions it deems necessary to carry out the provisions of this article pertaining to private roads. Private roads and easements providing access to parcels within a subdivision shall be located and shown on the Parcel or Final Map.

G.    Alternative circulation systems. Proposed subdivisions shall be designed to reserve rights-of-way for pedestrian paths, bikeways and multiple use trails consistent with the Circulation Element of the General Plan, the City’s Standards, and/or the Amador County Transportation Commission Pedestrian and Bicycle Plan as applicable. The review authority will determine when the alignment of these systems shown in the General Plan and/or in any applicable Specific Plan can be feasibly accommodated within the subdivision. Rights-of-way and easements shall be offered for dedication if the review authority determines that the facility is needed the proposed subdivision.

H.    Maintenance requirements. Where streets are offered for dedication, but not accepted for maintenance purposes, the City Attorney shall approve the provisions by the home owner’s association or organization to assume responsibility for the maintenance and ownership of rights-of-way.

 

17.92.040 Energy Conservation and Solar Access.
The design of a subdivision for which a Tentative and Final Map is required by this article shall provide for future passive or natural heating or cooling opportunities in the subdivisions, in compliance with Map Act Section 66473.1. The review authority may require solar access easements as it deems necessary to protect the opportunities for passive or natural heating or cooling, in compliance with the following requirements.

A.    The location and extent of the easements shall be determined by an analysis performed by a qualified professional engaged by the City at the expense of the applicant. The analysis shall specify the optimal location and dimensions of the easements, based on the topography and natural vegetation of the site and surroundings.

B.     The easement shall prohibit any structure which would extend into and block the passage of sunlight through more than 10 percent of the easement area at any time during the year. The easement shall also prohibit the property owner from allowing any vegetation other than native vegetation on the site prior to subdivision, from extending into and blocking the passage of sunlight through more than 10 percent of the easement area at any time during the year.

C.     The easement shall include provisions allowing the owner of the site which is protected by the easement discretion to revisions to the easement, or termination of the easement with approval of the City Planner. The City Planner shall not approve revisions to the easement, or the termination of the easement, if requested by the owner of the site that is subject to the easement. The City Planner shall not approve termination of a solar access easement except where he or she determines that the dwelling unit proposed on the site is not designed to utilize passive or natural heating or cooling.

D.    The review authority shall not require solar access easements where an easement would have the effect of reducing the density of residential units otherwise allowed on the site by Article II (Zoning Districts and Allowable Land Uses), and shall consider the feasibility of the easement, given the contour and configuration of the parcel to be divided.

 

17.92.050 Fire Hydrants.
Fire hydrants shall be installed within the proposed subdivision in compliance with the requirements of the Jackson Fire Department and the City’s Improvement Standards.

 

17.92.060 Grading, Erosion and Sediment Control.
New subdivisions shall be designed so that all proposed grading incorporates appropriate erosion and sediment control measures in compliance with the City’s Improvement Standards and Chapter 17.36 (Hillside Development Standards) of this Development Code.

17.92.070 Major Structures.
The review authority may require the subdivider to provide major structures, including retaining walls, bridges or dams, based on the needs for these facilities created by the subdivision. Each structure shall be designed and approved on an individual basis. The subdivider shall provide the City with all drawings, specifications, and engineering calculations used in the design of a major structure.

 

17.92.080 Monuments.
The subdivider shall install monuments in compliance with Chapter 17.110 (Surveys and Monuments), and the Map Act.

 

17.92.090 Parcel and Block Design.
The design and configuration of proposed parcels and blocks shall comply with the requirements of Article II (Zoning Districts and Allowable Land Uses). A Tentative Map shall propose no more than one parcel as a designated remainder, or “not a part,” and all portions of the designated remainder shall be contiguous.

 

17.92.095 Parks and Recreation.
A.    Park and recreational fee. As a condition of approval of any tentative map, a park and recreational fee in the amount set by City Council resolution shall be paid for each and every newly created parcel. Common area, open space, and similar parcels shall be exempt from the fee if enforceable restrictions are imposed on the parcel prohibiting residential development on the parcel. Condominium and townhouse parcels for which recreational facilities impact fees have been paid for the construction of the multifamily residential structure(s) on said parcels shall be exempt from the fee.

B.     In-lieu dedication of land. In lieu of the park and recreational fee, a dedication of land for park or recreational purposes within the subdivision may be required as a condition of approval for subdivisions containing more than 50 parcels.

 

17.92.100 Public Utilities and Utility Easements.
Public utilities including electricity, gas, water, sewer, cable television, and telecommunications services, shall be installed as part of the improvements within all subdivisions as provided by this Section, and by Section 17.92.120 (Sewage Disposal) and Section 17.92.170 (Water Supply). The installation of utilities may be waived by the review authority if the review authority finds that not installing the utilities as part of the subdivision improvements is in the public interest.

A.    Underground utilities. Utilities in new subdivisions shall be installed underground, as follows:

1.     When undergrounding is required. All proposed utility distribution facilities (including electric, telecommunications and cable television lines) installed in and for the purpose of supplying service to any subdivision with parcels less than three acres in area, shall be installed underground.

a.     Equipment appurtenant to underground facilities, including surface mounted transformers, pedestal mounted terminal boxes and meter cabinets, and concealed ducts, shall also be underground, unless otherwise approved by the City Engineer.

b.     Existing utility facilities need not be undergrounded unless they are to be enlarged or replaced.

c.     The subdivider is responsible for complying with the requirements of this Section and shall make the necessary arrangements with the affected utility companies for facility installation.

2.     Location of installation. Underground utility lines may be installed within street rights-of-way or along a lot line, subject to the appropriate easements being provided where necessary. When installed within street rights-of-way, the location and method of installation shall be in accordance with the Public Improvements and Engineering Standards and subject to the approval of the City Engineer, insofar as it affects other improvements within the street right-of-way.

3.     Timing of installation. All underground utilities, water lines, sanitary sewers, and storm drains installed in streets, shall be constructed in accordance with the City’s Improvement Standards.

B.     Utility easements. Where utility easements are required by the review authority, the easement shall comply the City’s Improvement Standards.

17.92.110 Residential Density.
The maximum number of dwelling units permitted within a proposed subdivision shall not exceed the number permitted by the applicable zoning district in Article II (Zoning Districts and Allowable Land Uses), and may be further restricted by considerations of safety, traffic access or circulation, the slope of the natural terrain, the physical suitability of the site, the nature or extent of existing development, the availability of public facilities, utilities, or open spaces or any other provision of this Development Code.

 

17.92.120 Sewage Disposal.
All subdivisions shall be served by and designed to provide connection to the City of Jackson’s Wastewater Treatment Plant.

 

17.92.130 Street Lighting.
A proposed subdivision shall incorporate street lighting in compliance with the City’s Improvement Standards and any applicable Development Code design standards.

 

17.92.140 Street Names.
All streets within a proposed subdivision shall be named, and the names shall be approved by the City Engineer and County of Amador Surveyor. Preference shall be given to names that are historically significant to the area. Duplication of existing names within the City shall not be allowed in a new subdivision unless the street is an obvious extension of an existing street.

 

17.92.150 Storm Drainage and Watercourses.
Subdivisions shall be provided storm drainage facilities as required by this Section, and the City’s Improvement Standards.

 

17.92.160 Traffic Safety Devices.
Traffic control and safety devices shall be installed by the subdivider during subdivision construction as required by the review authority, to promote traffic control and safety both during construction, and after occupancy of the subdivision. Traffic control and safety devices shall include regulatory signs, warning signs, guide markers, construction signs, pavement markings, lane delineations, and traffic signals, as determined to be necessary by the review authority. Street name signs shall be installed at all public intersections in compliance with the City’s Improvement Standards.

 

17.92.170 Water Supply.
All Subdivisions shall provide water mains and services, installed to serve each parcel, and connected to the service facilities of the City of Jackson in accordance with the City’s Improvement Standards.

 

17.92.180 Zoning Standards.
Proposed subdivisions shall be designed to comply with all applicable provisions of Articles II (Zoning Districts and Allowable Land Uses) and III (Site Planning and General Development Standards) of this Development Code. For example, parcel boundaries proposed near existing structures shall comply with the setback requirements of Article II.

 

Chapter 17.94 RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT DESIGN GUIDELINES
17.94.010 Purpose of Chapter.
This Chapter provides residential design guidelines to assist project designers and property owners in understanding and implementing the City’s goals for attaining high quality residential development and for preserving the small town character of the City. These guidelines are not intended to promote one type of development over another. Their primary objective is to encourage well designed residential neighborhoods which:

A.    De-emphasize the dominance of the automobile;

B.     Promote pedestrian and bicycle traffic corridors;

C.     Provide community open space throughout the development;

D.    Protect the natural environment;

E.     Promote mixed use where appropriate; and

F.     Cluster housing and other structures to establish more open space.

 

17.94.020 Applicability.
A.    The provisions of this Chapter apply to all tentative maps for residential projects.

B.     The review authority may exercise discretion in applying these guidelines to specific projects as not all design criteria may be workable or appropriate for each project. In some circumstances, a guideline may be relaxed in order to accomplish another, more important guideline. The overall objective is to ensure that the intent and spirit of the design guidelines are followed, and to attain the best possible design within reason.

 

17.94.030 Development Context and Continuity.
The following guidelines address the “edges” of new residential projects, that is, how a new residential development should relate to its surroundings.

A.    Develop “neighborhoods.” New patterns of development should ensure that:

1.     They are compatible with the character of established or adjacent neighborhoods;

2.     Groups of new projects together create true neighborhoods, not isolated compounds; and

3.     Features of the natural landscape are preserved.

B.     Continuous streets. New residential subdivisions shall align public streets with those of adjacent developments, avoiding the tendency to become enclaves apart from the rest of the community. Public streets shall be planned to be continuous through adjacent residential developments, where permitted by terrain and other natural features, weaving the community together and simplifying traffic circulation. Through traffic should be accommodated in a manner that discourages the use of neighborhood roadways, especially local streets.

C.     Incorporation of open space. New residential developments should incorporate open space, public or private, and any creeks or riparian areas in project design. Subdivision design should provide maximum access and visibility to these areas.

D.    Frontage roads. Where a project adjoins a public park or open space, frontage roads are a good means of providing visibility and public access to the open space while at the same time providing separation of residences from the open space. (See Figure 5-1, Use of Frontage Roads)

 



 

Figure 5-1 Use of Frontage Roads

 

E.     Fences.

1.     Fences along ridges should be of “open” construction to allow for protection of scenic views.

2.     Fencing adjacent to open space areas should be of a wood (or wood substitute)-rail type. Fencing should have a maximum height of six feet, with horizontal rails or open wire sufficiently spaced to restrict trespassing and to provide security, but to allow for animal movement (deer, etc.) across these areas. (See Figure 5-2, Appropriate Fencing)

F.     Gated neighborhoods. Gated neighborhoods isolate parts of the community from others, and shall not be allowed.



Figure 5-2 Appropriate Fencing

 

17.94.040 Project Site Planning.
The following guidelines relate to the internal organization of residential subdivisions. The intent of these guidelines is to ensure that the relationships between housing units and other on-site uses are attractive and create visual variety along project streets.

A.    New streets shall connect with adjacent existing streets to form a continuous neighborhood network.

B.     Natural, historic and cultural amenities (e.g., views, mature trees, creeks, riparian vegetation, rock outcropping, rock walls, mining features, etc.) should be preserved and incorporated into proposed projects to the greatest extent feasible. See Chapter 17.36 (Hillside Development Standards). (See Figure 5-3, Incorporating Natural Amenities)



Figure 5-3 Incorporating Natural Amenities

 

C.     Site design should not change natural drainage patterns. Site grading should be sensitive to existing landforms and topography so that the natural setting may be preserved to the greatest extent possible. When modifications are necessary, surface drainage with appropriate retention or detention facilities is preferred to underground systems.

D.    Subdivisions for detached single-family homes should be designed with varied front yard setbacks. Long monotonous rows of homes set at the same setback are strongly discouraged. (See Figure 5-4, Varied Entry Setbacks)

 



 

Figure 5-4 Varied Entry Setbacks

 

E.     Single-family parcels should avoid a patterned “cookie cutter” look by employing a variety of lot sizes, widths, and shapes, whenever possible, except where this pattern has already been established in the neighborhood. (See Figure 5-5, Varied Parcel Design)



Figure 5-5 Varied Parcel Design

 

F.     Existing healthy mature trees should be preserved and incorporated into project landscaping to the greatest extent feasible.

G.    Development on sloping sites should follow the natural contours of the land. Stepped building pads, and larger setbacks should be used to preserve the general shape of natural land forms and to minimize grade differentials with adjacent streets and with adjoining properties. See Chapter 17.36 (Hillside Development Standards). (See Figure 5-3, Incorporating Natural Amenities)

H.    Curb-adjacent sidewalks create an undesirable urban appearance and are strongly discouraged. Detached sidewalks or pedestrian paths separated from the road with variable-width parkways are preferred.

I.      New roads and roadway improvements should be located, constructed, and maintained in a manner that prevents adverse impacts to water quality and significant biological, scenic, and historic resources.

J.      Permeable paving shall be utilized wherever feasible.

K.    Alleys should be designed into the development plan whenever possible to allow for garages and vehicle access to be situated at the rear of houses.

17.94.050 Energy Conservation and Solar Orientation.
The consideration of passive solar energy techniques in subdivision design is strongly encouraged, where not in conflict with the objective of preserving the natural features of the site.

A.    Street orientation. Streets that run generally east and west are encouraged because they increase the likelihood and desirability of houses sited with solar access to the south. South-wall glass is important to providing maximum passive solar heating. Where streets do run primarily east and west, solar access can still be provided by creative lot configuration and siting of units on the lots. (See Figure 5-6, Solar Orientation of Parcels)

 



 

Figure 5-6 Solar Orientation of Parcels

 

B.     Setbacks. Placing a house near the north boundary of its lot allows a major portion of the open space to the south of each unit to be controlled by the owner of the house rather than by an adjacent neighbor. Flexibility in setback requirements may be considered to achieve adequate solar orientation when other aspects of the project are also designed to incorporate passive heating and cooling techniques. (See Figure 5-7, Setbacks for Solar Access)

 



 

Figure 5-7 Setbacks for Solar Access

 

C.     Siting. In general, houses should be sited so that south-facing glass is maximized, east- and west-facing glass is minimized. Units attached in preferred east-west directions should not be staggered so as to block south glass collector surfaces. Also, units should not be sited closer to northern units than solar access angles will allow. (See Figure 5-8, South Facing Glass)

 



 

Figure 5-8 South Facing Glass

D.    Orienting homes adjacent to mature trees for shade is a passive solar energy technique that is encouraged.

E.     Integrating deep porches and overhangs in the design of homes is suggested for minimizing energy consumption, and it also is compatible with the Motherlode style.

 

17.94.060 Pedestrian and Vehicular Circulation.
In an effort to avoid residential subdivisions in the City of Jackson having a typical urban or suburban appearance, following design alternatives may be considered.

A.    Gravel pedestrian ways. When attempting to preserve trees and pedestrian traffic is anticipated to be light, compacted gravel pedestrian ways may be incorporated for pedestrian circulation. Gravel walks should be a minimum of six-feet wide and be designed to drain properly.

B.     Reduced centerline radius. To reduce vehicle speeds when rounding curves on neighborhood streets, short radius curves should be incorporated into the project design where possible with minimum and maximum radii established by the City Engineer and the City’s Improvement Standards.

 

 

 

Chapter 17.96 TENTATIVE MAP FILING AND PROCESSING
17.96.010 Tentative Map Preparation, Application Contents.
A.    General content requirements. Tentative Map submittals shall include the application forms, and all information and other materials prepared as required by the Planning Department.

B.     Soils report. As required by Map Act Section 66490, a preliminary soils report prepared by a California registered engineer qualified to prepare such reports, and based on adequate test borings, shall be required for every subdivision for which a Final Map is required by this article. The report shall include recommendations from the engineer for corrective actions which are likely to prevent structural damage to each structure proposed to be constructed in any area of the site where soils problems are identified.

 

17.96.020 Tentative Map Filing, Initial Processing.
A.    General filing and processing requirements. Tentative Map applications shall be submitted to the Planning Department for processing, be reviewed for completeness and accuracy, referred to affected agencies, reviewed in compliance with the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA), and evaluated in a staff report in compliance with Chapter 17.70 (Applications, Processing, and Fees). For Maps with four or more lots, the application will not be accepted without first receiving an allocation per the Resource Constraints and Priority Allocation (Chapter 17.91).

B.     Referral to affected agencies. In addition to the procedures outlined in Chapter 17.70 (Application, Processing, and Fees), a Tentative Map application shall be referred to the agencies outlined in this subsection, as well as any other City department, County, State or Federal agency, or other individual or group that the City Planner believes may be affected by the subdivision, or may have useful information about issues raised by the proposed subdivision.

1.     Time limits. As required by Map Act Sections 66453 through 66455.7, referral shall occur within five days of the Tentative Map application being determined to be complete for processing in compliance with Section 17.70.060 (Initial Application Review/Environmental Assessment). An agency wishing to respond to a referral shall provide the Planning Department with its recommendations within 15 days after receiving the Tentative Map application.

2.     Required referrals. The City Planner shall refer Tentative Map applications for review and comment to each of the following agencies which will be expected to provide service to the proposed subdivision.

a.     Airport. The Amador County Airport shall be referred any Tentative Map for site located within the Airport Influence Area.

b.     Caltrans. The California Department of Transportation shall be referred any Tentative Map within one mile of a State Highway:

c.     Fire District. The Amador Fire Protection District shall be referred any Tentative Map, or Conditional Certificate of Compliance.

d.     Amador County Land Use Agency. The County of Amador shall be referred a Tentative Map or Conditional Certificate of Compliance application for any site located within one-half mile from the boundary of the City of Jackson.

e.     Amador County Department of Environmental Health. The Amador County Department of Environmental Health shall be referred any Tentative Map application proposing the continued use of private wells or private sewage disposal systems or on property suspected to contain mining remains including, but not limited to, waste rock and tailings.

f.      Public utilities and other service agencies. Public utility companies and other service agencies which will be expected to provide service to the proposed subdivision, including providers of gas, electrical, telephone, and cable television services, shall be referred any Tentative Map or Conditional Certificate of Compliance within their respective jurisdictions.

g.     School districts. Tentative Maps shall be referred to the governing board of any elementary, high school, or unified school district within which the property to be subdivided is located.

h.     State Department of Education. The State Department of Education shall be notified of any Tentative Map that includes a proposed public school site.

g.     Amador County Transportation Commission. All Tentative Parcel Maps shall be referred to the Amador County Transportation Commission for review and comment.

Along with the subdivision application referral, the Planning Department shall include notification that if no written response to the referral is received within 21 calendar days of receipt by the Department, the City shall presume that no recommendations or comments are forthcoming.

C.     Review of soils report. The preliminary soils report required by Section 17.96.010 (Tentative Map Preparation, Application Contents) shall be reviewed by the City Engineer who may require additional information or reject the report if it is found to be incomplete, inaccurate, or unsatisfactory.

1.     If the soils report indicates the presence of critically expansive soils or other soils problems which, if not corrected, would lead to structural defects, a soils investigation of each proposed parcel may be required.

2.     If the soils report indicates the presence of rocks or liquids containing deleterious chemicals which, if not corrected, could cause construction materials such as concrete, steel, and ductile or cast iron to corrode or deteriorate, a soils investigation of each proposed parcel may be required.

3.     If the soils report indicates the presence of hazardous wastes, a hazardous waste investigation may be required.

 

17.96.030 Evaluation of Application.
After completion of the initial processing in compliance with Chapter 17.70 (Applications, Processing, and Fees), the City Planner shall:

A.    Review and evaluate each Tentative Map as to its compliance and consistency with applicable provisions of this Development Code, the General Plan, any applicable Specific Plan, and the Map Act;

B.     Determine the extent to which the proposed subdivision complies with the findings in Section 17.96.060 (Tentative Map Approval or Denial), and recommend the approval, approval with specified conditions, or disapproval of the Tentative Map application;

C.     Prepare a staff report in compliance with Section 17.96.050 (Tentative Map Public Hearings), describing the conclusions of the City Planner’s evaluation, and providing recommendations for approval or disapproval of the proposed subdivision by the review authority.

 

17.96.040 Review and Decision.
The Planning Commission shall serve as the review authority and be responsible for the review and approval or disapproval of a Tentative Parcel Map proposing four or fewer parcels, or a Tentative Subdivision Map proposing five or more parcels. After receiving a staff report on a Tentative Map from the City Planner, the review authority shall:

A.    Conduct a public hearing on any proposed Tentative Map (Parcel or Subdivision), and consider recommendations from the City Planner, and any agency providing comments on the Tentative Map in compliance with 17.96.020(B) (Tentative Map Filing, Initial Processing—Referral to Affected Agencies). The public hearing shall be scheduled and notice provided in compliance with Section 17.96.050 (Tentative Map Public Hearings);

B.     Review and evaluate each Tentative Map as to its compliance and consistency with applicable provisions of this Development Code, the General Plan, any Specific Plan, and the Map Act. The evaluation shall be based on the staff report Section 17.96.030 (Evaluation of Application) and information provided by an initial study or environmental impact report Section 17.70.060 (Initial Application Review/Environmental Assessment), and any public testimony received; and

C.     Within 50 days after certification of an environmental impact report or adoption of a negative declaration on the Tentative Map, approve, conditionally approve or deny the Tentative Map. The 50-day time limit may be extended by mutual consent of the subdivider and the City Planner or review authority.

Approval or conditional approval of a Tentative Map shall be granted only after the review authority has first made all findings required by Section 17.96.060 (Tentative Map Approval or Denial). The review authority may impose conditions of approval in compliance with Section 17.96.070 (Conditions of Approval).

 

17.96.050 Tentative Map Public Hearings.
When a public hearing is required by this Development Code for a Tentative Map or an appeal of a Tentative Map decision, the hearing shall be scheduled and conducted in compliance with this Section, in addition to public notice being provided in compliance with Chapter 17.180 (Public Hearings).

A.    Scheduling of hearing, decision. A public hearing on a Tentative Map or appeal shall be scheduled, and a decision shall be reached, within the following time limits.

1.     Hearing. A hearing on a Tentative Map by the review authority shall be scheduled within 30 days after completion of the City Planner’s report.

2.     Decision on map. The review authority shall approve or deny the Tentative Map within 30 days of their receipt of a report and recommendation on a Tentative Map from the City Planner. The 30-day time period may be extended by mutual consent of the subdivider and the City Planner or review authority.

B.     Distribution of staff report. The staff report on the Tentative Map shall be mailed to the subdivider (and each tenant of the subject property, in the case of a condominium conversion Section 17.100.040 (Design Standards) at least 10 days before any hearing or action on the Tentative Map by the review authority.

 

17.96.060 Tentative Map Approval or Denial.
In order to approve a Tentative Map and conditions of approval, or to deny a Tentative Map, the review authority shall first make the findings required by this Section. In determining whether to approve a Tentative Map, the City shall apply only those ordinances, policies, and standards in effect at the date the Planning Department determined that the application was complete in compliance with Section 17.70.060 (Initial Application Review/Environmental Assessment), except where the City has initiated General Plan, Specific Plan or Development Code changes, and provided public notice as required by Map Act Section 66474.2.

A.    Required findings for approval. The Planning Commission may approve a Tentative Map, with or without conditions, only if all of the following findings can be made. The findings shall apply to each proposed parcel as well as the entire subdivision, including any parcel identified as a designated remainder in compliance with Government Code Section 66424.6.

1.     The proposed subdivision, together with the provisions for its design and improvement, is consistent with all applicable provisions of the Subdivision Map Act, the General Plan, any applicable Specific Plan, the Development Code, the Amador County Transportation Commission Pedestrian and Bicycle Plan, and the City’s Improvement Standards;

2.     The site is physically suitable for the type and density/intensity of development being proposed;

3.     There are adequate provisions for public and emergency vehicle access, sanitation, water, and public utilities and services to ensure that the proposed development would not be detrimental to the public health and safety. Adequate provisions shall mean:

a.     There is available capacity in community sewer and/or water systems serving the subdivision;

b.     Distribution and collection facilities for sewer and water and other infrastructure are installed to lot boundaries; and

c.     Recreation development fees are paid at time of Building Permit.

4.     The tentative map approval is in compliance with the requirements of the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) and there would be no potential significant adverse effects upon environmental quality and natural resources, including fish, wildlife, and their habitat, that would not be properly mitigated and monitored, unless a Statement of Overriding Considerations is adopted;

5.     The subdivision will not be detrimental to the public health, safety, or welfare of the City, or injurious to the property or improvements in the vicinity in which the property is located;

6.     The proposed subdivision, together with the provisions for its design and improvement, will not conflict with easements, acquired by the public at large for access through or use of, property within the proposed subdivision unless alternate easements for access or use will be provided and the alternate easements will be substantially equivalent to ones previously acquired by the public;

7.     The discharge of sewage from the proposed subdivision into the community sewer system will comply with the requirements prescribed by the Regional Water Quality Control Board.

B.     Supplemental findings. In addition to the findings required for approval of a Tentative Map by subsection A of this Section, the following findings are also required when they are applicable to the specific subdivision proposal.

1.     It is in the interest of the public health and safety, and it is necessary as a prerequisite to the orderly development of the surrounding area, to require the construction of improvements either prior to, or within a specified time after recordation of the Parcel Map, where road improvements are required Section 17.92.030 (Access, Circulation, Streets).

2.     Any findings required by Section 17.100.040 (Design Standards) for condominium conversions.

C.     Findings for dedications or exactions. In addition to the findings required for approval of a Tentative Map by subsection A of this Section, any requirement by the review authority for dedications and/or exactions in compliance with Chapter 17.106 (Dedications, Exactions, Reservations, Easements) shall include the review authority first making the findings required by Section 17.106.030 (Findings Required for Dedications and Exactions).

D.    Findings for waiver of Parcel Map. If waiver of a Parcel Map has been requested with the Tentative Map application, the review authority shall determine whether the findings required by Section 17.98.030 (Waiver of Parcel Map) can also be made.

E.     Approval with soils problems. The review authority may approve the subdivision or a portion thereof where soils problems described in Section 17.96.020(C) (Tentative Map Filing, Initial Processing - Review of soils report) exist, if it determines that corrective measures recommended by the civil engineer who prepared the soils report are likely to prevent damage to each structure to be constructed. The review authority shall require that the approved recommended actions be incorporated in the construction of each structure, as a condition to the issuance of any Building Permit.

 

17.96.070 Conditions of Approval.
Along with the approval of a Tentative Map, the adoption of conditions of approval shall occur in compliance with this Section, provided that all conditions shall be consistent with the requirements of the Map Act.

A.    Mandatory conditions. The review authority shall adopt conditions of approval that will:

1.     Require that parcels, easements or rights-of-way be provided for streets, water supply and distribution systems, sewage disposal systems, storm drainage facilities, solid waste disposal, and public utilities providing electric, gas and communications services, as may be required to properly serve the subdivision.

2.     Mitigate or eliminate environmental problems identified through the environmental review process, or require redesign of the subdivision as a prerequisite to the approval of the Tentative Map.

3.     Carry out the specific requirements of Chapter 17.92 (Subdivision Design and Improvement Requirements) and Chapter 17.108 (Improvement Plans and Agreements) of this Development Code.

4.     Secure compliance with the requirements of this Development Code, the General Plan, the City’s Improvement Standards, the Uniform Building Code, and any applicable Specific Plans.

5.     Require that any designated remainder parcels not be subsequently sold unless a certificate or conditional certificate of compliance (Chapter 17.102—Certificates of Compliance) is obtained, or the remainder parcel is further subdivided in compliance with this Development Code.

6.     Require the subdivider to defend, indemnify, and hold harmless the City and its agents, officers, and employees from any claim, action, or proceeding against the City to attack, set aside, void, or annul, an approval of the review authority, which action is brought within the time period provided for in Section 66499.37 of the Subdivision Map Act.

7.     Specify time limits for completion of conditions.

B.     Optional conditions. The review authority may also require as conditions of approval, but not be limited to, the following:

1.     The waiver of direct access rights to any existing or proposed streets;

2.     The dedication of additional land for bicycle paths, local transit facilities, (including bus turnouts, benches, shelters, etc.), sunlight easements, access to public waterways, and school sites, in compliance with Map Act Chapter 4, Article 3;

3.     The reservation of sites for public facilities, including fire stations, libraries, and other public uses in compliance with Map Act Chapter 4, Article 4;

4.     Time limits or phasing schedules for the completion of conditions of approval, when deemed appropriate; and/or

5.     Any other conditions deemed reasonable and necessary by the review authority to ensure that the approval of the Tentative Map will be in compliance with the findings required by Section 17.96.060 (Tentative Map Approval or Denial).

 

17.96.080 Appeal.
A decision of the City Planner or Planning Commission may be appealed in compliance with Chapter 17.140 (Appeals). The hearing on the appeal shall be held within 30 days after the date of filing the appeal. The appeal body shall reach its decision within 10 days following the conclusion of the hearing.

 

17.96.090 Effective Date of Tentative Map Approval.
The approval of a Tentative Map shall become effective for the purposes of pursuing recordation, including compliance with conditions of approval, on the day after the expiration of the appeal period established by Chapter 17.140 (Appeals), where no appeal has been filed. If an appeal has been filed, the Tentative Map approval shall not become effective unless the appeal body approves the map; in that case, the approval shall become effective immediately upon the decision by the appeal body.

 

17.96.100 Changes to Approved Tentative Map or Conditions.
A subdivider may request changes to an approved Tentative Map or its conditions of approval before recordation of a Parcel or Final Map in compliance with this Section. Changes to a Parcel or Final Map after recordation are subject to Section 17.98.140 (Amendments to Recorded Maps).

A.    Limitation on allowed changes. Changes to a Tentative Map that may be requested by a subdivider in compliance with this Section include major adjustments to the location of proposed lot lines and improvements, and any changes to the conditions of approval, consistent with the findings required by subsection D of this Section. Other changes including increasing the number of approved lots shall require the filing and processing of a new Tentative Map.

B.     Application for changes. The subdivider shall file an application and filing fee with the Planning Department, using the forms furnished by the Planning Department, together with the following additional information:

1.     A statement identifying the Tentative Map number, the features of the map or particular conditions to be changed and the changes requested, the reasons why the changes are requested, and any facts that justify the changes; and

2.     Any additional information deemed appropriate by the Planning Department.

C.     Processing. Proposed changes to a Tentative Map or conditions of approval shall be processed in the same manner as the original Tentative Map, except as otherwise provided by this Section.

D.    Findings for approval. The review authority shall not modify the approved Tentative Map or conditions of approval unless it first finds that the change is in compliance with following subsections D.1, or D.2, and that all of the applicable findings for approval required by Sections 17.96.060(A) and (B) (Tentative Map Approval or Denial—Required and Supplemental Findings) can still be made.

1.     Non-substantive changes. The proposed changes:

a.     Involve minor alterations in the location of proposed lot lines, and/or reduce the number of proposed parcels;

b.     Do not change subdivision features that were a specific basis for any findings for Tentative Map approval or the decision of the review authority to approve the Tentative Map;

c.     Will not affect any finding of, or mitigation required by, a Negative Declaration or EIR, except to further minimize environmental impacts.

2.     Errors or unforeseen circumstances. The change is necessary because of one or more of the following circumstances:

a.     There was a material mistake of fact in the deliberations leading to the original approval;

b.     There has been a change of circumstances related to the original approval; or

c.     A serious and unforeseen hardship has occurred, not due to any action of the applicant subsequent to the enactment of this Development Code.

E.     Effect of changes on time limits. Approved changes to a Tentative Map or conditions of approval shall not be considered as approval of a new Tentative Map, and shall not extend the time limits provided by Section 17.96.140 (Expiration of Approved Tentative Map).

 

17.96.110 Completion of Subdivision Process.
A.    Compliance with conditions, improvement plans. After approval of a Tentative Map in compliance with this Chapter, the subdivider shall proceed to fulfill the conditions of approval within any time limits specified by the conditions and prior to the expiration of the map and, where applicable, shall prepare, file and receive approval of improvement plans pursuant to Chapter 17.108 (Improvement Plans and Agreements), before constructing any required improvements.

B.     Parcel or Final Map preparation, filing and recordation.

1.     A Parcel Map for a subdivision of four or fewer parcels shall be prepared, filed, processed and recorded as set forth in Chapter 17.98 (Parcel Maps and Final Maps), to complete the subdivision, unless a Parcel Map has been waived in compliance with Section 17.98.030 (Waiver of Parcel Map).

2.     A Final Map for a subdivision of five or more parcels shall be prepared, filed, processed and recorded as set forth in Chapter 17.98 (Parcel Maps and Final Maps), to complete the subdivision.

 

17.96.120 Vesting Tentative Maps.
This Section establishes procedures to implement the vesting Tentative Map requirements of State law, Sections 66498.1 et seq. of the Map Act.

A.    Applicability. Whenever this Development Code requires that a Tentative Map be filed, a vesting Tentative Map may instead be filed, provided that the vesting Tentative Map is prepared, filed and processed in compliance with this Section.

1.     A vesting Tentative Map may be filed for either residential, commercial or industrial developments.

2.     If a subdivider does not seek the rights conferred by this Section, the filing of a vesting Tentative Map is not a prerequisite to any approval for any proposed subdivision, permit for construction, or work preparatory to construction; however, nothing in this Section shall be construed to eliminate the need for a subdivider to obtain subdivision or other land use approval in compliance with the other applicable provisions of this Development Code, building, grading or other construction permit approval.

B.     Procedures for processing a vesting Tentative Map. A vesting Tentative Map shall be filed in the same form, have the same contents and accompanying data and reports and, shall be processed in the same manner as set forth by this Chapter as a Tentative Map, except as follows.

1.     Application content. The vesting Tentative Map shall include the following information in addition to that required by Section 17.96.010 (Tentative Map Preparation, Application Contents):

a.     Title. The vesting Tentative Map shall be prepared with the words “Vesting Tentative Map” printed conspicuously on its face; and

b.     Intended development. The vesting Tentative Map application shall include accurately drawn, preliminary floor plans or footprints, and architectural elevations for all buildings and structures intended to be constructed on the property after subdivision.

2.     Findings for approval. The approval of a vesting Tentative Map shall not be granted unless the review authority first determines that the intended development of the subdivision is consistent with the zoning regulations applicable to the property at the time of filing, in addition to all other findings required for Tentative Map approval by Section 17.96.060 (Tentative Map Approval or Denial).

C.     Expiration of vesting Tentative Map. An approved vesting Tentative Map shall be subject to the same time limits for expiration as are established for Tentative Maps by Section 17.96.130 (Tentative Map Time Limits).

D.    Changes to approved map or conditions. The subdivider may apply for an amendment to the vesting Tentative Map or conditions of approval at any time before the expiration of the vesting Tentative Map. An amendment request shall be considered and processed as a new application, in compliance with this Section.

E.     Development rights vested.

1.     The approval of a vesting Tentative Map shall confer a vested right to proceed with development of the subdivided lots in substantial compliance with the City ordinances, policies and standards (excluding fees) described in Map Act Section 66474.2.

2.     If Map Act Section 66474.2 is repealed, approval of a vesting Tentative Map shall confer a vested right to proceed with development in substantial compliance with the City ordinances, policies and standards in effect at the time the map is approved.

3.     Subsequent land use permits, building permits, extensions of time or other entitlements filed on parcels created by the subdivision may be conditioned or denied if:

a.     A failure to do so would place the residents of the subdivision or the immediate area in a condition dangerous to health or safety; or

b.     The condition or disapproval is required in order to comply with state or federal law.

4.     Fees charged for building or land use permits, filed after the approval of a vesting Tentative Map shall be as required at the time the subsequent permit applications are filed, including any related development impact fees (e.g., traffic mitigation fees, etc.). Application contents shall be as required by ordinance requirements in effect at the time the subsequent application is filed.

F.     Duration of vested rights. The development rights vested by this Section shall expire if a Parcel Map or Final Map is not approved and recorded before the expiration of the vesting Tentative Map in compliance with Section 17.96.130 (Tentative Map Time Limits). If the Parcel or Final Map is approved and recorded prior to Tentative Map expiration, the development rights shall be vested for the following periods of time.

1.     An initial time period of 12 months from the date of recordation of the Parcel or Final Map. Where several Final Maps are recorded on various phases of a project covered by a single vesting Tentative Map, this initial time period shall begin for each phase when the Final Map for that phase is recorded.

2.     The initial 12 months shall be automatically extended by any time used for processing a complete application for a grading permit or for design or architectural review, if processing exceeds 30 days from the date the application is accepted for processing as complete.

3.     The subdivider may apply for a one-year extension at any time before the initial 12 months expires. Application for an extension shall be submitted to the Planning Department and shall be accompanied by the required fee. The Planning Commission shall approve or deny any request for extension. If the extension is denied by the Planning Commission, the subdivider may appeal to the City Council as set forth in Chapter 17.140 (Appeals).

4.     If the subdivider submits a complete application for a building permit during the periods of time specified in subsections F.1 and F.2 above, the vested rights shall continue until the expiration of the building permit, or any extension of that permit.

 

17.96.130 Tentative Map Time Limits.
The processing of a Tentative Map shall be completed, and an approved Tentative Map shall be subject to the time limits for expiration and procedures for extension in compliance with Section 17.96.140 (Expiration of Approved Tentative Map) and Section 17.96.150 (Extensions of Time for Tentative Maps).

 

17.96.140 Expiration of Approved Tentative Map.
The expiration date of a Tentative Map is determined by Map Act Sections 66452.6, and 66463.5. An approved Tentative Map or vesting Tentative Map is valid for 24 months after its effective date Section 17.96.090 (Effective Date of Tentative Map Approval). At the end of that time, the approval shall expire and become void unless:

A.    A Parcel or Final Map, and related security and improvement agreements have been filed with the City Engineer in compliance with Chapter 17.98 (Parcel Maps and Final Maps), and the Parcel or Final map is recorded within 90 days of the expiration date; or

B.     An extension of time has occurred in compliance with Section 17.96.150 (Extensions of Time for Tentative Maps).

A Tentative Map approval shall be deemed to have expired if a Parcel or Final Map has not been recorded within the time limits established by this Section or within an extension of time approved in compliance with Section 17.96.150 (Extensions of Time for Tentative Maps). Expiration of an approved Tentative Map or vesting Tentative Map shall terminate all proceedings. The application shall not be reactivated unless a new tentative map application is filed.

 

17.96.150 Extensions of Time for Tentative Maps.
When a subdivision has not been completed through the recording of a Parcel or Final Map within the time limits set by Section 17.96.130 (Tentative Map Time Limits), time extensions may be granted in compliance with this Section. Extension requests applications shall be filed with the Planning Department on or before the date of expiration of the approval or previous extension, together with the required filing fee.

A.    Tentative Maps. The review authority which approved the Tentative Map may grant extensions of one to five years to the initial time limit, provided that the total of all extensions shall not exceed five years, only after finding that:

1.     There have been no changes to the provisions of the General Plan, any applicable Specific Plan, or this Development Code applicable to the project since the approval of the Tentative Map causing the proposed subdivision to become inconsistent with the General Plan or any applicable Specific Plan, or to not comply with any applicable provision of this Development Code;

2.     There have been no changes in the character of the site or its surroundings that affect how the policies of the General Plan or other standards of this Development Code apply to the project, causing the proposed subdivision to become inconsistent with the General Plan or any applicable Specific Plan, or to not comply with any applicable provision of this Development Code; and

3.     There have been no changes to the capacities of community resources, including but not limited to water supply, sewage treatment or disposal facilities, roads or schools so that there is no longer sufficient remaining capacity to serve the project.

B.     Tentative Maps with multiple Final Maps. Extensions for Tentative Maps with multiple Final Maps shall be allowed in accordance with the Subdivision Map Act.

C.     Vesting Tentative Maps. The review authority which approved the Vesting Tentative Map may grant extensions of one to five years to the initial time limit, provided that the total of all extensions shall not exceed five years, in compliance with subsection A, above. Any rights conferred by Section 17.96.120 (Vesting Tentative Maps) shall expire if a Final Map is not approved and recorded before the expiration of the vesting Tentative Map.

 

17.96.160 Applications Deemed Approved.
Any subdivision application deemed approved in compliance with Government Code Section 65956, or Map Act Sections 66452 et seq., shall be subject to all applicable provisions of this Development Code, which shall be satisfied by the subdivider before any Building Permits or other land use entitlements are issued. Parcel or Final Maps filed for record after the approval of their Tentative Map shall remain subject to all the mandatory requirements of this Development Code and the Map Act, including but not limited to Map Act Sections 66473, 66473.5 and 66474.

 

 

Chapter 17.98 PARCEL MAPS AND FINAL MAPS
17.98.010 Purpose of Chapter.
This Chapter establishes requirements for the preparation, filing, approval and recordation of Parcel and Final Maps, consistent with the requirements of the Map Act.

 

17.98.020 Parcel Maps.
As required by Section 17.90.030 (Applicability), and Section 17.96.110 (Completion of Subdivision Process), a Parcel Map shall be filed and approved to complete the subdivision process for a subdivision of four or fewer parcels, except when the requirement for a Parcel Map is waived as set forth in Section 17.98.030 (Waiver of Parcel Map). A Parcel Map shall be prepared, filed and processed as set forth in Section 17.98.040 (Parcel Map Form and Content), Section 17.98.050 (Filing and Processing of Parcel Maps) and Section 17.98.060 (Parcel Map Approval).

 

17.98.040 Parcel Map Form and Content.
A Parcel Map shall be prepared by or under the direction of a qualified, registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor, registered or licensed by the State of California. Parcel Map submittals shall include the application forms, and all information and other materials prepared as required by the Planning Department.

 

17.98.050 Filing and Processing of Parcel Maps.
A.    Filing with the City Engineer. The Parcel Map, together with all data, information and materials required by Section 17.98.040 (Parcel Map Form and Content) above shall be submitted to the City Engineer. The Parcel Map shall be considered submitted when it is complete and complies with all applicable provisions of this Development Code and the Map Act.

B.     Review of Parcel Map. The City Engineer shall:

1.     Determine whether the parcel map complies with all applicable provisions of this Development Code and the Map Act and all conditions of approval of the Tentative Map, that the map is technically correct, and that it is in substantial compliance with the approved Tentative Map; and

2.     Obtain verification from the Planning Department that the Parcel Map conforms to the approved Tentative Map and that any conditions of approval for which that office is responsible have been completed.

If the Parcel Map does not conform as required above, the applicant shall be notified, and given the opportunity to make necessary changes and resubmit the Parcel Map, together with all required data.

 

17.98.060 Parcel Map Approval.
After determining that the Parcel Map is technically correct and in compliance with Section 17.98.040 (Parcel Map Form and Content), and in compliance with all other applicable provisions of this article and the Development Code, the City Engineer shall execute the City Engineer’s certificate on the map as required by Map Act Section 66450, and approve or deny the Parcel Map in compliance with this Section.

A.    Criteria for approval. The City Engineer shall approve the Parcel Map if it complies with all the requirements of the Map Act, all conditions of approval of the Tentative Map, all provisions of this Development Code that were applicable at the time that the Tentative Map was approved, and is in substantial compliance with the approved Tentative Map.

B.     Waiver of errors. The City Engineer may approve a Parcel Map that fails to meet any of the requirements of this Development Code or the Map Act applicable at the time of approval of the Tentative Map, when the City Engineer finds that the failure of the map is a technical or inadvertent error which, in the determination of the City Engineer does not materially affect the validity of the map.

C.     Map with dedications. If a dedication or offer of dedication is required on the Parcel Map, the City Engineer shall accept, accept subject to improvement, accept for public use without accepting responsibility for maintenance, or reject with or without prejudice any or all offers of dedication, at the same time as the City Engineer takes action to approve the Parcel Map.

D.    Map with incomplete improvements. If improvements required by this Development Code, conditions of approval or by law have not been completed at the time of approval of the Parcel Map, the subdivider shall enter into an agreement with the City as specified in Map Act Section 66462, and Section 17.108.040 (Improvement Agreements and Security), as a condition precedent to the approval of the Parcel Map.

E.     Transmittal to Recorder. After action by the City Engineer and after the required signatures and seals have been affixed, the City Clerk shall transmit the Parcel Map to County Recorder for filing, in compliance with Section 17.98.120 (Recordation of Maps).

F.     Permits prior to map recordation. In accordance with Health and Safety Code Section 19828, the Building Official may authorize the issuance of a building permit for construction on a parcel to be created by a map prior to recordation of the Parcel Map if the Building Official finds that all conditions of the Parcel Map have been fulfilled and the map may be recorded.

G.    Appeal. A decision of the City Engineer to approve or disapprove a Parcel Map may be appealed to the City Council in compliance with Chapter 17.140 (Appeals). The hearing on the appeal shall be held within 30 days after the date of filing the appeal. The City Council shall reach its decision within 10 days following the conclusion of the hearing.

17.98.070 Final Maps.
As required by Section 17.90.030 (Applicability), a Final Map shall be filed and approved to complete the subdivision process for a subdivision of five or more parcels. A Final Map shall be prepared, filed and processed as set forth in Section 17.98.080 (Final Map Form and Content), Section 17.98.090 (Filing and Processing of Final Maps) and 17.98.100 (Final Map Approval).

 

17.98.080 Final Map Form and Content.
A Final Map shall be prepared by or under the direction of a qualified registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor, registered or licensed by the State of California. Final Map submittals shall include the application forms, and all information and other materials prepared as required by the Department.

 

17.98.090 Filing and Processing of Final Maps.
A.    Filing with City Engineer. The Final Map, together with all data, information and materials required by Section 17.98.080 (Final Map Form and Content) above shall be submitted to the City Engineer. The Final Map shall be considered submitted when it is complete and complies with all applicable provisions of this Development Code and the Map Act.

B.     Review of Final Map. The City Engineer shall review the Final Map and all accompanying materials, and shall:

1.     Determine whether the map and subdivision comply with all applicable provisions of this Development Code and the Map Act, including the conditions of approval of the Tentative Map, that the map is technically correct, and that it is in substantial compliance with the approved Tentative Map; and

2.     Obtain verification from the Planning Department that the Final Map conforms to the approved Tentative Map and that any conditions of approval for which that office is responsible have been completed.

If the Final Map does not conform as required above, the applicant shall be notified, and given the opportunity to make necessary changes and resubmit the Final Map, together with all required data.

C.     Multiple Final Maps. The subdivider may file multiple Final Maps on the approved Tentative Map if the subdivider either included a statement of intention with the Tentative Map or, if after the filing of the Tentative Map, the City Planner approved the request.

 

17.98.100 Final Map Approval.
After determining that the Final Map is technically correct and in compliance with Section 17.98.080 (Final Map Form and Content), and in compliance with all other applicable provisions of this article and the Development Code, the City Engineer shall execute the City Engineer’s certificate on the map as required by Map Act Section 66442, and approve or deny the Final Map in compliance with this Section.

A.    Criteria for approval. The City Engineer shall approve the Final Map if it complies with all the requirements of the Map Act, all conditions of approval of the Tentative Map, all provisions of this Development Code that were applicable at the time that the Tentative Map was approved, and is in substantial compliance with the approved Tentative Map.

B.     Notification of City Council. Prior to approval of the Final Map, the City Engineer shall notify the City Council of the City Engineer’s pending action on the Final Map at its next regular meeting after the Final Map is filed with the City Engineer. The City Clerk shall provide notice of the City Engineer’s pending action by attaching and posting said notice with the City Council’s regular agenda and mailing such notice to any interested party who requests notice.

C.     Waiver of errors. The City Engineer may approve a Final Map that fails to meet any of the requirements of this Development Code or the Map Act applicable at the time of approval of the Tentative Map, when the City Engineer finds that the failure of the map is a technical or inadvertent error which, in the determination of the City Engineer does not materially affect the validity of the map.

D.    Map with dedications. If a dedication or offer of dedication is required on the Final Map, the City Engineer shall accept, accept subject to improvement, accept for public use without accepting responsibility for maintenance, or reject with or without prejudice any or all offers of dedication, at the same time as the City Engineer takes action to approve the Final Map.

E.     Map with incomplete improvements. If improvements required by this Development Code, conditions of approval or by law have not been completed at the time of approval of the Final Map, the subdivider shall enter into an agreement with the City as specified in Map Act Section 66462, and Section 17.108.040 (Improvement Agreements and Security), as a condition precedent to the approval of the Final Map.

F.     Transmittal to Recorder. After action by the City Engineer and after the required signatures and seals have been affixed, the City Clerk shall transmit the Final Map to County Recorder for filing, in compliance with Section 17.98.120 (Recordation of Maps).

G.    Permits prior to map recordation. In accordance with Health and Safety Code Section 19828, the City Engineer may authorize the issuance of a building permit for construction on a parcel to be created by a map prior to recordation of the Final Map if the City Engineer finds that all conditions of the Final Map have been fulfilled and the map may be recorded.

H.    Appeal. A decision of the City Engineer to approve or disapprove a Final Map may be appealed to the City Council in compliance with Chapter 17.140 (Appeals). The hearing on the appeal shall be held within 30 days after the date of filing the appeal. The City Council shall reach its decision within 10 days following the conclusion of the hearing.

 

17.98.110 Recordation of Maps.
A.    At the time of filing of a Parcel or Final Map with the County Recorder, the subdivider shall present to the County Recorder evidence that, at the time of filing the map, the parties consenting to the filing are all parties having vested fee interest in the property being subdivided and are parties required to sign the certificate described in Map Act Section 66445(e).

B.     The County Recorder will review and act upon Parcel and Final Maps filed with that office as set forth in Article 6, Chapter 3 of the Map Act and other applicable provisions of state law.

 

17.98.120 Effect of Recorded Map.
When a properly endorsed Parcel or Final Map has been filed for record, the subdivision or reversion to acreage shall be deemed complete, and the new parcels may be conveyed or otherwise transferred. The recordation of the map shall have the effect of eliminating any lot lines that existed within the boundaries of the subdivision before recordation of Parcel or Final Map.

 

17.98.130 Amendments to Recorded Maps.
In the event that a subdivider wishes to change the characteristics of an approved subdivision, including but not limited to the number or configuration of parcels, location of streets or easements, or the nature of required improvements, the construction of which has been deferred through the approval of an agreement in compliance with Section 17.108.040 (Improvement Agreements and Security), a new tentative and Parcel or Final Map shall be filed and approved as required by Section 17.90.030 (Applicability).

 

 

Chapter 17.100 CONDOMINIUMS, CONDOMINIUM AND MOBILEHOME PARK CONVERSIONS
17.100.010 Purpose and Intent.
The purpose of this Section is to establish development standards and special conditions for the protection of the community and purchasers or renters of both new and converted residential and commercial condominiums, community apartment projects and stock cooperatives, the lessors of cooperative apartment projects and stock cooperatives, and the lessors of cooperative apartments, as well as mobilehome park residents in parks proposed for subdivision activity.

 

17.100.020 Applicability.
All new or converting residential and commercial condominiums, community apartment projects, stock cooperatives, and cooperative apartments, and mobilehome park subdivisions shall conform to the provisions of this Section in addition to any and all requirements for preparation, review and approval of a land division map.

 

17.100.030 Minimum Requirements.
Except as otherwise provided by law, in approving or conditionally approving any condominium projects, including conversions of apartment and mobilehome park developments, the following shall be required:

A.    Residential Parking. Off-street parking shall be provided in the amount and type pursuant to standards for new construction established by the City.

B.     Development Standards. All new construction of condominium projects shall comply with the property development standards for the district in which the project is located. All condominium conversions of apartment and mobile park developments shall comply with development standards for the district in which the project is located in regard to lot coverage, height and distance between buildings. Condominium conversions are not required to comply with existing setback and density standards if the development met all zoning and building standards in effect at the time of its construction. Nothing in this Section shall be construed to prohibit the imposition of more restrictive requirements as a condition of approval by the Planning Commission or City Council when necessary to protect the public health, safety, or general welfare, based upon appropriate findings.

C.     Covenants, Conditions and Restrictions (CC&Rs). The covenants, conditions and restrictions (CC&Rs) for the new condominium project, including conversion of apartment and mobilehome projects, shall include a guarantee agreement by the subdivider for the following:

1.     Common area items, including but not limited to, the roof, plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and electrical systems until one year elapses from the date of the sale of the last individual unit sold;

2.     Additional items to be provided or installed within individual units by the subdivider, including, but not limited to, appliances, fixtures, and facilities for a period of one year from the date of close of escrow of each individual unit;

3.     Adequate provisions for maintenance, repair and upkeep of common areas;

4.     Provisions that in the event of destruction or abolishment, reconstruction shall be in accordance with codes in effect at the time of such reconstruction;

5.     Provisions for dedication of land or establishment of easements for street widening or other public purpose.

6.     The CC&Rs shall provide that the nonsubdivider owners have the right to select or change the management group or the homeowner association 90 days after sale or transfer of title of 51 percent of the units. The CC&Rs shall provide that subsequent owners agree to make no changes in the CC&Rs imposing restrictions on the age, race, national origin, sex, marital status or other similar restrictions of occupants, residents or owners.

7.     Estimated Costs of Maintenance. The subdivider shall submit an estimate of and guarantee for the maintenance costs for a period of 12 months beginning at the close of escrow on the first unit sold. The subdivider to be responsible for all costs of normal maintenance in excess of the estimate.

8.     All condominiums, condominium conversions, and mobile home park conversions over 10 dwelling units, at least 10 percent of the total units must be inclusionary units restricted for occupancy by five percent Low- and five percent Very Low-Income Households.

9.     The CC&Rs shall provide the City with the right to enforce the CC&Rs and bring actions to compel compliance and/or the cessation of any violation, but the CC&Rs shall not obligate the City to do so.

 

17.100.040 Design Standards.
The following design standards apply to both new condominium projects and for the conversion of existing structures into condominiums. Such minimum criteria shall be required in addition to the existing building codes, zoning district provisions, and other requirements of the City. New condominium projects shall also comply with the performance standards for planned unit developments established by the City.

A.    All private streets, driveways, drainage structures, and parking areas shall be improved and constructed in accordance with the City’s adopted standards and shall be designed and appropriate easements granted to insure access for both municipal services and public utility company services to each dwelling.

B.     All assigned parking shall be provided within 100 feet of the front entrance of the dwelling unit.

C.     Separate utility services shall be provided for each dwelling unit.

D.    Each dwelling unit shall be provided with a minimum of 200 cubic feet of secure exterior storage.

E.     All permanent mechanical equipment, such as motors, compressors, pumps and compactors, that are determined by the building official to be a source of structural vibration or structure-borne noise, shall be shock-mounted with inertia blocks or bases and/or vibration isolators in a manner approved by the building official.

F.     All common walls and floors shall have a maximum impact and sound transmission class (STC) of 50 (45 if field tested) as defined in U.B.C. Standard No. 35.1.

G.    All separating floor/ceiling assemblies between separate units shall provide impact sound insulation equal to that required to meet an Impact Insulation Class (IIC) of 50 (45 if field tested) as defined in U.B.C. Standard No. 35.2.

H.    All condominium and condominium conversion projects shall meet or exceed the Uniform Fire Code requirements, and shall be inspected and approved by the City fire chief, and additionally shall have a complete one-hour fire separation between dwelling units (floors/ceilings, as well as walls).

I.      Provisions for laundry facilities shall be provided within each dwelling unit or within a common, conveniently located laundry room.

J.      For all condominium conversions, a set of original construction plans shall be submitted as part of the initial application.

K.    For all condominium conversions, an on-site inspection shall be made by the Building Department, Public Works Department, Fire Department, and Planning Department to determine if the design criteria set forth in this Section has been met. Such inspections shall be included as part of the staff report prepared for the Planning Commission.

L.     For all new condominiums a recreational facility shall be provided. The size of such structure shall be 200 square feet per condominium unit. This facility may be used for community club house, swimming pool, playground, or sports facilities.

M.    For all condominium conversions over 50 units a recreational facility as described in the above section may be required by the Planning Commission.

 

17.100.050 Condominium and Mobilehome Park Conversions.
No condominium or mobile home park conversion shall be approved unless all of the following conditions are met:

A.    Tenants and prospective tenants have been given a tenant’s notice of intent to convert pursuant to the provisions of California Government Code Section 66427.1 (Subdivision Map Act) 60 days prior to filing applications for tentative map, conditional use permit, and architectural review approval with the planning director. Such notice shall be given by the applicant, and shall contain information as to tenant’s rights under state and local regulations.

B.     The submittal package for conversion shall include the following items in addition to the required information for a tentative map, conditional use permit, and architectural review application:

1.     A copy of the tenant’s notice of intent to convert; a signed statement certifying that all tenants have received such notice; a statement that all future tenants shall receive such notice shall be attached along with a list of names and addresses of persons notified.

2.     A facilities report, prepared by a California licensed architect or California registered civil or structural engineer detailing the condition and estimated useful life of all elements of the existing buildings and other structures involved in the project, but not limited to the following:

a.     Roof;

b.     Foundations;

c.     Mechanical and electrical systems;

d.     Plumbing systems;

e.     Structural elements;

f.      Paved surfaces;

g.     Exterior paint;

h.     HVAC systems;

i.      Utility delivery systems;

j.      Fire protection systems;

k.     Swimming pools.

This facilities report shall be prepared by a professional hired by the City of Jackson and paid for by the applicant.

3.     Building History Report. The applicant shall provide a building history report, which shall include:

a.     The date of construction of all elements of the project; and

b.     A statement of the use or uses of the facilities since construction; and

c.     The date and description of each structural repair or renovation requiring an expenditure of $1,000 or more; and

d.     A statement of the use or uses of the facilities.

4.     A listing of the proposed improvements to be carried out and an estimated time schedule.

5.     The estimated prices of the converted units and/or lots.

6.     A copy of the proposed CC&Rs.

7.     A purchase incentives plan for current occupants.

8.     A tenant relocation assistance plan indicating the number of tenants interested in purchasing or relocating, detailed plans for assisting in the relocation of tenants, the present rent schedule and occupancy. Assistance may be monetary in the form of payment or partial payment of first month’s rent and security deposit. Relocation shall be in the City of Jackson or to an area with similar amenities and services to these available to the tenants in Jackson. Any tenant may decline assistance.

9.     For conversions of mobilehome parks to another use, the subdivider shall also file a report on the impact of the conversion upon the displaced residents of the mobilehome park as set forth in Government Code Section 66427.4.

10.   For conversions of mobilehome parks to resident ownership, the subdivider must conduct a survey of tenant support as set forth in Government Code Section 66427.5 and submit the results of the survey of tenant support with its tentative map application. The City shall conduct a hearing to determine the subdivider’s compliance with the requirements of Section 66427.5 as provided in subsection (e) thereof.

11.   Two sets of mailing labels for all tenants affected by the conversion.

C.     Tenants shall be notified in writing of all public hearings in connection with an application for conversion, and all new tenants subsequent to the initial notice of intent, shall be notified in writing of the pending conversion prior to occupancy.

D.    All systems, including electrical, fire and life safety, at point of sale should be in good repair. All maintenance, repair or alterations requested by the Fire Chief or Building Official should be complete at this time as well.

E.     Before submittal, all conditions of approval requirements need to be complete. These include: plumbing in sound condition, water heater insulation, pipes for circulated hot water, individual gas and electrical meters, unless impractical, protected trash areas, and smoke and fire detectors.

F.     The applicant has complied with all applicable provisions of the Subdivision Map Act.

G.    The required number of owners in a stock cooperative or community apartment project, as specified in the by-laws or other organizational documents, have voted in favor of the condominium conversion. If the by-laws or other organization’s documents do not specify the number of votes required, a majority vote of the owners in the cooperative or project shall be required.

H.    For residential conversions, the decision making body must determine that:

1.     The conversion is consistent with the General Plan; and

2.     In the case of condominium conversions, the vacancy factor of comparable apartment rental housing units in the City exceeds seven percent of the total rental housing inventory. Existing rental units may be approved for conversion regardless of the vacancy factor if the City Council determines that a new rental unit has or will be added to the City’s housing inventory for each rental unit removed through conversion. Additionally, the City Council may allow for affordable designated housing or housing outside the City limits to count toward the City’s vacancy rate if it can be demonstrated that they have significantly increase the rental housing market. To determine the vacancy factor and the disposition of the areas housing inventory, the applicant shall be responsible for paying the City for a housing study prepared by an independent contractor of the City’s choice;

3.     The subdivider has complied with such other requirements or conditions, as the decision-making body shall believe necessary or appropriate.

I.      During the conversion process, from the time of application submittal through tenant relocation or purchase of the condominium, the rental rate must remain the same or be lower.

 

17.100.060 Waiver Provisions—Mobilehomes.
Requirement for a subdivision map for a mobile home is waived when a minimum of two-thirds of the owners of the mobile homes, who are also tenants, sign a petition with intent to purchase a condominium interest unless any of the following exist:

A.    There are significant design or improvement requirements necessitated by health or safety concerns.

B.     There is a need to perform field surveys on the exterior boundaries of the parcel or parcels appearing on the face of the map.

C.     The existing lot or lots were not created by a recorded parcel or final map.

D.    The conversion would result in the creation of additional parcels.

Waiver applications shall be processed in compliance with Section 66428 (b) of the Subdivision Map Act.

 

 

 

Chapter 17.102 CERTIFICATES OF COMPLIANCE
17.102.010 Purpose of Chapter.
This Chapter provides procedures for the filing, processing, and approval of Certificates of Compliance and Conditional Certificates of Compliance, consistent with the policies of the General Plan and the requirements of the Map Act.

 

17.102.020 Applicability.
A Certificate of Compliance is a document prepared by the City Engineer and recorded by the County Recorder, which acknowledges that the subject parcel, which was typically created prior to current subdivision map requirements, is considered by the City to be a legal lot of record. A Conditional Certificate of Compliance is used instead of a Certificate of Compliance to validate a parcel that was not legally subdivided in compliance with State subdivision laws and local ordinances regulating subdivisions that were in effect at the time the subdivision occurred. Any person owning real property, or a purchaser of the property in a contract of sale of the property, may request a Certificate of Compliance.

 

17.102.030 Application Contents.
Documents required for a Certificate of Compliance include: the Planning Department application, the filing fee, a chain of title consisting of copies of all deeds beginning before the transfer to the present, unless the parcels were created through a subdivision map and any other information required by the Planning Department.

 

17.102.040 Review and Approval.
The processing, review, and approval of an application for a Certificate of Compliance shall occur as follows.

A.    Staff report. The Planning Department shall prepare a staff report that:

1.     Describes the history of the land division;

2.     Determines whether the property was legally divided, in compliance with subsection B of this Section;

3.     References the provisions of State/City/County law ordinances applicable to the subdivision at the time of division. Additionally, it will advise the parties of any Map Act and Development Code conditions for which a certificate is requested if they are parties to the original division; and

4.     Recommends appropriate conditions of approval if it is determined that the property was not legally divided, in compliance with Section 17.102.050(B) (Conditional Certificates of Compliance - Conditions of Approval).

B.     City Engineer action. The City Engineer shall review all available information and make a determination whether the real property was divided in compliance with the Map Act, the applicable provisions of the Development Code, and other applicable provisions of the Municipal Code.

1.     Upon making the determination that the parcel(s) comply with the applicable provisions of this Development Code and the Map Act, the City Engineer shall file a Certificate of Compliance with the County Recorder.

2.     In the event that the City Engineer determines that the real property does not comply with the provisions of this Development Code and/or the Map Act, the application shall instead be processed as set forth in the Subdivision Map Act.

C.     Form of certificate. The Certificate of Compliance shall identify the real property, shall state that the division complies with the provisions of the Map Act and this Development Code, and shall include all information required by Map Act Section 66499.35.

D.    Effective date of certificate. A Certificate of Compliance shall not become final until the document has been recorded by the County Recorder.

 

17.102.050 Conditional Certificates of Compliance.
A Conditional Certificate of Compliance is used to validate a parcel that was not legally divided in compliance with the State subdivision laws and local ordinances regulating subdivisions that were in effect at the time the subdivision occurred. If the current owners were responsible for the subdivision which created the illegal parcel, conditions of approval may be imposed, based on current standards. The preparation, filing and processing of a Conditional Certificate of Compliance application shall occur in compliance with Section 17.102.040 (Review and Approval), and this Section.

A.    Review by City Engineer. Upon making a determination that the real property does not comply with the applicable provisions of this Development Code or the Map Act, the City Engineer shall grant a Conditional Certificate of Compliance, imposing conditions in compliance with subsection B of this Section.

B.     Conditions of approval. If the owners of the property for which a certificate is requested are the original subdividers, the City Engineer may impose any conditions that would be applicable to a current subdivision, as provided by the Map Act and this Development Code, regardless of when the property was divided. If the owners had no responsibility for the subdivision that created the parcel, the City Engineer may only impose conditions that would have been applicable at the time the property was acquired by the current owners.

C.     Appeal. The conditions imposed by the City Engineer may be appealed to the City Council in compliance with Chapter 17.140 (Appeals).

D.    Completion of process. Following expiration of the 10 day appeal period after the determination and imposition of conditions by the City Engineer, the Planning Department shall file a Conditional Certificate of Compliance with the County Recorder. The certificate shall identify the property, and serve as notice to the property owner or purchaser who applied for the certificate, a grantee of the owner, or any subsequent transferee or assignee of the property that the fulfillment and implementation of the conditions shall be required before subsequent issuance of a permit or other approval for the development of the property.

E.     Effective date of certificate. A Conditional Certificate of Compliance shall not become effective until the document has been recorded by the County Recorder.

 

 

Chapter 17.104 REVERSIONS TO ACREAGE
17.104.010 Purpose and Applicability.
Subdivided real property may be reverted to acreage (to a single parcel) as provided by this Chapter and by Map Act Chapter 6, Article 1. The consolidation of existing lots into more than a single parcel shall be accomplished through the Lot Line Adjustment process (Chapter 17.86—Lot Line Adjustments) when the existing parcels, or through the Tentative and Parcel or Final Map processes (Chapter 17.96, Tentative Map Filing and Processing and Chapter 17.98, Parcel Maps and Final Maps).

 

17.104.020 Application and Processing.
Applications for reversion to acreage shall be filed and processed as follows:

A.    Application information—Streets and easements. The application for reversion shall include evidence of non-use of or lack of necessity for any streets or easements that are to be vacated or abandoned, in addition to the information required by Section 17.96.010 (Tentative Map Preparation, Application Contents).

B.     Filing and processing. The application shall be prepared, filed, and initially processed as provided by Chapter 17.70 (Applications, Processing, Fees), except that no environmental review of a reversion to acreage shall be required, as provided by Section 15305 of the CEQA Guidelines.

C.     Review and decision. A reversion to acreage shall require approval of a Final Map, with the procedure the same as that required by Chapter 17.98 (Parcel Maps and Final Maps), except that a public hearing shall be held by the Planning Commission on the reversion to acreage before approval or disapproval of the Final Map.

 

17.104.030 Findings for Approval of Reversions.
Subdivided property may be reverted to acreage only if the advisory agency first makes the following findings, in addition to determining compliance with Section 17.96.060 (Tentative Map Approval or Denial):

A.    Dedications or offers of dedication to be vacated or abandoned by the reversion to acreage are unnecessary for present or future public purposes; and either

B.     All owners of an interest in the real property within the subdivision have consented to reversion; or

C.     None of the improvements required to be made have been made within two years from the date the Parcel or Final Map was filed for record, or within the time allowed by an agreement for completion of the improvements, whichever is the later; or

D.    No lots shown on the Parcel or Final Map have been sold within five years from the date the map was filed for record.

 

17.104.040 Conditions of Approval for Reversions.
As conditions of reversion, the advisory agency shall require the following:

A.    Dedications or offers of dedication necessary for the purposes specified by Chapter 17.92 (Subdivision Design and Improvements) and Chapter 17.108 (Improvement Plans and Agreements).

B.     Retention of all previously paid fees and/or any portion of required improvement security or deposits if necessary to accomplish the purposes of the Map Act or these Regulations.

 

17.104.050 Final Map Contents.
In addition to the information specified by Section 17.98.040 (Parcel Map Form and Content) and Section 17.98.080 (Final Map Form and Content), the Final Map for a reversion to acreage shall also delineate dedications that will not be vacated and dedications that are a condition of reversion.

 

 

Chapter 17.106 DEDICATIONS, EXACTIONS, RESERVATIONS, EASEMENTS
17.106.010 Purpose of Chapter.
This Chapter establishes standards for subdivider dedications of land or payment of fees in lieu thereof, in conjunction with subdivision approval.

 

17.106.020 Applicability.
A.    Compliance required. All proposed subdivisions shall comply with the requirements of this Chapter for dedications, reservations, or the payment of in-lieu fees.

B.     Conditions of approval. The requirements of this Chapter as they apply to a specific subdivision shall each be described in conditions of approval adopted by Planning Commission.

 

17.106.030 Findings Required for Dedications and Exactions.
The review authority may require any of the dedications or exactions described in this Chapter through conditions of approval of a proposed Tentative Map only after first making findings which:

A.    Identify the purpose for the dedication or exaction; and

B.     Demonstrate that there is a reasonable relationship between the need for the dedication or exaction and the characteristics and impacts of the subdivision from which the dedication or exaction is required.

 

17.106.040 Right-of-Way Dedications.
A.    Offers of dedication required. As a condition of Tentative Map approval, the subdivider shall make an irrevocable offer of dedication in fee simple of all land within the subdivision that is determined by the review authority to be needed for public streets and alleys, including access rights and abutters’ rights.

B.     Improvements. The subdivider shall construct, or agree to construct, all approved and required streets and alleys, including access rights and abutters’ rights. These improvements shall conform with design and improvement standards within this Chapter, the City’s Improvement Standards, or as may be adopted by resolution of the City Council.

C.     Rights-of-way, generally. Rights-of-way shall be in accordance with the City’s Improvement Standards. In addition, where parcels front on a City-maintained road of insufficient width, or when the existing right-of-way is not owned by the City, the subdivider shall dedicate right-of-way sufficient for the ultimate facility. Dedications on remainder parcels that are not at the smallest lot area allowed under present zoning will not be required unless necessary for orderly development of the area or public health and safety.

D.    Bicycle paths. If the subdivision, as shown on the Final Map, contains 200 or more parcels, any subdivider who is required to dedicate roadways to the public, shall dedicate additional land for bicycle lanes or paths for the use and safety of the residents of the subdivision. Bicycle lane and or path design shall be acceptable to the City Engineer.

E.     Transit facilities. Dedications in fee simple or irrevocable offers of dedication of land within the subdivision will be required for local transit facilities including bus turnouts, benches, shelters, and similar items that directly benefit the residents of the subdivision if:

1.     The subdivision as shown on the Tentative Map has the potential for 200 dwelling units or more if developed to the maximum density shown in the General Plan; and

2.     The review authority finds that transit services are or will, within a reasonable time period, be available to the subdivision.

F.     Alternative transportation systems. Whenever the subdivision falls within an area designated for the development of bikeways, hiking or equestrian trails in the General Plan, Parks and Recreation or Amador County Transportation Commission Pedestrian and Bicycle Plan, applicable Specific Plan, or implementing legislation, the subdivider shall dedicate land as is necessary and feasible to provide for these systems.

G.    Abandonment/vacation. The abandonment or vacation of a street or highway right-of-way or easement shall comply with Streets and Highways Code Sections 8300 et seq., as applicable, and Chapter 17.88 (Vacations).

 

17.106.050 Reservations of Land for Public Uses.
The review authority may require through conditions of Tentative Map approval, the reservation of real property within a proposed subdivision for parks, recreational facilities, fire stations, libraries, or other public uses, in compliance with this Section, and Map Act Sections 66479 et seq.

A.    Criteria for requiring a reservation. A reservation of land within a proposed subdivision for public use may be required only when the review authority determines that:

1.     The requirement is based on policies and standards of the General Plan or applicable Specific Plan for the uses for which a reservation is required, and the required reservation is in compliance with those policies and standards;

2.     This Section has been in effect for at least 30 days prior to the filing of the Tentative Map;

3.     The reserved area is of such size and shape as to permit the balance of the property within which the reservation is located to develop in an orderly and efficient manner; and

4.     The amount of land reserved will not make development of the remaining land held by the subdivider to be economically unfeasible.

B.     Configuration of reservation. The reserved area shall conform to the applicable provisions of the General Plan or applicable Specific Plan, and shall be in multiples of streets and parcels that will permit an efficient division of the reserved area in the event that it is not acquired within the time period established in compliance with subsection C of this Section.

C.     Binding agreement required. When a reservation has been required, the City or other public agency for which the reservation has been required shall enter into a binding agreement with the property owner to acquire the reserved area, in compliance with Map Act Section 66480. If the public agency for whose benefit the reservation was required does not enter into the binding agreement, the reservation shall automatically terminate, in compliance with Map Act Section 66481.

 

17.106.060 Easements.
The review authority may require easements to be dedicated to the City or special district for access, drainage, public utilities, solar access, and other purposes in compliance with this article. Requirements for right-of-way dedications are found instead in Section 17.106.040 (Right-of-Way Dedications).

A.    Offers of dedication required. As a condition of Tentative Map approval, the subdivider shall dedicate or make an irrevocable offer of dedication in fee simple of all land within the subdivision that is determined by the Planning Commission to be needed for access rights; drainage; public greenways; scenic easements, public utility easements; and any other necessary public easements.

B.     Improvements. The subdivider shall improve or agree to improve all approved and required drainage, public utility and other public easements in compliance with design and improvement standards within this Chapter, the City’s Improvement Standards, or as may be adopted by resolution of the City Council.

C.     Abandonment/vacation. The abandonment or vacation of a service easement shall comply with Streets and Highways Code Sections 8300 et seq., as applicable, and Chapter 17.88 (Vacations).

 

 

Chapter 17.108 IMPROVEMENT PLANS AND AGREEMENTS
17.108.010 Purpose of Chapter.
This Chapter establishes procedures and requirements for the review and approval of improvement plans, the installation of improvements, agreements and guarantees for their installation, and dedications.

 

17.108.020 Improvement Plans.
After the approval of a Tentative Map, the applicant shall diligently proceed to complete any work necessary to fulfill the conditions of approval.

 

17.108.030 Installation of Improvements.
Subdivision improvements required as conditions of approval of a Tentative Map in compliance with Section 17.96.070 (Conditions of Approval) shall be installed in accordance with the City’s Improvement Standards.

 

17.108.040 Improvement Agreements and Security.
This Section provides procedures and criteria for the preparation and approval of improvement agreements, and standards for the types of security allowed to guarantee the proper installation of required subdivision improvements.

A.    Applicability. A subdivider may file a Parcel or Final Map before completion of all the improvements required by this article and conditions of approval of the Tentative Map, only when the subdivider first obtains City approval of a subdivision improvement agreement executed and submitted for City review by the subdivider, and provides the City performance security as required by this Section. Improvement agreements and required security shall also comply with Chapter 5 of the Map Act. The approval of a subdivision improvement agreement is entirely at the discretion of the City; and the City may require the completion of some or all improvements prior to the recordation of the Parcel or Final Map.

B.     Contents of improvement agreement. A subdivision improvement agreement shall be submitted on a form provided by the City Engineer and approved by City attorney and shall include the following provisions.

1.     Description of improvements. A description of all improvements to be completed by the subdivider, with reference to the approved subdivision improvement plans.

2.     Time limit for construction. The period within which all required improvements will be completed to the satisfaction of the City Engineer.

3.     Completion by City. Provide that if the subdivider fails to compete all required improvements within the specified time, the City may elect to complete the improvements and recover the full cost and expenses thereof from the subdivider or the surety, including any attorney and legal fees associated with enforcement of the agreement. The costs and expenses may be recorded as a lien against all parcels within the subdivision.

4.     Surety requirement. Require the subdivider to secure the agreement by furnishing security as specified in subsection C of this Section. The amount of surety shall be based on an engineer’s cost estimate submitted by the subdivider. The total cost of improvements to be guaranteed shall be as provided in the engineer’s cost estimate approved by the City Engineer.

5.     Phased construction. Provisions for the construction of improvements in units, at the option of the subdivider.

6.     Time extensions. Provisions for an extension of time under conditions specified therein, at the option of the City, consistent with the requirements of subsection F of this Section.

7.     Progress payments or partial release. Provide for progress payments from surety deposits or partial release of agreement surety, at the option of the City, consistent with the requirements of subsection C of this Section; provided that no progress payment or partial release shall be construed to be acceptance by the City of any portion of the required improvements or any defective work or improper materials.

C.     Security required to guarantee improvements. A subdivision improvement agreement or a subdivision road maintenance and repair agreement shall be secured by adequate surety in a form approved as to form and sufficiency by the City Attorney, as follows:

1.     Type of security. Subdivision improvement agreements shall be secured by all of the following:

a.     A guarantee for “Faithful Performance,” in the amount set forth in the City’s Improvement Standards; and

b.     A guarantee for “Materials and Labor,” in the amount set forth in the City’s Improvement Standards.

2.     Form of security. The required surety shall by consistent with those set forth in the City’s Improvement Standards.

D.    Release of security. The security furnished by the subdivider shall be released as provided by Chapter 5 of the Map Act.

E.     Progress payments or partial release. No progress payment or partial release of surety shall be made except when the City Engineer has certified that the work required to qualify for payment or release has been satisfactorily completed and the payment or release has also been approved by the City Council by at least four-fifths vote. No certificate given, progress payment made, or release of surety, except the final certificate of acceptance, shall be considered as any evidence of the performance of the agreement either wholly or in part. There shall be no partial acceptance of any improvements.

F.     Time extensions. An extension of time for completion of improvements under a subdivision improvement agreement shall be granted by the City only as follows:

1.     Work is in progress. The subdivider is proceeding to do the work required with reasonable diligence and has given satisfactory evidence of being able and willing to complete all required work within the time of the requested extension.

2.     Agreement by sureties. The sureties agree in writing to extend for the additional period of time at the original amount of the bond or other surety.

3.     Conditions. As a condition of granting a time extension, the City may impose whatever additional requirements the City deems reasonable to protect the public interest.

G.    Acceptance of improvements. Before acceptance for maintenance or final approval of subdivision improvements, the City Engineer shall verify that the improvement work has been completed in substantial compliance with the approved plans and specifications.

 

 

Chapter 17.110 SURVEYS AND MONUMENTS
17.110.010 Purpose of Chapter.
This Chapter provides requirements for subdivision survey work, and the placement of subdivision monuments.

 

17.110.020 Survey Procedure and Practice.
The procedure and practice of all survey work done on any subdivision, whether for preparation of a Final Map or Parcel Map shall conform to the standard practices and principles of land surveying, the California Land Surveyor’s Act, and the provisions of this Chapter.

A.    Traverse. The traverse of the exterior boundaries of the subdivision computed from field measurements of the ground must close within a limit of error of one foot to 10,000 feet of perimeter before balancing the survey.

B.     Field notes. When required by the City Engineer, the engineer or surveyor making the survey shall prepare complete field notes, in a form satisfactory to the City Engineer, showing references, ties, locations, elevations and other necessary data relating to monuments, set in compliance with these regulations, and shall submit the notes to the City Engineer to be indexed and retained as a part of the permanent public record of his or her office.

C.     Geodetic monuments. Whenever the City Engineer has established a system of coordinates which is within a reasonable distance of the subdivision boundary, as determined by the City Engineer, the field survey shall be tied into the system.

 

17.110.030 Monuments.
In surveying a subdivision, the engineer or surveyor shall set sufficient permanent monuments so that any part of the survey may be readily retraced. Survey monuments shall be set by the engineer or surveyor for all new subdivisions requiring a Parcel Map or Final Map, in compliance with this Section.

A.    Boundary monuments.

1.     Boundary monuments shall be set on the exterior boundary of the subdivision at all corners, angle points, beginnings and ends of curves and at intermediate points approximately 1,000 feet apart. The locations of inaccessible points may be established by ties and shall be so noted on the Final Map or Parcel Map.

2.     All exterior boundary monuments shall be set prior to recordation of the Final Map or Parcel Map or as certified on the Final or Parcel Map.

B.     Interior monuments. Whenever interior monuments are required, the monuments shall be set at:

1.     All block and lot corners and angle points;

2.     The beginnings and ends of curves;

Interior property line and ties may be set after the Final Map or Parcel Map is recorded as certified on the Final or Parcel Map.

C.     Monument type and positioning. All monuments set in the course of the survey shall be as specified by the City Engineer and shall be set to the depth and in the manner prescribed by the City Engineer.

D.    Identification marks. All monuments shall be permanently and visibly marked or tagged with the registration or license number of the engineer or surveyor who signs the engineer’s or surveyor’s certificate and under whose supervision the survey is made.

E.     Replacement of destroyed monuments. Any monument which is disturbed or destroyed before acceptance of all improvements by the City shall be replaced by the subdivider.

F.     Timing of monument installation. The exterior boundary of the subdivision shall be completely monumented or referenced before the Final Map or Parcel Map is submitted to the City Engineer for processing. Interior monuments need not be set at the time the Final Map or Parcel Map is filed if the engineer or surveyor certifies on the map that the monuments will be set on or before a specified later date, and if the subdivider furnishes the City in a sufficient amount to guarantee payment of the cost of setting the monuments in compliance with Map Act Section 66496.

G.    Notice of completion. Within five days after all monuments have been set, the engineer or surveyor shall give written notice to the subdivider and the City Engineer that the final monuments have been set. Verification of payment to the engineer or surveyor shall be filed as required by Article 9 of the Map Act. The cost of setting monuments shall be included in the engineer’s estimate for improvements in compliance with Section 17.108.040 (Improvement Agreements and Security). If requested, this amount of the security may be released upon verification of the setting of the monuments by the City Engineer.

 

17.110.040 Survey Information on Parcel or Final Map.
The following survey information shall be shown on each Final Map or Parcel Map for which a field survey was made in compliance with this Development Code.

A.    Stakes, monuments (together with their precise position) or other evidence found on the ground, to determine the boundaries of the subdivision;

B.     Corners of all adjoining properties identified by lot and block numbers, subdivision names, numbers and pages of record maps, or by section, township and range, or other proper designation;

C.     All information and data necessary to locate and retrace any point or line without unreasonable difficulty;

D.    Bearing and length of each lot line, block line and boundary line and each required bearing and distance;

E.     Length, radius and central angle of each curve and the bearing of each radial line for non-tangent curves;

F.     The centerlines of any street or alley in or adjoining the subdivision which have been established by the City Engineer, together with reference to a field book or map showing the centerline. If determined by ties, that fact shall be so stated;

G.    Any other survey data or information as may be required to be shown by the City Engineer or by the provisions of this Chapter and the Subdivision Map Act.

Article VI. Development Code Administration
Chapter 17.120 ADMINISTRATIVE RESPONSIBILITY
17.120.010 Purpose of Chapter.
This Chapter describes the authority and responsibilities of City staff and official bodies in the administration of this Development Code, in addition to the Council.

 

17.120.020 Planning Department Defined.
The functions of a Planning Department shall be performed by the Jackson City Council, Planning Commission, Site Plan Review Committee, and City Planner in compliance with State law (Government Code Section 65100), and the Municipal Code.

 

17.120.030 Planning Commission.
A.    Appointment and Meetings. Appointments to the Commission and the scheduling and conduct of Commission meetings shall be in compliance with Chapter 2.06 of the Municipal Code.

B.     Duties and authority. The Commission shall:

1.     Conduct public hearings and approve or deny applications for Development Permits, Planned Developments, Reversions to Acreage, Tentative Maps, and Use Permits; and make recommendations to the Council on Development Agreements, Development Code and Zoning Map Amendments, General Plan Amendments, Specific Plans, environmental documents, and other applicable policy or ordinance matters related to the City’s planning process; and

2.     Perform any other responsibilities assigned by the Council.

 

17.120.040 Site Plan Review Committee.
A.    Appointment. The Site Plan Review Committee is established per Section 17.74 of this Development Code.

B.     Duties and authority. The Site Plan Review Committee shall:

1.     Have the responsibility and authority to conduct public hearings and approve or deny applications for Certificates of Compliance, Minor Use Permits, Variances, Tentative Maps for subdivision of four or fewer parcels, and Reversions to Acreage involving four or fewer parcels;

2.     Perform the duties and functions prescribed in this Development Code, including the review of development projects, in compliance with this Development Code and the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA); and

3.     Perform any other responsibilities assigned by the Council.

 

17.120.050 City Planner.
A.    Duties and authority. The City Planner shall:

1.     Head and manage the functions of the Planning Department;

2.     Have the responsibility and authority to approve or deny applications for Interpretations, Lot Line Adjustments, Sign Permits, Temporary Use Permits, Voluntary Parcel Mergers, and Zoning Clearances; and

3.     Perform any other responsibilities assigned by the City Manager and/or Council.

B.     The responsibilities of the City Planner may also be carried out by the Department staff under the supervision of the City Planner.

 

17.120.060 Housing Discrimination.
A City official or official body, including the City Council, shall not take any action that discriminates against any residential development, senior citizen/disabled congregate care facility, emergency shelter, or transient living center because of the method of financing or the race, sex, religion, national origin, marital status, or disability of its owners or intended occupants.

 

 

Chapter 17.130 NONCONFORMING USES, STRUCTURES, AND PARCELS
17.130.010 Purpose of Chapter.
A.    This Chapter establishes uniform provisions for the regulation of legal nonconforming land uses, structures, and parcels.

B.     Within the zoning districts established by this Development Code, there exist land uses, structures, and parcels that were lawful before the adoption, or amendment of this Development Code, but which would be prohibited, regulated, or restricted differently under the terms of this Development Code or future amendments.

C.     It is the intent of this Development Code to discourage the long-term continuance of these nonconformities, providing for their eventual elimination, but to allow them to exist under the limited conditions outlined in this Chapter.

D.    Generally, this Chapter is intended to be administered in a manner which encourages the eventual abatement of these nonconformities.

 

17.130.020 Definitions.
A.    Discontinuance of a nonconformity. The following subsections serve to define the concept of discontinuance. Discontinuance may still occur even with the situation identified in subsection A.4 below.

1.     Discontinuance is typically evidenced by:

a.     The removal of equipment, furniture, improvements, inventory, machinery, structures, or other components so as to make the use inoperable; and/or

b.     The lack of on-site pedestrian or vehicular activity (e.g., customers, deliveries, employees, etc.) on a daily basis, which was evident before the discontinuance.

2.     Lack of business receipts/records. Where there are no business receipts/records available to provide evidence that the use is and has been in continual operation.

3.     The discontinuance may be by:

a.     Voluntary action of the owner/operator;

b.     Involuntary discontinuance due to:

(1)    Dilapidation of the site and/or structure(s);

(2)    Failure of the owner/operator to abide by State and/or non-zoning local laws (e.g., required compliance with annual health inspections, payment of sales tax or Transient Occupancy Tax); or

c.     Only a portion of the use, whether voluntary or involuntary. In this case the City Planner shall determine if the partial discontinuance is enough to make the use inoperable.

4.     Structure(s) are unoccupied but still connected to services. The site and/or structure(s) appear to be unoccupied even though they are still connected to services (e.g., cable television, electricity, protection alarm, sewer, telephone, water, etc.), or the owner/operator is still paying the required bills (maintenance, mortgage, phone, rent, utilities), etc.

5.     Termination of nonconforming rights. Application of the definitions above shall render the discontinuance complete and all rights to reestablish or continue the nonconforming use shall terminate.

B.     Intensification of a nonconformity. A change in the use of a site, or structure, where there is:

1.     More parking required. New or modified use is required by Chapter 17.48 (Off-Street Parking and Loading) to provide more off-street parking spaces than the former use; or

2.     Change in operational characteristics. Owner/operator implements a change in the operational characteristics of the use (e.g., increase in the number of days and/or hours of operation), which have the ability to generate more activity on the site.

C.     Nonconforming parcels. A parcel of record that was legally created before the adoption of this Development Code and which does not comply with the access, area, or width requirements of this Development Code for the zoning district in which it is located.

D.    Nonconforming signs. A sign of record (residence, business, or commercial/industrial center) that was legally created before the adoption of this Development Code and which does not comply with the sign standards and other applicable development standards of this Development Code.

E.     Nonconforming structure. A structure that was legally constructed before the adoption of this Development Code and which does not comply with applicable development standards (e.g. maximum lot coverage, setbacks, etc.) of this Development Code.

F.     Nonconforming use (of land). A use of land (no structures associated with the use) that was legally established and maintained before the adoption of this Development Code and which is not allowed in the subject zoning district.

G.    Nonconforming use (by use). A use that was legally established and maintained before the adoption of this Development Code and which is not allowed in the subject zoning district.

H.    Nonconforming use (by standard). A use that was legally established and maintained before the adoption of this Development Code and which is allowed in the subject zoning district. However, the use does not comply with applicable development standards (e.g. landscaping, parking, screening, etc.) of this Development Code.

I.      Normal repair and maintenance. Normal site or structure repair and maintenance includes the following:

1.     Site—Fix up or replace on-site:

a.     Fences and/or walls;

b.     Landscaping, including the planting of new ground cover, scrubs, and trees;

c.     Paving or repaving, and stripping of parking and circulation areas; or

d.     Service facilities (drainage, irrigation components, and utility service connections).

2.     Structure—Fix up or replace:

a.     Exterior doors, siding, or windows; or

b.     Roof, service connections, or sewer/water system.

3.     Replacement materials. The replacement materials identified in subsections I.1 and I.2 above shall maintain the same visual appearance and characteristics of the original materials, ensuring compatibility of the replacement materials with the site or structure.

4.     Exterior painting, stuccoing, or texture coating.

5.     New construction not included. Normal site or structure repair and maintenance does not include the following examples:

a.     New on-site construction;

b.     Additions to existing structure(s); or

c.     Grading and paving for a new or expanded parking area on previously vacant land.

J.      Structural alterations. Any exterior or interior alteration(s) to the structure which requires a City approved (e.g., discretionary or nondiscretionary) permit (e.g., Building Permit) before construction and/or operations on the site may be initiated.

K.    Total costs for repair/maintenance and investment improvements. The expenditure of funds for both labor and materials to complete the repairs, maintenance, and investment improvements. The construction of new expansions or additions to a nonconforming structure, which comply with all applicable standards and guidelines of the Development Code, shall not count towards the costs of repair/maintenance and investment improvements. Once the expansion or addition is completed, the expansion or addition shall be considered part of the nonconforming structure, and any subsequent repair/maintenance and investment improvements to the expansion or addition shall be counted towards the costs for repair/maintenance and investment improvements allowed for a nonconforming structure. The values for labor and materials shall be verified by a licensed contractors estimate. If the work will be conducted by the owner, the owner shall provide an estimate of the labor hours to complete the work and an estimate of the typical labor costs for the Truckee region for such similar work.

 

17.130.030 Restrictions on Nonconforming Uses and Structures.
Nonconformities may be continued subject to the provisions identified in Table 6-1 (Nonconforming Uses and Structures) below.

 

 

TABLE 6-1

NONCONFORMING USES AND STRUCTURES

Type of Nonconformity

Continued or Change of Use

Allowed Expansion

Allowed Intensification of Use

Allowed Repair/ Rehabilitation or Investment

Termination by Destruction or Discontinuance

Nonconforming Use (of land)

For continued use, Yes

For change of use, See Note 1

None

None

Yes, for normal repair and maintenance

180 Days

See Notes 2, 3

Nonconforming Use (by use)

For continued use, Yes

For change of use, See Note 1

None

See Note 4

None

Yes

See Note 5

180 Days

See Notes 2, 3, 6

Nonconforming Use (by standard)

For continued use, Yes

For change of use, See Note 7

Yes

See Note 8

Yes

See Note 9

Yes

See Note 10

180 Days

See Notes 2, 3, 6

Nonconforming Structure

Yes

Yes

See Note 11

Yes

See Note 12

Yes

See Note 13

180 Days

See Notes 2, 3, 6

Nonconforming Temporary Signs

No, shall be removed at end of temporary sign permit time limit

None

None

None

90 days from mailing of the first written notice

Nonconforming Permanent Signs See also Section 17.54.090 (Nonconforming or Abandoned Signs)

Shall be abated within the amortization period of Section 17.54.090(C)

See Note 14

None

None

Yes

15 years from mailing of the first written notice

See Notes 15, 16

Notes:

 

Note 1: Change of use.

(a)    The City Planner may issue a zoning clearance for a nonconforming use to be changed to an allowed use only if one of the following findings can be made.

If there is a conflict between a finding required for issuance of a zoning clearance and one of the following findings, these findings shall control.

(1)    All requirements of this Development Code are satisfied; or

(2)    The change in use is clearly not of an increased intensity and would not have a greater adverse impact on the surrounding area than the existing or former nonconforming use.

If a nonconforming use is converted to an allowed use, no resumption of the nonconforming use shall occur.

(b)    The nonconforming use may be changed to another nonconforming use of a similar or less intensive/more restricted nature (e.g., capacity, intensity, purpose, or size) while continuing to preserve the rights provided under the nonconforming status. The City Planner may issue a zoning clearance for the change in use only if the City Planner finds that the change in use is clearly not of an increased intensity and would not have a greater adverse impact on the surrounding area than the existing or former nonconforming use. If there is a conflict between a finding required for issuance of a zoning clearance and this finding, this finding shall control. The replacement use shall serve as the “new bench mark” in terms of establishing the acceptable level of nonconformance.

 

Note 2: The rights provided under the nonconforming status would terminate if the use is discontinued for a minimum period of 180 days. Thereafter, the subject parcel may only be used in full compliance with all applicable Development Code requirements.

 

Note 3: The rights provided under the nonconforming status would terminate if the use or structure is involuntarily damaged, demolished, or destroyed to the extent of 50 percent or more of its appraised market value except for single family dwellings and multifamily dwellings which are addressed in Sections 17.130.050 and 17.130.060.

Note 4: Maximum allowable repair/maintenance and investment improvements (work that does not qualify under repair/maintenance) may only occur in the following manner:

(a)    No structural alterations allowed, except those required for seismic retrofitting, City Building Code compliance, or replacement.

(b)    Normal repair/maintenance and investment improvements to the nonconforming use may be made only if the total costs for the repair/maintenance and investment improvements over a five year period would not exceed 50 percent of its appraised market value of the use. The appraised market value shall be verified by a valid appraisal by a credentialed real estate appraiser.

 

Note 5: The rights provided under the nonconforming status would terminate if the total costs for repair/ maintenance and investment improvements over a five year period would exceed 50 percent of its appraised market value.

 

Note 6: The conforming use, together with its nonconforming development standards, may be changed to another use of a similar or less intensive/more restricted nature (e.g., capacity, intensity, purpose, or size), while continuing to preserve the rights provided under the nonconforming status. The City Planner may issue a zoning clearance for the change in use only if the City Planner finds that the change in use is clearly not of an increased intensity and would not have a greater adverse impact on the surrounding area than the existing or former nonconforming use. If there is a conflict between a finding required for issuance of a zoning clearance and this finding, this finding shall control. The replacement use shall serve as the “new bench mark” in terms of establishing the acceptable level of nonconformance.

 

Note 7: The review authority may issue a land use permit for an expansion to a nonconforming use (by standard) only if all of the following findings can be made:

(a)    The expansion of the use, that would intensify the nonconforming development standards, complies with all applicable standards of this Development Code; and

(b)    The existing use complies with all previous approvals for the use and complies with as many Development Code standards and guidelines, as is reasonable and practicable, that address and improve the existing nonconformities. If there is a conflict between a finding required for approval of the land use permit and the above findings, the above findings shall control.

 

Note 8: The review authority may issue a land use permit for an intensification to a nonconforming use (by standard) only if all of the following findings can be made:

(a)    The change of the use, that would intensify the nonconforming standards, complies with all applicable standards of this Development Code; and

(b)    The existing use complies with all previous approvals for the use and complies with as many Development Code standards and guidelines, as is reasonable and practicable, that address and improve the existing nonconformities. If there is a conflict between a finding required for approval of the land use permit and the above findings, the above findings shall control.

 

Note 9: Repairs and maintenance shall be allowed without limitation, except for those identified under the columns titled “Expansion” and “Intensification” of this chart.

 

Note 10: Any addition or expansion to a nonconforming structure devoted to a conforming use shall comply with all applicable standards and guidelines of this Development Code.

 

Note 11: Any intensification to a nonconforming structure devoted to a conforming use shall comply with all applicable standards and guidelines of this Development Code.

 

Note 12: Maximum allowable repair/maintenance and investment improvements (work that does not qualify under repair/maintenance) may only occur in the following manner:

(a)    No structural alterations allowed, except for those required for seismic retrofitting, City Building Code compliance, and replacement.

(b)    Normal repair/maintenance and investment improvements to the nonconforming structure may be made only if the total costs for the repair/maintenance and investment improvements over a five year period would not exceed 50 percent of its appraised market value of the structure. The appraised market value of the structure shall be verified by a valid appraisal by a credentialed real estate appraiser.

 

Note 13: The amortization period shall begin on the date of mailing the first written notice issued by the City Planner to the sign owner, that the sign is nonconforming. The nonconforming sign may be changed to or replaced with another nonconforming sign of a less intensive/more restricted nature while continuing to preserve the rights provided under the nonconforming status. The change or replacement may occur only if the City Planner finds that the change or replacement addresses and substantially improves the existing nonconformities, does not create new nonconformities, and brings the sign into greater conformance with the sign development standards and design guidelines. However, the changed or replacement sign shall serve as the “new bench mark” in terms of establishing the acceptable level of nonconformance. The date of the beginning of the amortization period for the changed or replacement sign shall be the same date as the previous nonconforming sign.

 

Note 14: The rights provided under the nonconforming status would terminate if the sign is involuntarily damaged, demolished, or destroyed to the extent of more than 50 percent of its appraised market value, the damage or destruction is other than facial copy replacement, and the sign cannot be repaired within 30 days of the date of its damage or destruction. The appraised market value of the sign shall be verified by a valid appraisal by a credentialed real estate appraiser.

 

Note 15: The rights provided under the nonconforming status would terminate if the sign whose owner, outside of a change of copy, requests permission to remodel and remodels the sign, or expand or enlarge the building or land use upon which the sign is located, and the sign is affected by the construction, enlargement, or remodeling, or the cost of construction, enlargement, or remodeling of the sign exceeds 50% of the cost of reconstruction of the building.

 

17.130.040 Elimination of Nonconforming Uses (By Use).
A.    Replace with a conforming use. The City Planner, or the appropriate review authority if other than the City Planner, may grant one or more of the incentives listed in subsection B as an inducement for the owner/operator of an existing nonconforming use (by use) to replace the use with a conforming use identified in Article II (Zoning Districts and Allowable Land Uses).

B.     Incentives allowed. The incentives for conversion of a nonconforming use to an allowed use may include decreased landscaping, parking, screening, and setback requirements, and increased density, FAR, or intensity provisions.

 

17.130.050 Single Family Dwelling Unit Exemption.
A.    Allowable reconstruction. Nonconforming single family residential dwelling units including secondary residential units, involuntarily damaged or destroyed due to a catastrophic event, may be reconstructed or replaced with a new structure(s) using the same development standards applied to the damaged or destroyed structure(s) (e.g. building envelope, density, and footprint standards).

B.     Time limits. The building permit(s) for the reconstruction or replacement of the nonconforming structure(s) with a new structure(s) shall be obtained within one year from the date of the catastrophic event and construction shall be completed within two years from the date of issuance of the building permit(s).

C.     Flood hazards. The reconstruction or replacement of the nonconforming structure(s) with a new structure(s) in the 100-year floodplain shall be in compliance with all applicable requirements of Chapter 17.34 (Flood Plain Management).

 

17.130.060 Multifamily Dwelling Unit Exemption.
A.    Allowable reconstruction. Nonconforming multifamily residential dwelling units, involuntarily damaged or destroyed due to a catastrophic event, may be reconstructed or replaced with a new structure(s) of an equivalent number of dwelling units and size in compliance with State law (Government Code Sec. 65852.25) and the standards of this Section.

B.     Multifamily units defined. Multifamily is defined as two or more dwelling units on a single parcel for the purposes of this Section.

C.     Time limits. The building permit(s) for the reconstruction or replacement of the nonconforming structure(s) with a new structure(s) shall be obtained within two years from the date of the catastrophic event and construction shall be completed within two years from the date of issuance of the building permit(s).

D.    Compliance with Development Code. The multifamily reconstruction shall be in compliance with all applicable Development Code requirements provided that the pre-damaged size and number of dwelling units shall be allowed. The City Planner may waive or reduce requirements if compliance with such requirements would result in the size and/or number of dwelling units being less than that in existence prior to damage or destruction.

17.130.070 Nonconforming Parcels.
A nonconforming parcel of record that does not comply with the access, area, or width requirements of this Development Code for the zoning district in which it is located, shall be considered to be a legal building site if it meets at least one of the five criteria specified by subsection A.

A.    Criteria for nonconforming status. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to produce sufficient evidence to establish the applicability of one or more of the following, which shall determine that a parcel is a legal building site for purposes of development and new land uses:

1.     The parcel was created through an approved subdivision;

2.     The parcel is under one ownership and of record, and was legally created by a recorded deed in accordance with County or City subdivision regulations in effect at the time of its creation and before the effective date of the zoning amendment that made the parcel nonconforming;

3.     The parcel was approved through a Variance in compliance with Chapter 17.82 (Variances and Historic Variances) or resulted from a lot line adjustment as provided in Chapter 17.86 (Lot Line Adjustments);

4.     A Certificate of Compliance was issued for the parcel; and/or

5.     The parcel was created in compliance with the provisions of this Development Code, but was made nonconforming when a portion of the parcel was acquired by a governmental entity so that the parcel size is decreased not more than 20 percent and the yard facing any public right-of-way was decreased not more than 50 percent.

B.     Limitation on subsequent subdivision. Where structures have been erected on a nonconforming parcel, the area where structures are located shall not be later divided so as to reduce the building site area and/or frontage below the requirements of the applicable zoning district or other applicable provisions of this Development Code, or in any way that makes the use of the parcel more nonconforming.

 

17.130.080 Conformity of Uses Requiring Use Permits.
A.    Uses allowed with Use Permit approval. Any use existing at the time of adoption of this Development Code in a zoning district that allows the use subject to Use Permit approval, shall be deemed a conforming use, but only to the extent that it previously existed (e.g., maintaining the same site area boundaries, hours of operation, etc.).

B.     Uses no longer allowed with Use Permit approval. Any use in existence by virtue of a Use Permit issued in compliance with the regulations in effect at the time of application for any land use activity which, under the new regulations is not allowable by Use Permit, may continue, but only in compliance with the provisions and terms of the original Use Permit. If the Use Permit specified a termination date, then the use shall terminate in compliance with the original permit.

 

17.130.090 Extensions of Time for Discontinuance.
A.    Upon the filing of a request for extension by the applicant, the City Planner may extend the time limits for the rights provided under the nonconforming status if the use is discontinued. The applicant shall file a written request for an extension of time with the City Planner in advance of the expiration date, together with the filing fee required by the Council’s Fee Resolution.

B.     In considering the extension, the City Planner shall determine whether the property owner has made a good faith effort to re-establish the nonconforming use. If the City Planner determines that the owner has proceeded in good faith and has exercised due diligence in seeking to re-establish the nonconforming use, the City Planner may grant an extension of the period for discontinuance of a nonconforming use for up to a total of 180 days.

 

17.130.100 Unlawful Uses and Structures.
Uses and structures that did not comply with the applicable provisions of this Development Code or other planning and zoning regulations that applied to the use when it was established, are violations of this Development Code and are subject to the provisions of Chapter 17.200 (Enforcement). No right to continue occupancy of property containing an illegal use or structure is granted by this Chapter. The activity shall not be lawfully allowed to continue unless/until all land use permits required by this Development Code are first obtained.

 

17.130.110 Nuisance Abatement.
In the event that a legal nonconforming use or structure is found to constitute a public nuisance, nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to permit the retention of the nonconformity. The City Attorney may, with the consent of the Council, commence an action or preceding for the abatement and removal of the nonconformity.

 

 

Chapter 17.140 APPEALS
17.140.010 Purpose of Chapter.
This Chapter provides procedures for appealing determinations and actions made by the City Planner, Site Plan Review Committee, or Commission.

 

17.140.020 Allowable Appeals.
Determinations and actions that may be appealed, and the authority to act upon an appeal shall be as follows.

A.    City Planner decisions. Any decision by the City Planner including zoning clearances, may be appealed to the Commission.

B.     Site Plan Review Committee decisions. Any decision by the Site Plan Review Committee may be appealed to the Planning Commission.

C.     Planning Commission decisions. Any decision by the Planning Commission may be appealed to the City Council.

D.    City Manager’s appeal of Site Plan Review Committee or Planning Commission decisions. Any decision by the Site Plan Review Committee or Planning Commission may be appealed to the Council by the City Manager.

E.     Council review/appeal.

1.     Any member of the Council within 10 calendar days from the date of the review authority’s action may request the opportunity to review/discuss any decision rendered by the City Planner, Site Plan Review Committee, or Planning Commission.

2.     The Council may appeal any decision by the City Planner, Site Plan Review Committee, or Planning Commission at the next available council meeting if a member of the Council has requested the opportunity to review the decision within 10 calendar days from the date of the review authority’s action. A majority vote of the Council is required to initiate the appeal.

F.     Statute of limitations. The decision of the Council shall be final on all matters unless an appeal is filed with the Superior Court of the County of Amador within 30 days after the decision of the Council.

 

17.140.030 Filing and Processing of Appeals.
A.    Timing and form of appeal.

1.     Appeals shall be submitted in writing, and filed with the City Clerk within 10 days from the date of the review authority’s action except as allowed by Section 17.140.020(D).

2.     The appeal shall state the pertinent facts of the case and the basis for the appeal.

3.     Appeals shall be accompanied by the filing fee set by the Council’s Fee Resolution.

B.     Scheduling of hearing and City Planner’s report. When an appeal has been filed, the City Planner shall schedule the matter for consideration by the appropriate appeal body identified in Section 17.140.020 (Allowable Appeals) and prepare a report on the matter. If the matter originally required a noticed public hearing, the City Clerk shall give notice in the same manner followed for the original hearing, in compliance with Chapter 17.180 (Public Hearings).

C.     Review by City Planner.

1.     The City Planner shall determine if the appeal was filed within the applicable time limits and shall summarily reject any appeal which was filed beyond the time limits. Further, the City Planner shall determine if the appeal contains sufficient information as required by subsection A (Timing and form of appeal) above.

2.     If the City Planner determines that the information in the appeal is incomplete, the City Planner shall immediately notify the appellant of the insufficiency and allow the appellant an additional seven days in which to correct the deficiency.

3.     If upon the expiration of any additional time, the City Planner determines that the statement on appeal is still insufficient, the City Planner shall summarily reject the appeal.

D.    City attorney’s authority to summarily reject appeal. Upon presentation of the Notice of Appeal, together with the required statement on appeal, the City Attorney may summarily reject the appeal if the City Attorney finds that the matter being appealed is a requirement of law.

E.     Action. At the hearing, the appeal body may consider any issue involving the matter being appealed, in addition to the specific grounds for the appeal.

1.     The appeal body may, by resolution, affirm, affirm in part, or reverse the action, the decision, or determination of the original review authority.

2.     When reviewing an appeal, the appeal body may:

a.     Deny the permit or entitlement, even though the appeal only requested relaxation or elimination of one or more of the conditions imposed on the permit or entitlement: or

b.     Impose additional conditions that may address other issues or concerns than the original subject of the appeal.

3.     The appellant and other interested parties shall not present new evidence and testimony at the appeal hearing unless the party can demonstrate, to the satisfaction of the appeal body, that new information:

a.     Was not previously available to the party, or

b.     The party could not have participated in the review process because they could not have known about the review process.

4.     If new or different evidence is presented on appeal, the Commission or council, may, but shall not be required to, refer the matter to the original review authority for further consideration.

F.     Refund of appeal fees. Appeal fees may be refunded in only the following situations:

1.     Upon the conclusion of any appeal, where the Council upholds the appeal and overturns the decision of the review authority, the Council may also authorize the return of all, or a portion, of the appeal fees; or

2.     Upon the conclusion of any appeal, where the Council denies the appeal but finds that the appellant(s) raised issues of substantial merit, the Council may authorize the return of any portion of the appeal fees deemed just.

 

 

Chapter 17.150 DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENTS
17.150.010 Purpose of Chapter.
A.    The purpose of this Chapter is to provide procedures and minimum requirements for the review and consideration of development agreements upon application by, or on behalf of property owners or other persons having a legal or equitable interest in the property subject to the agreement.

B.     It is intended that the provisions of this Chapter shall be fully consistent, and in full compliance, with the provisions of State law (Article 2.5 of Chapter 4 of Division 1 of Title 7, commencing with Section 65864 of the Government Code), and shall be so construed.

C.     In construing the provisions of any development agreement entered into in compliance with this Chapter, those provisions shall be read to fully effectuate, and to be consistent with, the language of this Chapter, State law (Article 2.5 of the Government Code, cited above), and the agreement itself. Should any apparent discrepancies between the meaning of these documents arise, reference shall be made to the following documents and in the following order:

1.     The plain terms of the development agreement itself;

2.     The provisions of this Chapter; and

3.     The provisions of State law (Article 2.5 of the Government Code, cited above).

D.    A development agreement is a legislative act and not a land use permit or entitlement.

 

17.150.020 Application.
A.    Initiated by owner. Any owner of real property may request and apply through the City Planner to enter into a development agreement provided the following:

1.     The status of the applicant as an owner of the property is established to the satisfaction of the City Planner;

2.     The application is made on forms approved, and contains all information required, by the City Planner; and

3.     The application is accompanied by all lawfully required documents, information and materials.

B.     City Planner’s review. The City Planner is authorized to receive, review, process, and prepare, together with recommendations for Commission and council consideration, all applications for development agreements; and

C.     Fees. Processing fees, as established by resolution of the Council, shall be collected for any application for a development agreement made in compliance with this Chapter. Additionally, appropriate fees shall be established and collected for periodic reviews conducted by the City Planner in compliance with Section 17.150.080 (Periodic Review), below.

 

17.150.030 Public Hearings.
A.    Commission’s action. The City Planner, upon finding the application for a development agreement complete, shall set the application, together with recommendations, for a public hearing before the Commission in compliance with Chapter 17.180 (Public Hearings). Following conclusion of a public hearing, the Commission shall make a written recommendation to the Council that it approve, conditionally approve, or deny the agreement.

B.     Council’s action. The City Clerk shall set the application and written report of the Commission for a public hearing before the Council in compliance with Chapter 17.180 (Public Hearings). Following conclusion of the public hearing, the Council shall approve, conditionally approve, or deny the agreement.

C.     Notice. Notice of the hearings, outlined in subsections A. and B., above, shall be given in the form of a notice of intention to consider approval of a development agreement in compliance with State law (Government Code Section 65867).

D.    Preparation of agreement. Should the Council approve or conditionally approve the application, it shall direct the preparation of a development agreement containing the terms and conditions of the application as approved or conditionally approved, as well as an ordinance authorizing execution of the development agreement by the City Manager.

E.     Findings. The ordinance shall contain the findings required by Section 17.150.040 (Findings and Decision), and the facts supporting them.

F.     Subject to referendum. The ordinance may be subjected to referendum in the manner provided by State law.

 

17.150.040 Findings and Decision.
The Council may approve a Development Agreement, with or without conditions, only if all of the following findings can be made:

A.    The Development Agreement would be in the best interests of the City and would promote the public interest and welfare of the City.

1.     The approval of a Development Agreement for a project that is merely developed in compliance with this Development Code would not be considered in the best interests of the City.

2.     Examples of project elements and components that may be considered in the best interests of the City and promote the public interest and welfare including, but are not limited to, the following:

a.     An enhanced/expanded open space network that ties into existing neighboring open space areas;

b.     A well designed mixed-use project that further implements the goals, objectives, and policies of the General Plan;

c.     The dedication of lands for public uses above and beyond those necessary for the project; and

d.     Off-site improvements in the public right-of-way that would generally be above and beyond those required by the City’s standard requirements for a project of the scale and intensity desired in the proposed project.

 

17.150.050 Content of Development Agreement.
A.    Mandatory contents. A development agreement entered into in compliance with this Chapter shall contain the following provisions:

1.     Specify the duration of the agreement;

2.     Specify the allowed uses for the subject property;

3.     Specify the density/intensity of the allowed uses;

4.     Clearly identify and refer to the approved documents and exhibits;

5.     Specify the maximum height and size of the proposed structures;

6.     Specify the minimum size and dimensions of the proposed parcels;

7.     Describe the provisions, if any, for reservation or dedication of land for public purposes;

8.     Describe the provisions, if any, for the construction or financing of public improvements;

9.     Negotiate a level of protection from either a future growth control ordinance or a future increase in development fees, including impact fees;

10.   Provide for a tiered amendment review process that may incorporate the following:

a.     City Planner sign-off for minor changes;

b.     Commission sign-off for major modifications; and

c.     Approval of major amendments by the Council.

11.   Provide for the possibility of subsequent discovery of health and safety issues (e.g., a “compelling public necessity” [e.g., a new environmental health hazard is discovered]), which would necessitate a reconsideration/amendment of the previously approved development agreement; and

12.   Describe the provisions, if any, for any other matter(s) which is reasonably related to the requested land use permit or entitlement and which the Council deems necessary or convenient to implement the General Plan or to promote the public health, safety, or general welfare.

B.     Permissive contents. A development agreement entered into in compliance with this Chapter may contain the following provisions:

1.     Conditions, terms, restrictions, and requirements for subsequent discretionary actions, provided that the conditions, terms, restrictions, and requirements shall not prevent development of the land for the uses and to the density/intensity of development specified in the agreement;

2.     Provisions which require that construction shall be commenced within a specified time and that the project, or any individual phase, be completed within a specified time;

3.     Terms and conditions relating to applicant financing of necessary public improvements and facilities, including applicant participation in benefit assessment proceedings; and

4.     Any other terms, conditions, and requirements the Council may deem necessary and proper, including requirement(s) for ensuring, to the satisfaction of the City, performance of all provisions of the agreement in a timely manner by the applicant/contracting party.

 

17.150.060 Execution and Recordation.
A.    Effective date. The City shall not execute any development agreement until on or after the date upon which the ordinance approving the agreement, enacted in compliance with Section 17.150.050, above becomes effective;

B.     Mutual consent required. A development agreement may be executed only upon the mutual consent of each party to the agreement;

C.     City’s authority under agreement. The provisions of this Chapter shall not be construed to prohibit the City Planner, Site Plan Review Committee, Planning Commission, or council from conditioning approval of a discretionary land use permit or entitlement on the execution of a development agreement where the condition is otherwise authorized by law; and

D.    Recordation of agreement. A development agreement shall be recorded with the County Recorder no later than 10 days after it is executed.

 

17.150.070 Environmental Review.
The approval or conditional approval of a development agreement in compliance with this Chapter shall be deemed a discretionary act for purposes of the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA).

 

17.150.080 Periodic Review.
A.    Review required every 12 months or less. Every development agreement, approved and executed in compliance with this Chapter, shall be subject to periodic review, as specified in the agreement, but in no case less than once every 12 months, by the City Planner during the full term of the agreement. Appropriate fees to cover the City’s cost(s) to conduct the periodic reviews shall be collected from the applicant/contracting party in compliance with Section 17.150.020(C) (Application);

B.     Determine compliance. The purpose of the periodic review shall be to determine whether the applicant/contracting party or the successor(s)-in-interest has complied in good faith with the terms and/or conditions of the development agreement. The burden of proof shall be on the applicant/contracting party or the successor(s) to demonstrate compliance, to the full satisfaction of, and in a manner prescribed by, the City; and

C.     Termination of agreement. If the City Planner finds and determines, on the basis of substantial evidence, that the applicant/contracting party or the successor(s)-in-interest has not complied in good faith with the terms or conditions of the agreement, the City Planner may recommend to the Council that it order the agreement to be terminated or modified. This action of the Council shall only take place during a noticed public hearing in compliance with Chapter 17.180 (Public Hearings).

 

17.150.090 Amendments to an Approved Development Agreement.
A development agreement may be amended or canceled, in whole or in part, by mutual consent of all parties to the agreement, or the successor(s)-in-interest, in compliance with State law (Government Code Section 65868). The requested amendment or cancellation shall be processed in the same manner specified by this Chapter for the adoption of a development agreement.

 

17.150.100 Effect of Development Agreement.
A.    Rules at the time of execution. Unless otherwise provided by the development agreement, the rules, regulations, and official policies governing allowed uses of the land, density, design, improvement, and construction standards and specifications, applicable to development of the property subject to a development agreement, are the rules, regulations, and official policies in force at the time of execution of the agreement.

B.     Subsequent City actions. Unless specifically provided for in the development agreement, the agreement does not prevent the City, in subsequent actions applicable to the property, from applying new rules, regulations, and policies which do not conflict with those rules, regulations, and policies applicable to the property under the development agreement, nor does a development agreement prevent the City from conditionally approving or denying any subsequent development project application on the basis of existing or new rules, regulations, and policies.

 

17.150.110 Approved Development Agreements.
Development agreements approved by the Council shall be on file with the City Clerk.

 

 

Chapter 17.160 GENERAL PLAN, LAND USE DESIGNATION MAP, AND DEVELOPMENT CODE AMENDMENTS
17.160.010 Purpose of Chapter.
A.    This Chapter provides procedures for the amendment of the General Plan, Zoning Map, and this Development Code, whenever required by public necessity and general welfare.

B.     The General Plan amendments may include revisions to actions, goals, land use designations, policies, or text.

C.     Zoning Map amendments have the effect of rezoning property from one zoning district to another.

D.    Amendments to this Development Code may modify any procedures, provisions, requirements, or standards applicable to the development and/or use of property within the City.

E.     Review and approval of each of the amendments identified above is a legislative act and not a land use permit or entitlement.

 

17.160.020 Initiation of Amendments.
Amendments to the General Plan, Zoning Map, or this Development Code may be initiated by:

A.    Private parties. Private parties through the filing of an application including all materials and information required by the City Planner, and the applicable filing fee; or

B.     Council. The Council.

 

17.160.030 Notice and Hearing.
After receipt of a complete application for amendment, the City Planner shall review the proposal, schedule public hearings before the Planning Commission and City Council, and prepare a staff report evaluating and providing recommendations on the proposal. Notice of the hearings shall be given in compliance with Section 17.180.020 (Notice of Hearing).

 

17.160.040 Planning Commission’s Action on Amendments.
The Planning Commission shall make a written recommendation to the Council whether to approve, approve in modified form, or deny the proposed amendment, based upon the findings contained in Section 17.160.060 (Findings for Amendments).

 

17.160.050 Council’s Action on Amendments.
A.    Council’s action. Upon receipt of the Planning Commission’s recommendation, the Council shall approve, approve in modified form, or deny the proposed amendment based upon the findings contained in Section 17.160.060 (Findings for Amendments).

B.     Referral to Commission.

1.     If the Council proposes to adopt any substantial modification to the amendment not previously considered by the Planning Commission during its hearings, the proposed modification may be first referred back to the Planning Commission for its recommendation, in compliance with State law (Government Code Sections 65356 [General Plan Amendments] and 65857 [Zoning Map/Development Code Amendments]).

2.     Failure of the Planning Commission to report back to the Council within 45 days (General Plan Amendments) or 40 days (Zoning Map/Development Code Amendments) after the referral, or within a longer time set by the Council, shall be deemed a recommendation for approval of the modification.

 

17.160.060 Findings for Amendments.
An amendment to the General Plan, the Zoning Map, or this Development Code may be approved only if all of the following findings are made, as applicable to the type of amendment.

A.    Findings for all amendments.

1.     The proposed amendment ensures and maintains internal consistency with all of the goals, policies, and actions of all elements of the General Plan and any applicable specific plan; and

2.     The proposed amendment would not be detrimental to the public interest, health, safety, convenience, or welfare of the City.

B.     Additional finding for Zoning Map amendments. There is adequate capacity available in the community sewer and water systems to serve the potential development, and the site is physically suitable for the requested zoning designation(s) and anticipated land use development(s). Factors considered to evaluate suitability shall include access, provision of utilities, compatibility with adjoining land uses, and absence of physical constraints.

C.     Additional finding for Development Code amendments. The proposed amendment ensures and maintains internal consistency with other applicable provisions of this Development Code.

 

17.160.070 Conditional Rezonings.
The Planning Commission may recommend and the Council may impose reasonable conditions on the approval of any Zoning Map amendment for the purposes of ensuring consistency of the proposed zoning with the General Plan, mitigating environmental impacts, minimizing functional conflicts with surrounding land uses, or any other purpose that is determined by the Council to protect the public health, safety, or general welfare.

A.    Type of conditions. Conditions imposed on a Zoning Map amendment in compliance with this Section may include, but are not limited to, dedication of additional road rights-of-way and requirements for participation in the cost of public improvements, deemed necessary and reasonably related to the land uses that would be allowed by the proposed zoning, and limitations on the type and nature of land uses allowed in the new zoning district.

B.     Timing of compliance with conditions. When a Zoning Map amendment with conditions is adopted by the Council, the ordinance shall specify when the conditions shall be satisfied relative to the approval by the City of any subdivision of the property, any land use or construction permits, or actual development.

 

 

Chapter 17.170 SPECIFIC PLANS
17.170.010 Purpose of Chapter.
A.    The purpose of this Chapter is to provide for a Specific Plan when required by the General Plan or this Development Code to systematically implement the General Plan for any part of the City.

B.     A Specific Plan is a legislative act and not a land use permit or entitlement.

C.     Specific Plans shall be prepared, processed, approved, (or denied) and implemented in compliance with this Chapter.

 

17.170.020 Specific Plan Preparation and Content.
An applicant shall prepare a draft Specific Plan for review by the City that includes the following detailed information in the form of text and diagram(s), organized in compliance with an outline furnished by the City Planner and State law (Government Code Section 65451). The Council may also initiate the preparation of a Specific Plan.

A.    Proposed land uses. The distribution, location, and extent of land uses proposed within the area covered by the Specific Plan, including open space areas;

B.     Infrastructure. The proposed distribution, location, extent, and intensity of major components of public and private circulation/transportation, drainage, energy, sewage, solid waste disposal, water, and other essential facilities proposed to be located within the Specific Plan area and needed to support the proposed land uses;

C.     Land use and development standards. Standards, criteria, and design guidelines by which development will proceed, and standards for the conservation, development, and utilization of natural resources, where applicable;

D.    Implementation measures. A program of implementation measures, including regulations, programs, public works projects, and financing measures necessary to carry out the proposed land uses, infrastructure, and development and conservation standards and criteria;

E.     Relationship to General Plan. A discussion of the relationship of the Specific Plan to the General Plan; and

F.     Additional information. The Specific Plan shall contain any additional information deemed necessary by the City Planner because of the characteristics of the area to be covered by the plan, applicable policies of the General Plan, or any other issue(s) determined by the City Planner to be significant.

 

17.170.030 Filing and Processing.
A draft Specific Plan shall be filed with the City Planner, and shall be accompanied by the fee required by the Council’s Fee Resolution. The draft plan shall be processed in the same manner as required for General Plans by State law (Government Code Sections 65350 et seq.), and as follows:

A.    City Planner evaluation. After the filing of a draft Specific Plan, the City Planner shall review the draft plan to determine whether it conforms with the provisions of this Chapter. If the draft plan is not in compliance, it shall be returned to the applicant with a written specification(s) as to why it does not comply, and with suggested revisions to ensure compliance;

B.     Public participation. The City Planner may recommend and the Council may approve a process to obtain maximum public participation early in the review process of the Specific Plan. The process would be designed to obtain public input before the completion of the environmental review document and the scheduling of formal public hearings on the plan.

C.     Environmental review. The draft Specific Plan shall be subject to environmental review in compliance with Section 17.70.060 (Initial Application Review/Environmental Assessment);

D.    Staff report. A staff report shall be prepared for the draft Specific Plan which shall include detailed recommendations for changes to the text and diagrams of the Specific Plan, as necessary, to make it acceptable for adoption; and

E.     Public hearings. A proposed Specific Plan shall be subject to public hearings before both the Commission and council prior to its adoption, as follows:

1.     Planning Commission hearing. The City Planner shall schedule a public hearing on the proposed Specific Plan. The hearing shall receive public notice and be conducted in compliance with Chapter 17.180 (Public Hearings). After the hearing, the Planning Commission shall forward a written recommendation, with appropriate findings to the Council, in compliance with Section 17.170.040 (Adoption of Specific Plan); and

2.     Council’s action.

a.     A public hearing on the Specific Plan shall be scheduled before the Council. The hearing shall be noticed and conducted in compliance with Chapter 17.180 (Public Hearings).

b.     After the hearing, the Council may adopt the Specific Plan, may deny the plan, or may adopt the plan with modifications, with appropriate findings in compliance with Section 17.170.040 (Adoption of Specific Plan).

3.     Referral to Planning Commission. If the Council proposes to adopt any substantial modifications to the plan not previously considered by the Planning Commission during its hearing, the proposed modification shall be first referred to the Planning Commission for its recommendation, in compliance with State law (Government Code Section 65356). Failure of the Planning Commission to report back to the Council within 45 days after the referral, or within a longer time period set by the Council, shall be deemed a recommendation for approval of the modifications.

 

17.170.040 Adoption of Specific Plan.
A.    Finding. The adoption of a proposed Specific Plan is entirely at the discretion of the Council. The Council shall adopt a Specific Plan only if it finds that the proposed plan is consistent with the General Plan, and other adopted goals and policies of the City.

B.     Adoption. The Specific Plan shall be adopted by ordinance, and/or by resolution of the Council, in compliance with State law (Government Code Section 65453).

 

17.170.050 Implementation, Amendments.
A.    Development within Specific Plan area.

1.     After the adoption of a Specific Plan, a land use permit, public works project, a tentative map or parcel map, for which a tentative map was not required, and an amendment to this Development Code may be approved/adopted within an area covered by a Specific Plan only if it is first found consistent with the Specific Plan, in compliance with State law (Government Code Section 65455).

2.     The Council may impose a Specific Plan Fee surcharge on development permits within the Specific Plan area, in compliance with State law (Government Code Section 65456).

B.     Amendments. An adopted Specific Plan shall be amended through the same procedure specified by this Chapter for the adoption of a Specific Plan.

 

 

Chapter 17.174 MASTER PLANS
17.174.010 Purpose of Chapter.
A.    The purpose of this Chapter is to provide for a Master Plan when required by this Development Code to systematically implement any Specific Plan.

B.     A Master Plan is a legislative act and not a land use permit or entitlement.

C.     Master Plans shall be prepared, processed, approved or denied, and implemented in compliance with this Chapter.

 

17.174.020 Master Plan Preparation and Content.
An applicant shall prepare a draft Master Plan for review by the City that includes the following detailed information in the form of text and diagram(s), organized in compliance with an outline furnished by the City Planner. The Council may also initiate the preparation of a Master Plan.

A.    Proposed land uses. The distribution, location, and extent of land uses proposed within the area covered by the Master Plan, including open spaces areas.

B.     Infrastructure. The proposed distribution, location, extent, and intensity of major components of public and private circulation/transportation, drainage, energy, sewage, solid waste disposal, water, and other essential features proposed to be located within the Master Plan area and needed to support the proposed land uses.

C.     Land use and development standards. Standards, criteria, and design guidelines by which development will proceed, and standards for the conservation, development, and utilization of natural resources, where applicable.

D.    Implementation measures. A program of implementation measures, including regulations, programs, public works projects, and financing measures necessary to carry out the proposed land uses, infrastructure, and development and conservation standards and criteria.

E.     Relationship to Specific Plan. A discussion of the relationship of the Master Plan to the Specific Plan.

F.     Phasing. A discussion on the phases of the development, if any.

G.    Additional information. The Master Plan shall contain any additional information deemed necessary by the City Planner because of the characteristics of the area to be covered by the plan, applicable policies of the General Plan, or any other issues(s) determined by the City Planner to be significant.

 

17.174.030 Filing and Processing.
A draft Master Plan shall be filed with the City Planner, and shall be accompanied by the fee required by the Council’s Fee Resolution. The draft plan shall be processed in the same manner as required for General Plans by State law (Government Code Section 65350 et seq.), and as follows:

A.    City Planner evaluation. After the filing of a draft Master Plan, the City Planner shall review the draft plan to determine whether it conforms with the provisions of this Chapter. If the draft plan is not in compliance, it shall be returned to the applicant with a written specification(s) as to why it does not comply, and with suggested revisions to ensure compliance.

B.     Public participation. The City Planner may recommend and the Council approve a process to obtain maximum public participation early in the review process of the master plan. Such a process would be designed to obtain public input prior to completion of the environmental review document and the scheduling of formal public hearings on the plan.

C.     Environmental review. The draft Master Plan shall be subject to environmental review in compliance with 17.70.060 (Initial Application Review/Environmental Assessment).

D.    Staff report. A staff report shall be prepared for the draft Master Plan which shall include detailed recommendations for changes to the text and diagrams of the Master Plan, as necessary, to make it acceptable for adoption.

E.     Public hearings. A proposed Master Plan shall be subject to public hearings before both the Planning Commission and council before its adoption, as follows:

1.     Planning Commission hearing. The City Planner shall schedule a public hearing on the proposed Master Plan. The hearing shall receive public notice and be conducted in compliance with Chapter 17.180 (Public Hearings). After the hearing, the Commission shall forward a written recommendation, with appropriate findings to the Council, in compliance with Section 17.174.040 (Adoption of Master Plan).

2.     Council’s action.

a.     A public hearing on the Master Plan shall be scheduled before the Council. The hearing shall be noticed and conducted in compliance with the chapter 17.180 (Public Hearings).

b.     After the hearing, the Council may adopt the Master Plan, may deny the plan, or may adopt the plan with changes, with appropriate findings in compliance with Sections 17.174.040 (Adoption of Master Plan) and 17.174.060 (Findings and Decision).

3.     Referral to Planning Commission. If the Council proposes to adopt any substantial modifications to the plan not previously considered by the Planning Commission during its hearing, the proposed modification shall be first referred to the Planning Commission for its recommendation. Failure of the Planning Commission to report back to the Council within 45 days after the referral, or within a longer time period set by the Council, shall be deemed a recommendation for approval of the modifications.

 

17.174.040 Adoption of Master Plan.
A.    Finding. The adoption of a proposed Master Plan is entirely at the discretion of the Council. The Council shall adopt a Master Plan only if it finds that the proposed plan is consistent with the General Plan, and other adopted goals and policies of the City.

B.     Adoption. The Master Plan shall be adopted by ordinance, or by resolution of the Council.

 

17.174.050 Findings and Decision.
Following a public hearing, the Council shall record the decision in writing with the findings upon which the decision is based. The Council may approve a Master Plan, with or without modifications, only if all of the following findings can be made or if the Council finds that one or more of the findings is not applicable or that a practical solution consistent with the public interest has been achieved:

A.    The uses, activities, and densities of the Master Plan shall be compatible and sensitive to the immediate environment, neighborhood, and adjacent properties relative to architectural design, scale, bulk, building height, buffer zones, identity, character, visual integrity, and orientation.

B.     The uses, activities, and densities of the Master Plan shall provide a compatible, efficient, and workable relationship with surrounding uses and activity.

C.     Appropriate parking and loading shall be established for all uses.

D.    The Master Plan is consistent with this Development Code and the General Plan.

E.     Natural and/or geologic hazards that affect the property shall be identified and mitigated.

F.     Site plan, building design and location, and open space provisions shall be designed to produce a functional development responsive and sensitive to natural features, vegetation, and overall aesthetic quality of the community.

G.    The circulation system shall be designed to address on and off-site traffic circulation for both vehicles and pedestrians.

H.    Functional and aesthetic landscaping and open space shall be incorporated into the Master Plan to optimize and preserve natural features, recreation, views and function.

I.      The phasing and subdivision plan shall provide a workable, functional, and efficient relationship throughout the development of the Master Plan.

 

17.174.060 Amendments.
A.    Definition. Major and minor amendments shall be defined by the applicable Master Plan.

B.     Minor amendments. Minor modifications consistent with the findings in Section 17.174.050 (Findings and Decision) may be approved by the City Planner. All minor modifications shall be indicated on a revised development plan, and approved changes shall be noted, signed, dated, and filed by the City Planner. Notification of a proposed minor amendment and the City Planner’s action on the amendment shall be provided to all property owners within or adjacent to the Master Plan area that may be affected by the amendment as determined by the City Planner. The notification shall include a statement describing the amendment and the action of the City Planner.

C.     Major amendments. Requests for major amendments to a Master Plan shall be reviewed and approved by the Council. A proposed major amendment shall be subject to public hearings before both the Planning Commission and council before its approval, as follows:

1.     Commission hearing. The City Planner shall schedule a public hearing on the proposed major amendment. The hearing shall receive public notice and be conducted in compliance with Chapter 17.180 (Public Hearings). After the hearing, the Planning Commission shall forward a written recommendation, with appropriate findings to the Council.

2.     Council’s action.

a.     A public hearing on the major amendment shall be scheduled before the Council. The hearing shall be noticed and conducted in compliance with the chapter 17.180 (Public Hearings).

b.     After the hearing, the Council may approve the amendment, may deny the amendment, or may approve the amendment with changes, with appropriate findings in compliance with Section 17.174.060 (Findings and Decision).

 

 

Chapter 17.180 PUBLIC HEARINGS
17.180.010 Purpose of Chapter.
This Chapter provides procedures for public hearings before the Site Plan Review Committee, Planning Commission, and Council. When a public hearing is required by this Development Code, public notice shall be given and the hearing shall be conducted as provided by this Chapter.

 

17.180.020 Notice of Hearing.
When a land use permit, entitlement or other matter requires a public hearing, the public shall be provided notice of the hearing(s) in compliance with State law (Government Code Sections 65090 et seq., and 66451.3 and Public Resources Code 21000 et seq.).

A.    Contents of notice. Notice of a public hearing shall include;

1.     The date, time, and place of the hearing and the name of the hearing body;

2.     A general explanation of the matter to be considered; and a general description, in text or by diagram, of the location of the real property that is the subject of the hearing; and

3.     If a proposed Negative Declaration or final Environmental Impact Report has been prepared for the project in compliance with the City’s CEQA Guidelines, the hearing notice shall include a statement that the hearing body will also consider approval of the proposed Negative Declaration or certification of the final Environmental Impact Report (EIR) and the notice shall be published, posted, mailed, and/or delivered at least the minimum number of days required by the California Environmental Quality Act.

B.     Method of notice distribution. Notice of a public hearing required for a land use permit, entitlement, plan amendment, zoning amendment, or appeal shall be given as follows, as required by State law (Government Code Sections 65090 and 65091) and in compliance with subsection A (Contents of Notice), above:

1.     Notice shall be published at least once in a local newspaper of general circulation within the City at least 10 days before the hearing;

2.     Notice shall be mailed or delivered at least 10 days before the hearing to:

a.     The owners of the property being considered or the owner’s agent, and the applicant;

b.     Each local agency expected to provide water, schools, or other essential facilities or services to the project, whose ability to provide the facilities and services may be significantly affected;

c.     All owners of real property as shown on the County’s latest equalized assessment roll within 500 feet of the property which is the subject of the hearing; and

d.     Any person who has filed a written request for notice with the City Planner and has paid the fee set by the most current council’s Fee Resolution for the notice.

3.     If the number of property owners to whom notice would be mailed is more than 1,000, the City Planner may choose to provide the alternate notice allowed by State law (Government Code Section 65091(a)(3)).

4.     In addition to the types of notice required by subsection B above, the City Planner may provide any additional notice with content or using a distribution method as the City Planner determines is necessary or desirable.

 

17.180.030 Notice of Decision—Site Plan Review Committee.
A.    Site Plan Review Committee options. The Site Plan Review Committee may announce and record the decision at the conclusion of a scheduled hearing, refer the matter to the Planning Commission for determination, or defer action and continue the consideration of the matter to a date certain, and announce and record the decision at that date.

B.     Findings. The decision shall contain applicable findings, any conditions of approval and reporting/monitoring requirements deemed necessary to mitigate any impacts and protect the public health, safety, and welfare of the City.

C.     Notice of decision. Following the hearing, a notice of the decision and any conditions of approval shall be mailed to the applicant at the address shown on the application.

 

17.180.040 Notice of Decision—Planning Commission.
The Planning Commission may announce and record the decision at the conclusion of a scheduled hearing or defer action and take specified items under advisement and announce and record the decision at a later date. The decision shall contain applicable findings of the Planning Commission, any conditions of approval and reporting/monitoring requirements deemed necessary to mitigate any impacts and protect the public health, safety, and welfare of the City. Following the hearing, a notice of the decision and any conditions of approval shall be mailed to the applicant at the address shown on the application.

 

17.180.050 Effective Date of Decision.
A decision by the City Planner, Site Plan Review Committee, or Planning Commission is final, and shall become effective on the 11th day after the decision, unless appealed in compliance with Chapter 17.140 (Appeals).

 

17.180.060 Recommendation by Planning Commission.
At the conclusion of any public hearing on a proposed amendment to the General Plan, the Official Zoning Map, this Development Code, or a Specific Plan, the Planning Commission shall forward a recommendation, including all required findings, to the Council for final action. Following the hearing, a notice of the Planning Commission’s recommendation shall be mailed to the applicant at the address shown on the application.

 

17.180.070 Notice of Decision—Council.
For applications requiring council approval, the Council shall announce and record its decision at the conclusion of the public hearing. The decision shall contain the findings of the Council, any conditions of approval and reporting/monitoring requirements deemed necessary to mitigate any impacts and protect the public health, safety, and welfare of the City. Following the hearing, a notice of the decision shall be mailed to the applicant at the address shown on the application. A decision by the Council is final and shall become effective the next business day after the Council’s decision.

 

 

Chapter 17.190 REVOCATIONS AND MODIFICATIONS
17.190.010 Purpose of Chapter.
This Chapter provides procedures for securing revocation or modification of previously approved land use permits or entitlements.

 

17.190.020 Hearings and Notice.
A.    Hearing required. The appropriate review authority shall hold a public hearing in order to revoke or modify any land use permit or entitlement granted in compliance with the provisions of this Development Code.

B.     Mailing of notice. Ten days before the public hearing (except for Temporary Use Permits), notice shall be mailed to the applicant and/or owner of the property for which the permit was granted.

C.     Deemed delivered. Notice shall be deemed delivered two days after being mailed, certified mail postage paid, to the owner as shown on the equalized assessment roll of the County and/or to the project applicant, who is not the owner of the subject property.

 

17.190.030 Review Authority Action.
A.    Permit revocation/modification. A land use permit or entitlement may be revoked or modified by the review authority (e.g., Site Plan Review Committee, Planning Commission, or council) that originally approved the permit, if any one of the following findings can be made:

1.     Circumstances under which the permit or entitlement was granted have been changed by the applicant to a degree that one or more of the findings contained in the original permit can no longer be made in a positive manner and the public health, safety, and welfare require the revocation or modification;

2.     The permit or entitlement was issued, in whole or in part, on the basis of a misrepresentation or omission of a material statement in the application, or in the applicant’s testimony presented during the public hearing, for the permit or entitlement;

3.     The use or improvement authorized in compliance with the permit has not been exercised or commenced in a timely manner and a time extension is not warranted;

4.     One or more of the conditions of the permit have not been met or have been violated;

5.     The use or improvement authorized in compliance with the permit is in violation of any code, law, ordinance, regulation, or statute;

6.     The use or improvement authorized by the permit has become detrimental to the public health, safety, or welfare or the manner of their operation constitutes a nuisance; or

7.     The use and/or on-site structure(s) are nonconforming and:

a.     Have been discontinued for a period of 180 days or more; or

b.     Have been destroyed or damaged, and the use and/or structure(s) cannot be repaired, rebuilt, or replaced in compliance with Chapter 17.130 (Nonconforming Uses, Structures, and Parcels).

B.     Variance revocation/modification. A Variance may be revoked or modified by the review authority which originally approved the Variance, if any one of the following findings can be made, in addition to any one of the findings outlined in subsection A above:

1.     Circumstances have been changed by the applicant to a degree that one or more of the findings contained in the original approval can no longer be made in a positive manner, and the grantee has not substantially exercised the rights granted by the Variance; or

2.     One or more of the conditions of the Variance have not been met, or have been violated, and the grantee has not substantially exercised the rights granted by the Variance.

 

 

Chapter 17.200 ENFORCEMENT
17.200.010 Purpose of Chapter.
The purpose of this Chapter is to provide for compliance with the requirements of this Development Code, other titles of the Municipal Code, and any conditions of an approved land use permit or entitlement.

 

17.200.020 Authority to Issue Citations.
A.    City Planner. The City Planner shall be the person primarily responsible for enforcing the provisions of this Development Code and shall have the authority and immunity of a public officer and employee to issue citations whenever possessing reasonable cause to believe that the person to be cited has committed a violation of this Development Code, which constitutes an infraction or misdemeanor. The responsibilities of the City Planner may also be carried out by the Department staff under the supervision of the City Planner who shall also have the authority and immunity of a public officer and employee to issue citations whenever processing reasonable cause to believe that the person to be cited has committed a violation of this Development Code, which constitutes an infraction or misdemeanor.

B.     Consultation with Police Chief. It may be necessary for the City Planner to work with the Police Chief when enforcing the provisions of this Development Code, when the specific situation warrants uniformed police involvement.

 

17.200.030 Remedies are Cumulative.
All remedies contained in this Development Code for the handling of violations or enforcement of the provisions of this Development Code shall be cumulative and not exclusive of any other applicable provisions of City, County, State, or Federal law. If a person is found guilty and convicted of an infraction or misdemeanor for the violation of any provision of this Development Code, the conviction shall not prevent the City from pursuing other available remedy(s) to correct the violation.

 

17.200.040 Inspection.
A.    Access for initial inspection. Every applicant seeking an application, permit, or any other action in compliance with this Development Code shall allow City officials access to any premises or property which is the subject of the application.

B.     Access for ongoing inspections. If the permit or other action is approved, the owner or applicant shall allow appropriate City officials access to the premises to determine continued compliance with the approved permit and/or any conditions of approval.

C.     Failure to allow inspections. Failure to allow inspections for compliance shall automatically cause all permits and approvals to be suspended, pending a hearing before the City Planner to void the permits and approvals.

D.    Compliance. In addition, the City Planner may withhold the processing of and/or issuance of any and all discretionary land use permits, where a documented Code violation(s) exists, until the subject property is found to be in complete compliance with any and all applicable Code sections.

 

17.200.050 Initial Enforcement Action.
This Section describes the procedures for initiating enforcement action in cases where the City Planner has determined that real property within the City is being used, maintained, or allowed to exist in violation of the provisions of this Development Code. It is the objective of these provisions to encourage the voluntary cooperation of responsible parties in the prompt correction of violations, so that the other enforcement measures provided by this Section may be avoided.

A.    The authority to abate and impose sanctions.

1.     Enforcement of this Section may be accomplished by the City Planner in any manner authorized by law.

2.     The procedures identified in this Chapter shall not be exclusive and shall not, in any manner, limit or restrict the City from enforcing other ordinances or abating public nuisances in any other manner provided by law.

3.     Whenever the City Planner determines that any condition exists in violation of this Development Code, the City Planner may take appropriate enforcement action in compliance with this Chapter.

4.     Notwithstanding the public nuisance abatement procedures, criminal and/or civil remedies may be employed as determined to be necessary and provided by law.

B.     Notice to responsible parties. Whenever the City Planner has inspected the location of the alleged violation and it has been found or determined that conditions constituting a Code violation exist on any property located in the City, the City Planner may prepare a notice and order and cause the owner of the property and the person, if other than the landowner occupying or otherwise in charge or control of the property, to be notified in writing of the existence of the condition and/or require an appearance before the City Planner at a stated time and place to show why the condition should not be abated by the City at the person’s expense. The notice and order to abate the determined public nuisance or other Code violation shall contain the following information:

1.     The street address and Assessor’s Parcel Number for identification of the property on which the condition exists;

2.     A statement that the City Planner has determined that a public nuisance/ Code violation is being maintained on the property with a brief description of the conditions which render the property a public nuisance, or which constitute a Code violation;

3.     An order to secure all appropriate permits and to physically commence, within a certain time from the date of service of the notice and order, and to complete within that reasonable and established time and date, the abatement of the described conditions;

4.     A statement advising that the disposal of any material associated with any Code violation shall be conducted in a legal manner;

5.     A statement advising that if the required work is not commenced within the time specified, the City Planner may proceed to cause the work to be done, and may bill the persons named in the notice for the abatement costs and/or assess the costs against the property;

6.     A statement that the City may charge the property owner for all administrative costs associated with the abatement of the violation(s) in compliance with Section 17.200.080 (Recovery of Costs), and/or initiate legal action as described in Section 17.200.070 (Legal Remedies) below;

7.     A statement advising that any person having any interest or record title in the property may request an administrative hearing of the notice and order or any action of the enforcement within 10 days from the date of service of the notice and order;

8.     A statement advising that the notice and order may be recorded against the property in the Office of the County Recorder;

9.     A statement that the property owner may request and be provided a meeting with the City Planner to discuss possible methods and time limits for the correction of the violations;

10.   A statement that the City Planner’s determination is appealable to the City Council in compliance with this Chapter; and

11.   Informal notice may precede the formal notice described above. Often, the Code violation can be resolved as a result of this informal notice, which saves time, money, and resources for all persons involved.

C.     Manner of notice.

1.     If a notice and order is prepared, the notice and order, and any amended notice and order, shall be mailed by first class mail, postage prepaid, at the address of the violation as it appears on the latest equalized assessment roll of the County, or as known to the City Planner. The address of owners shown on the assessment roll shall be conclusively deemed to be the property address for the purpose of mailing the notice.

2.     The failure of the City Planner to make or attempt service on any person required in this Section to be served shall not invalidate any proceedings in compliance with this Chapter, as to any other person(s) duly served. Service by mail, in compliance with this Chapter, shall be effective on the date said mail is received or refused by the addressee as evidenced by the mail carrier’s certified return receipt. The failure of any person entitled to receive notice shall not affect the validity of any proceedings taken under this Section. Proof of service of the notice and order shall be documented at the time of service by a declaration under penalty of perjury executed by the person effecting service, declaring the time and manner in which service was made.

3.     At the time the notice and order is served or any time thereafter, the City Planner may file in the Office of the County Recorder a certificate legally describing the property and certifying that a Code violation exists on the property and that the owner has been so notified. The City Planner may then file a new certificate with the County Recorder, which indicates that the nuisance has been abated, whenever the following actions occur:

a.     Corrections ordered have been completed so that a code violation or public nuisance no longer exists on the subject property as described in the original certificate;

b.     The notice and order is rescinded upon appeal; or

c.     Whenever the City abates the nuisance and the abatement costs have been paid.

D.    Hearing.

1.     The City Planner may set a date, time, and place to hear any relevant evidence concerning the existence of the alleged code violation or public nuisance and the question of whether the expense of abating the code violation or public nuisance, if determined to exist, should be made a lien on the property.

2.     In the event any person given notice of hearing, as shown by the evidence of mailing, should fail to appear at the hearing, then the evidence available to the City Planner shall be sufficient evidence of the existence of facts in support of the conclusion.

3.     If, at the conclusion of the hearing, the City Planner is satisfied that the condition exists and concludes that it should be abated at the expense of the landowner, the City Planner shall advise the landowner in writing in the same manner as provided in subsection C, above.

4.     The notice shall inform the landowner of the right of appeal as provided in subsection F below.

E.     Request for reconsideration. Any person aggrieved by the action of the City Planner in issuing a notice and order in compliance with this Section may appeal in compliance with subsection F, below. If no appeal is filed within the time prescribed, the action of the City Planner shall be final.

F.     Appeals. Appeals shall be made in compliance with the following provisions:

1.     Any person entitled who is dissatisfied with a public nuisance or code violation determination of the City Planner shall have the right to appeal to the City Council within 10 days from the date of mailing of the decision of the City Planner. The written appeal shall be filed with the Department, together with a filing fee in compliance with the Council’s Fee Resolution.

2.     The notice of appeal shall specify the following:

a.     The Assessor’s Parcel Number and street address of the property;

b.     The determination being appealed;

c.     The owner’s or appealing party’s legal interest in the property;

d.     A statement of disputed and undisputed facts;

e.     A statement specifying that portion of the decision or hearing proceedings that are being appealed together with any evidentiary and supporting materials that would support the appeal; and

f.      A signed verification of the truth of all stated matters.

3.     Appeals shall be processed in the following manner:

a.     Upon the timely filing of a notice of appeal in the proper form, the City Planner shall schedule the appeal hearing to be held not less than 30 days after the appeal is received;

b.     The City Planner shall provide written notice of the appeal, including the time, place, and date of the hearing on the appeal, to the appellant and any other person to whom notice of the City Planner’s order was sent, in compliance with this Chapter. The notice shall be sent in the same manner as the City Planner’s notice and order;

c.     The Council may limit the issues on appeal to those identified in the appellant’s notice of appeal, may consider the record produced before the City Planner, and may allow additional evidence to be produced;

d.     At the close of the hearing on an appeal, the Council may reverse or modify the decision of the City Planner and/or remand the matter to the City Planner for further proceedings, in compliance with directions of the Council. If the Council does not take any action reversing, modifying, and/or remanding of the decision of the City Planner within 45 days after the filing of the appeal, the City Planner’s action on the matter shall be final and conclusive; and

e.     Notice of the Council’s determination shall be in substantially the same form as that sent by the City Planner and shall be sent to all persons to whom notice of the City Planner’s order was sent as well as to all persons requesting the notice, in writing, at the time the appeal is heard.

G.    General penalty and continuing violations. Any person who:

1.     Violates or fails to comply with any provision or mandatory requirement of this Section, may be found guilty of a misdemeanor unless charged as an infraction by the City Planner, City attorney, or District attorney.

2.     Is found guilty of a misdemeanor or infraction, may be found guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of this Development Code is committed, continued, or allowed by the person and shall be punished accordingly;

3.     Removes any notice or order posted as required in this Section, for the purpose of interfering with the enforcement of the provisions of this Section, may be found guilty of a misdemeanor unless charged as an infraction by the City Planner; and

4.     Obstructs, impedes, or interferes with any representative of a City department or with any person who owns or holds an estate or interest in a structure which has been ordered to be demolished, rehabilitated, repaired, or vacated, or with any person to whom any structure has been lawfully sold, in compliance with this Chapter, when any of the aforementioned individuals are lawfully engaged in proceedings involving the abatement of a nuisance, may be found guilty of a misdemeanor unless charged as an infraction by the City Planner.

H.    Use of other enforcement procedures. The enforcement procedures of Section 17.200.070 (Legal Remedies), below may be employed by the City Planner after or instead of the provisions of this Section where the City Planner determines that this Section would be ineffective in securing the correction of the violation within a reasonable time.

 

17.200.060 Violations.
A.    Unlawful violation. Any use or structure which is altered, enlarged, erected, established, maintained, moved, or operated, contrary to the provisions of this Development Code or any applicable condition of approval, is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance, and shall be subject to the remedies and penalties specified in the Municipal Code, including this Chapter.

B.     Infraction or misdemeanor.

1.     Any person, partnership, firm or corporation, whether as principal, agent, employee or otherwise, violating or failing to comply with any provision(s) of this Development Code or any condition imposed on any land use permit, entitlement, map, or license, shall be guilty of an infraction on each separate day the violation or failure to comply exists, except as otherwise specified herein.

2.     However, any person responsible for these violations who has previously been convicted two or more times during any one year period for any other violation(s) of this Development Code may be guilty of a misdemeanor.

3.     Any construction in violation of this Development Code or any condition(s) imposed on a land use permit shall be subject to the issuance of a “Stop Work Order.”

4.     Any violation of a Stop Work Order may constitute a misdemeanor.

5.     Any violation that may be prosecuted as a misdemeanor may instead be prosecuted as an infraction, at the discretion of the City Planner, City attorney, or District attorney.

 

17.200.070 Legal Remedies.
The City may choose to undertake any of the following legal actions to correct and/or abate nuisances or violations of this Development Code.

A.    Civil actions.

1.     At the request of the Council, upon recommendation of the City Planner, the City Attorney may apply to a court of competent jurisdiction for injunctive relief to terminate a violation of this Development Code.

2.     Where any person, firm, or corporation fails to abate a violation after being provided a Notice of Violation in compliance with Section 17.200.050(B). (Notice to responsible parties), above and the opportunity to correct or end the violation, the Council, upon recommendation of the City Planner, may request the City Attorney to apply to a court of competent jurisdiction for an order authorizing the City to undertake actions necessary to abate the violation and requiring the violator to pay for the cost of the actions.

B.     Civil remedies and penalties.

1.     Any person who willfully violates the provisions of this Development Code, or any permit issued in compliance with this Development Code, may be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed $5,000.00 for each day that the violation continues to exist.

2.     Any person violating any provisions of this Development Code, or permits issued in compliance with this Development Code, may be liable to the City for the costs incurred and the damages suffered by the City, its agents, and agencies as a direct result of the violations.

3.     In determining the amount of the civil penalty to impose, the Court should consider all relevant circumstances, including the extent of the harm caused by the conduct constituting a violation, the nature and persistence of the conduct, the length of time over which the conduct occurred, the assets, liabilities, and net worth of the defendant, whether corporate or individual, and any corrective action taken by defendant.

 

C.     Criminal actions and penalties.

1.     A person violating any provisions of this Development Code, or any permit issued in compliance with this Development Code, may be guilty of an infraction, unless such violation is specifically designated as constituting a misdemeanor.

2.     Any conviction of an infraction under the provisions of this Development Code shall be punishable for a first conviction of a fine of not more than $100, for a second conviction within a period of one year by a fine of not more than $200, and for a third or any subsequent conviction within a period of one year by a fine of not more than $500.

3.     Any conviction of a misdemeanor under provisions of this Development Code shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000, or by imprisonment in the County jail for a period of not exceeding six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.

D.    Abatement of Code violations/nuisances.

1.     If the violation(s) is not completely abated by the owner as directed within the abatement period, the City may immediately cause the violation(s) to be abated by City personnel or private contract and the personnel or persons under contract are expressly authorized to enter upon the subject premises for these purposes.

2.     The owner of the premises shall be liable to the City for all costs of abatement, including all administrative and inspection costs.

E.     Proceedings for abatement of imminently dangerous public nuisances. Whenever the City Planner determines that a public nuisance (or any other Code violation) is so imminently dangerous to life or adjacent property that the condition shall be immediately corrected, or isolated, the following procedures shall be instituted:

1.     Before abatement of an imminently dangerous public nuisance, written notice shall be provided to the property owner by first class mail and by posting at the subject property. At least 72 hours notice shall be provided unless a specific finding is made of an emergency requiring immediate abatement or other action.

2.     The City Planner shall attempt to make contact through a personal interview, or by telephone with the landowner or the person, if any, occupying or otherwise in real or apparent charge and control of the subject property. In the event contact is made, the City Planner shall notify the person(s) of the danger involved and require that the condition be immediately removed, repaired, or isolated to preclude harm to any person or property;

3.     In the event the City Planner is unable to make contact, or if the appropriate persons, after notification by the City Planner, do not take action as specified by the City Planner, within the time frame requested, the City Planner may, with the approval of the City Manager, take all steps deemed necessary to remove or isolate the dangerous condition(s), with the use of City forces or a contractor retained in compliance with the provisions of the Municipal Code; and City Planner.

4.     The City Planner shall keep an itemized account of the costs incurred by the City in removing or isolating the condition(s). These costs may be recovered in the same manner that other abatement costs are recovered, in compliance with this Chapter.

 

17.200.080 Recovery of Costs.
This Section establishes procedures for the recovery of administrative costs (e.g., staff, legal, etc.), including staff time expended in the enforcement of the provisions of this Development Code. The intent of this Section is to recover City administrative and legal costs reasonably related to the required enforcement action(s).

A.    Notice. Upon investigation and a determination that a violation of any provision(s) of this Development Code is found to exist, the City Planner shall notify the record owner or any person having possession or control of the property by certified mail, of the existence of the violation, the City Planner’s intent to charge the property owner for all administrative costs associated with enforcement, and of the owner’s right to a hearing on any objections they may have. The notice shall be in a form approved by the City Attorney.

B.     Cost assessment. The City Planner shall maintain records of all administrative costs, incurred by responsible City departments, associated with the processing of violations, and enforcement of this Development Code, and shall recover the costs from the property owner in compliance with this Section. Staff time shall be calculated at an hourly rate established and revised from time to time by the Council.

C.     Summary of costs and notice.

1.     At the conclusion of the case, the City Planner shall send a summary of costs associated with enforcement to the owner and/or person having possession or control of the property by certified mail, in compliance with subsection A above.

2.     The summary shall include a notice in a form approved by the City Attorney, advising the responsible party of their right to request a hearing on the charges for City cost recovery within 10 days of the date of the notice, and that if no request for hearing is filed, the responsible party will be liable for the charges.

3.     In the event that a request for hearing is not timely filed or, after a hearing during which the City Planner affirms the validity of the costs, the property owner and/or person in control shall be liable to the City in the amount stated in the summary or any lesser amount determined by the City Planner.

4.     These costs shall be recoverable in a civil action in the name of the City, in any court of competent jurisdiction within the County.

D.    Request for hearing on costs. Any property owner, and/or other person having possession or control of the subject property, who receives a summary of costs shall have the right to a hearing before the City Planner on their objections to the proposed costs.

1.     A request for hearing shall be filed with the City Planner within 10 days of the service by certified mail, of the City Planner’s summary of costs, on a form provided by the City Planner.

2.     Within 30 days of the filing of the request, and on 10 days written notice to the owner, the City Planner shall hold a hearing on the owner’s objections and determine their validity.

3.     In determining the validity of the costs, the City Planner shall consider whether total costs are reasonable in the circumstances of the case. Factors to be considered include: whether the present owner created the violation(s); whether there is a present ability to correct the violation(s); whether the owner moved promptly to correct the violation(s); the degree of cooperation provided by the owner; and whether reasonable minds can differ as to whether a violation(s) exists.

4.     The City Planner’s decision shall be appealable to the Council in compliance with Chapter 17.140 (Appeals).

E.     Tax lien.

1.     The City Planner shall consider the cost summary at the time set for hearing, together with any objections or protests by any interested parties. Any owner of land or interested person may present a written or oral protest or objections to the cost summary.

2.     The City Planner may modify the cost summary if it is deemed necessary. The City Planner shall mail a written copy of the modified cost summary to the owner of the property and the person, if other than the landowner occupying or otherwise in charge or control of the property.

3.     In compliance with State law (Government Code Sections 25845 and 38773.5), the total costs of abatement, including all administrative costs, shall constitute a special assessment against the subject parcel. After the assessment is made and confirmed, it shall become a lien on the subject parcel in the following manner.

a.     After confirmation of the cost summary, a certified copy shall be filed with the County Auditor on or before August 10th of each year and the Auditor shall be requested to enter the amounts of the respective assessments on the County tax roll.

b.     The special assessment (in the amount of the total costs in the cost summary) shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary property taxes are collected and shall be subject to the same penalties and the same procedures and sale in case of delinquency as provided for ordinary property taxes.

c.     The City Planner may order refunded all or part of an assessment paid in compliance with this Section, if the City Planner finds that all or part of the assessment has been erroneously levied. An assessment or any part thereof shall not be refunded unless a claim is filed with the City Clerk on or before December 1st after the assessment becomes due and payable. The claim shall be verified by the person who paid the assessment, or the responsible administrator, executor, or guardian.

F.     Additional permit processing fees.

1.     Any person who establishes a land use, or alters, constructs, enlarges, erects, maintains, or moves any structure without first obtaining a permit required by this Development Code, shall pay the additional permit processing fees established by the Council’s Fee Resolution for the correction of the violation(s), before being granted a permit for any use or structure on the site.

2.     All administrative fees that have accrued against a particular parcel shall be paid before processing of any application (including a Building Permit) for that property.

3.     Any property owner notified of a Code violation shall correct the violation before issuance, processing, approval, or completion, as appropriate, of any discretionary permit application.

Article VII. Development Code Definitions
Chapter 17.220 DEFINITIONS, GLOSSARY
17.220.010 Purpose of Chapter.
This Chapter provides definitions of terms and phrases used in this Development Code that are technical or specialized, or that may not reflect common usage. If any of the definitions in this Chapter conflict with definitions in other provisions of the Municipal Code, these definitions shall control for the purposes of this Development Code. If a word is not defined in this Chapter, or other provisions of the Municipal Code, the most common dictionary definition is presumed to be correct.

 

17.220.020 Definitions of Specialized Terms and Phrases.
As used in this Development Code, the following terms and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this Section, unless the context in which they are used clearly requires otherwise.

The following definitions are in alphabetical order.

‘A’ weighted sound level. The total sound level in decibels of all sound as measured with a sound level meter with a reference pressure of 20 micropascals using the ‘A’ weighted network (scale) at slow response. The unit of measurement shall be defined as dB(A).

Abandoned. In addition to those definitions provided by State law, Municipal Code and case law, the term abandoned means and refers to any item which has ceased to be used for its designed and intended purpose. The factors used in determining whether or not an item has been abandoned, include, but are not limited to, the following:

1.     Present operability and functional utility of the item;

2.     The date of last effective use of the item;

3.     The condition of disrepair or damage;

4.     The last time an effort was made to repair or rehabilitate the item;

5.     The status of registration or licensing of the item;

6.     The age and degree of obsolescence;

7.     The nature of the area and location of the item.

Abandoned Sign. A sign that no longer advertises a business, lessor, owner, product, service or activity on the premises where the sign is displayed.

Accessory Dwelling Unit (ADU). An ADU is a secondary dwelling unit with complete independent living facilities for one or more persons and generally takes three forms:

1.     Detached: The unit is separated from the primary structure;

 

2.     Attached: The unit is attached to the primary structure; and

3.     Repurposed existing space: The space (e.g. garage) is within the primary residence and is converted into an independent living unit.

Accessory Retail Uses. The retail sales of various products (including food) in a store or similar facility that is located within a health care, hotel, office, or industrial complex for the purpose of serving employees or customers, and is not visible from public streets. These uses include pharmacies, gift shops, and food service establishments within hospitals; convenience stores and food service establishments within hotel, office and industrial complexes.

Accessory Structure. A structure that is physically detached from, secondary and incidental to, and commonly associated with the primary structure. For the purposes of this Development Code, accessory structures and uses include: detached garages, greenhouses, artist’s studios, and workshops; hot tubs, jacuzzis, spas, and swimming pools, together with any enclosures; and any other open air enclosures, including gazebos and detached patio covers.

Accessory use. A use that is conducted on the same parcel as the principal use or structure to which it is related, and which is clearly incidental to and customarily found in connection with the principal use.

Agent. A person authorized in writing by the property owner to represent and act for a property owner in contacts with City employees, committees, Commissions, and the City Council, regarding matters regulated by this Development Code.

Aggregate processing and batch plants. Manufacturing facilities for the sorting, grading, and storage of aggregates as construction materials; includes concrete batch plants. A retail ready-mix concrete operation as an incidental use in conjunction with a building materials outlet is defined under “Building Material Stores.”

Agricultural Accessory Structures. An uninhabited structure for the storage of farm animals, implements, supplies or products, that contains no residential use and is not open to the public. Includes: barns; grain elevators; silos, and other similar structures, but not commercial greenhouses (which are under “Plant Nurseries and Garden Supply Stores”) or structures for agricultural processing activities (which are under “Agricultural Processing). Also may include: coops, corrals, pens, stables, etc., and wind machines for water pumping or other conversion of wind energy to mechanical or thermal power.

Agricultural Processing. The processing of crops after harvest, to prepare them for on-site marketing or processing and packaging elsewhere. Includes the following:

alfalfa cubing

corn shelling

cotton ginning

custom grist mills

custom milling of flour, feed and grain

dairies (but not feedlots, see instead “Animal Sales Yards, Feedlots, Stockyards”)

drying of corn, rice, hay, fruits and vegetables

grain cleaning and custom grinding

hay baling and cubing

pre-cooling and packaging of fresh or farm-dried fruits and vegetables

sorting, grading and packing of fruits and vegetables

tree nut hulling and shelling

Any of the above activities performed in the field with mobile equipment not involving permanent structures are included under the definition of “Crop Production.”

Alcoholic Beverage Sales. The retail sale of beer, wine, and/or other alcoholic beverages for on- or off-premise consumption.

Alley. A public or private roadway, generally not more than 30 feet wide that provides vehicle access to the rear or side of parcels having other public street frontage, that is not intended for general traffic circulation.

 

Allowed use. A use of land identified by Article II (Zoning Districts and Allowable Land uses) as a permitted or conditional use that may be established with land use permit and, where applicable, Design Review and/or Building Permit approval, subject to compliance with all applicable provisions of this Development Code.

Alteration. Any construction or physical change in the internal arrangement of rooms or the supporting members of a structure, or a change in the external appearance of any structure, not including painting.

Ambient noise level. An all encompassing noise level associated with a given environment. A composite of sounds from all sources, excluding the noise in question, at the location and approximate time at which a comparison with the noise in question is to be made.

Animal Raising and Keeping. The keeping/raising of farm animals, including cattle, goats, horses, sheep, swine (including pot bellied pigs), fowl, poultry, and other animals determined by the City Planner to not be common household pets. Does not include: birds, cats, dogs, and other household pets or exotic animals, which are separately defined.

Animal unit. An animal unit is equal to one livestock animal or 10 fowl.

Antenna. A device used in communications which transmits or receives radio signals.

Antenna, dish. A dish-like antenna used to link communications sites together by wireless transmission of voice or data. Also called microwave antenna or microwave dish antenna.

Antenna, panel. An antenna or array of antennae that are flat and rectangular and designed to concentrate a radio signal in a particular area. Also referred to as directional antennae.

Antenna, whip. An antenna that transmits signals in 360 degrees. They are typically cylindrical in shape and are less than six inches in diameter and measure up to 18 feet in height. Also called omnidirectional, pipe or stick antennae.

Approval. Includes both approval and approval with conditions.

Area of a Sign. See “Sign Area.”

Area of regional significance. An area designated by the State Mining and Geology Board which is known to contain a deposit of minerals, the extraction of which is judged to be of prime importance in meeting future needs for minerals in a particular region of the State within which the minerals are located and which, if prematurely developed for alternate incompatible land uses, could result in the premature loss of minerals that are of more than local significance.

Area of Special Flood Hazard. See Special Flood Hazard Area.

Area of statewide significance. An area designated by the State Mining and Geology Board which is known to contain a deposit of minerals, the extraction of which is judged to be of prime importance in meeting future needs for minerals in the State and which, if prematurely developed for alternate incompatible land uses, could result in the permanent loss of minerals that are of more than local or regional significance.

Attractive nuisance. Any condition, instrument or machine which is unsafe and unprotected and therefor dangerous to young children by reason of their inability to appreciate the inherent peril, and which may be reasonably expected to attract children to a property and therefor risk injury by playing with, in or on it.

Auto, Mobile Home, and Vehicle Sales. Retail establishments selling and/or renting the following (vehicles may be new or used):

automobiles

boats

campers

golf carts

jet skis

mobile homes

motorcycles

motor homes

motorized farm equipment

recreational and utility trailers

repair shops

snowmobiles

tires

trucks

vans

Does not include: auto parts/accessory sales separate from a vehicle dealership (see “Auto Parts Sales”); bicycle and moped sales (see “Retail Stores, General Merchandise”); tire recapping establishments (see “Repair and Maintenance - Vehicle”); businesses dealing exclusively in used parts, (see “Recycling, Scrap and Dismantling Yards”); or “Service Stations,” which are separately defined.

Auto Parts Sales. Stores that sell new automobile parts, tires, and accessories. May also include minor parts installation (see “Repair and Maintenance - Vehicle”). Does not include tire recapping establishments, which are found under “Repair and Maintenance - Vehicle,” or businesses dealing exclusively in used parts, which are included under “Recycling Facilities - Scrap and Dismantling Yards.”

Automated Teller Machine (ATM). Machines used by bank and financial service patrons for conducting transactions including deposits, withdrawals and fund transfers, without contact with financial institution personnel. The machines may be located at or within banks, or in other locations, in compliance with this Development Code.

Automobile repair. See “Repair and Maintenance, Vehicle.”

Automobile dismantling yard. See “Recycling, Scrap, and Dismantling Yards.”

BACT. Best Available Control Technology. Technology required to reduce emissions of air pollutants.

Banks and Financial Services. Financial institutions including:

banks and trust companies

credit agencies

holding (but not primarily operating) companies

lending and thrift institutions

other investment companies

securities/commodity contract brokers and dealers

security and commodity exchanges

vehicle finance (equity) leasing agencies

This definition does not include escrow companies and title insurance companies which come under the definition “Offices, Business and Professional.” See also, “Automatic Teller Machine,” above.

Bars and Drinking Places. Businesses where alcoholic beverages are sold for on-site consumption, which are not part of a larger restaurant. Includes bars, taverns, pubs, and similar establishments where any food service is subordinate to the sale of alcoholic beverages. May include entertainment (e.g., live music and/or dancing). May also include beer brewing as part of a microbrewery, and other beverage tasting facilities.

Base flood. A flood having a one percent probability of being equaled or exceeded in any given year (also called the 100-year flood).

Bed and Breakfast Inns. Residential structures with one family or representative in permanent residence with up to 10 bedrooms rented for overnight lodging, where meals may be provided subject to Section 17.58.070 (Bed and Breakfast Inns), and applicable Health Department regulations. A Bed and Breakfast Inn with more than 10 guest rooms is considered a hotel or motel, and is included under the definition of “Hotels and Motels.” Does not include room rental in a “boarding house” situation; see “Rooming and Boarding Houses.”

Beverage Production. Manufacturing facilities including bottling plants, breweries, coffee roasting, soft drink production, and wineries. Does not include milk processing; see “Food Products.” May include tasting and accessory retail sales of beverages produced on site. A tasting facility separate from the manufacturing facility is included under the definition of “Bars and Drinking Places” if alcoholic beverages are tasted, and under “Restaurant” if beverages are non-alcoholic.

Borrow pits. Excavations created by the surface mining of rock, unconsolidated geologic deposits, or soil to provide material (borrow) for fill elsewhere.

Breakaway wall. Any type of wall, whether solid or lattice, and whether constructed of concrete, masonry, wood, metal, plastic or other building material that is not part of the structural support of the building and which is designed to break away under abnormally high tides or wave action without causing damage to the structural integrity of the building on which they are used or buildings to which they might be carried by flood waters. A breakaway wall shall have a design load resistance of not less than 10 and not more than 20 pounds per square foot. Use of breakaway walls shall be certified by a registered engineer or architect and shall meet the following conditions:

1.     Breakaway wall collapse shall result from a water load less than that which would occur during the base flood; and

2.     The elevated portion of the building shall not incur any structural damage due to the effects of wind and water loads acting simultaneously in the event of the base flood.

Broadcasting Studios. Commercial and public communications uses including radio and television broadcasting and receiving stations and studios, with facilities entirely within buildings. Transmission and receiving apparatus, including antennae and towers, are included under the definition of “Telecommunications Facilities.”

Building. See “Structure.”

Building Material Stores. Retail establishments selling lumber and other large building materials, where most display and sales occur indoors. Includes paint, wallpaper, glass, fixtures, nursery stock, lawn and garden supplies. Includes all these stores selling to the general public, even if contractor sales account for a major proportion of total sales. Includes incidental retail ready-mix concrete operations, except where excluded by a specific zoning district. Establishments primarily selling electrical, plumbing, heating, and air conditioning equipment and supplies are classified in “Wholesaling and Distribution.” Hardware stores are listed in the definition of “Retail Stores, General Merchandise,” even if they sell some building materials.

Building Official. The Senior Building Inspector or his or her designee.

Building/Structure Frontage. The building elevation which fronts on a public street, public parking lot, private parking lot available to the general public, or pedestrian walk where customer access to a structure is available.

Bungalow courts. Small houses carefully arranged around a planned open space.

Business frontage. That portion of a building frontage occupied by a single business tenant having a public entrance within the building frontage.

Business Support Services. Establishments primarily within buildings, providing other businesses with services including maintenance, repair and service, testing, rental, etc., also includes:

blueprinting

business equipment repair services (except vehicle repair, see “Repair and Maintenance - Vehicle”)

commercial art and design (production)

computer-related services (rental, repair)

copying, quick printing, and blueprinting services

equipment rental businesses within buildings (rental yards are “Storage Yards and Sales Lots”)

film processing laboratories

heavy equipment repair services where repair occurs on the client site

janitorial services

mail advertising services (reproduction and shipping)

other “heavy service” business services

outdoor advertising services

photocopying

photofinishing

protective services (other than office related)

soils and materials testing laboratories

window cleaning

Cabin Plot means a section of ground not less than 30 feet by 40 feet in area, upon which only one camp cottage or cabin is located.

Cabinet shop. See “Furniture and Fixtures.”

California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA). State law (California Public Resources Code Sections 21000 et seq.) requiring public agencies to document and consider the environmental effects of a proposed action, prior to allowing the action to occur.

California Public Utilities Commission (CPUC). The governmental agency which regulates the terms and conditions of public utilities in the State.

Campground. Commercial facilities where sites are provided for overnight outdoor camping with tents. See also “Recreational Vehicle Parks.”

Cardlock Fueling Facility. An automated vehicle fuel sales facility without an attendant.

Caretaker and Employee Housing. A temporary or permanent residence that is accessory to a nonresidential primary use of the site, where needed for security, or 24-hour care or supervision. Does not include living quarters within a single-family dwelling for domestic staff, which are included under the definition of “Single-Family Dwelling.”

Car wash. Permanent, self-service and attended car washing establishments, including fully mechanized and automatic (drive-through) facilities. Temporary car washes are fund-raising activities, typically conducted at a service station or other automotive-related business, where volunteers wash vehicles by hand, and the duration of the event is limited to one day.

Cellular. An analog or digital wireless communication technology that is based on a system of interconnected neighboring cell sites, each of which contains antennae.

Cemeteries and Columbariums. Internment establishments engaged in subdividing property into cemetery lots and offering burial plots or air space for sale. Includes animal cemeteries; cemetery, mausoleum, crematorium and columbarium operations, and full-service funeral parlors accessory to a cemetery or columbarium.

Certificate of Public Convenience and Necessity. A certificate issued by the California Public Utilities Commission (CPUC).

Channel letters. Three-dimensional individually cut letters or figures, illuminated or unilluminated, affixed to a structure.

Chemical Products. Manufacturing facilities that produce or use basic chemicals, and other establishments creating products predominantly by chemical processes. Facilities included in this definition manufacture three general classes of products: (1) basic chemicals, such as acids, alkalies, salts, and organic chemicals; (2) chemical products to be used in further manufacture, such as synthetic fibers, plastic materials, dry colors, and pigments; and (3) finished chemical products to be used for ultimate consumption, such as drugs, cosmetics, and soaps; or to be used as materials or supplies in other industries such as paints, fertilizers, and explosives. Also includes sales and transportation establishments handling the chemicals described above in other than one of the uses included in the Retail Trade group in the land use and permit tables.

Child Day Care Facilities. Facilities that provide nonmedical care and supervision of minor children for periods of less than 24 hours. These facilities include the following, all of which are required to be licensed by the California State Department of Social Services:

1.     Child day care centers (13 or more children). Allowed in the zoning districts as determined by Article II (Zoning Districts and Allowable Land Uses) and the standard in Section 17.58.080 (Child Day Care Facilities).

2.     Large family day care homes (seven to twelve children). Allowed within any single-family residence located in a residential zoning district, in compliance with the standards in Section 17.60.060(A) (Standards for large family day care homes). A large family day care home may provide care for two additional children up to 14 children in compliance with Section 1597.46 of the Health and Safety Code; and

3.     Small family day care homes (six or fewer children). Allowed within any single-family residence located in a residential zoning district. A small day care home may provide care for two additional children up to eight children in compliance with Section 1597.44 of the Health and Safety Code.

Churches/Places of Worship. Religious facilities operated by organizations for worship, or the promotion of religious activities, including churches, synagogues, mosques, etc., and religious schools; and accessory uses on the same site, such as living quarters for ministers and staff, and child day care facilities where authorized by the same type of land use permit required for the church itself. Other establishments maintained by religious organizations, such as full-time educational institutions, hospitals and other potentially related operations (such as a recreational camp) are classified according to their respective activities.

Clothing Products. Manufacturing establishments producing clothing, and fabricating products by cutting and sewing purchased textile fabrics, and related materials such as leather, rubberized fabrics, plastics and furs. Custom tailors and dressmakers not operating as a factory and not located on the site of a clothing store (“General Merchandise Stores”) are instead included under “Personal Services.” See also, “Textile and Leather Products.”

Co-location. The locating of wireless communications equipment from more than one provider on a single ground-mounted, roof-mounted or structure-mounted facility.

Code Enforcement Director. A City officer or employee, as may be designated by the City Manager, to enforce property maintenance, zoning and other City violations.

Commercial marijuana activity. Any business activity, whether fixed, mobile, permanent or temporary, that involves the cultivation, possession, manufacture, processing, storing, laboratory testing, labeling, transporting, distribution, delivery, or sale of marijuana, expressly including, but not limited to, all commercial marijuana activities requiring a license issued pursuant to the Medicinal and Adult-Use Cannabis Regulation and Safety Act, Business and Professions Code 26000 et seq., as it may be amended.

Commercial Parking and Vehicle Storage. Service establishments in the business of storing operative cars, buses, recreational vehicles, and other motor vehicles for clients. Includes both day use and long-term public and commercial garages, parking lots and structures, except when accessory to a principal use. Includes sites where vehicles are stored for rental or leasing. All principal uses are considered to include any customer or public use off-street parking required by this Development Code. Does not include dismantling yards; see “Recycling, Scrap and Dismantling Yards.”

Commercial properties. Any structure, premises or portion thereof used for wholesale or retail purposes on which the property user or employees are engaged in work for which it is intended that compensation be received for goods or services.

Commission. See “Planning Commission.”

Common Interest Development. A common interest development includes a community apartment project, a condominium project, a planned development, or a stock cooperative.

Community Centers. Multi-purpose meeting and recreational facilities typically consisting of one or more meeting or multi-purpose rooms, kitchen and/or outdoor barbecue facilities, that are available for use by various groups for such activities as meetings, parties, receptions, dances, etc.

Community event. An event determined by the City Council to be of community importance.

Community information/directory sign. A sign which provides information about the community and civic groups, typically located near the municipal boundary.

Community Noise Equivalent Level (CNEL) measurements are a weighted average of sound levels gathered throughout a 24-hour period. This is essentially a measure of ambient noise.

Compatible land uses, mining. Land uses inherently compatible with mining and/or that require a minimum public or private investment in structures, land improvements, and which may allow mining because of the relative economic value of the land and its improvements. Examples of the uses may include very low density residential, geographically extensive but low impact industrial, recreational, agricultural, silvicultural, grazing, and open space.

Concrete, Gypsum, and Plaster Products. Manufacturing establishments producing bulk concrete, concrete building block, brick and all types of precast and prefab concrete products. Also includes ready-mix concrete batch plants, lime manufacturing, and the manufacture of gypsum products, such as plasterboard. A retail ready-mix concrete operation as an incidental use in conjunction with a building materials outlet is defined under “Building Material Stores.”

Condominium. A structure containing two or more dwelling units, where the interiors of each unit are individually owned, and the balance of the property including both land and structures is owned in common by the owners of the individual units. The balance of the property is called the common area. The term “condominium” is also defined by California Civil Code Section 1351.

Conservation Easement. An easement whose purpose is to retain land predominantly in its natural, scenic, historical, agricultural, forested, or open space condition.

Construction Contractors Yard. Storage yards operated by, or on behalf of a contractor for storage of large equipment, vehicles, or other materials commonly used in the individual contractor’s type of business; storage of scrap materials used for repair and maintenance of contractor’s own equipment; and buildings or structures for uses such as offices and repair facilities.

Construction and Heavy Equipment Sales. Retail establishments selling or renting heavy construction equipment, including cranes, earth moving equipment, heavy trucks, etc.

Convenience Store. Retail stores typically less than 15,000 square feet in gross floor area that carry a range of merchandise oriented to convenience and travelers’ shopping needs. These stores may be part of a service station or an independent facility.

Corral. A fenced area typically for confining horses or other hoofed animals.

Cost effective. Capable of achieving results which would justify the required costs.

Covenant of Easement. An easement granted in favor of the City restricting or limiting the use of land for air or light access, emergency access, aviation, landscaping, parking access, open space, or similar purposes.

Crop Production. Commercial agricultural field and orchard uses including production of:

field crops

flowers and seeds

fruits

grains

melons

ornamental crops

tree nuts

trees and sod

vegetables

Also includes associated crop preparation services and harvesting activities, such as mechanical soil preparation, irrigation system construction, spraying, crop processing and sales in the field not involving a permanent structure.

Decibel (dB). A unit for measuring the amplitude of sounds, equal to 20 times the logarithm to the base 10 of the ratio of the pressure of the sound measured to the reference pressure, of 20 micropascals.

Density. The number of housing units per net acre, unless otherwise stated, for residential uses.

Department. The City of Jackson Planning Department, referred to in this Development Code as “Department.”

Destination Resort. Destination Resort is any hotel which includes on the site of the hotel three or more of the following outdoor recreation facilities that are available to hotel occupants with or without additional charge: Wedding/conference facilities, spas and/or salons, retail shops, restaurants, bike paths, walking trails, running trails or horse trails, horseback riding facilities, one or more golf courses, tennis courts, skating facilities and one or more swimming pools.

Detached. Any structure that does not have a wall or roof in common with another structure.

Detached living area. A detached living area is an accessory structure within a residential zoning district, is not a required element of the main dwelling and is designed for human occupancy. It is intended to provide living quarter(s) within a detached residential accessory structure, located on the same premises with the main dwelling, for use by members of the family occupying the main dwelling and their non-paying guests.

Development. Any construction activity or alteration of the landscape, its terrain contour or vegetation, including the erection or alteration of structures. New development is any construction, or alteration of an existing structure or land use, or establishment of a land use, after the effective date of this Development Code.

Development Agreement. A contract between the City and an applicant for a development project, in compliance with Chapter 17.150 (Development Agreements) of this Development Code and Government Code Sections 65864 et seq. A development agreement is intended to provide assurance to the applicant that an approved project may proceed subject to the policies, rules, regulations, and conditions of approval applicable to the project at the time of approval, regardless of any changes to City policies, rules, and regulations after project approval. In return, the City may be assured that the approved project will contain elements and components that are in the best interests of the City and will promote the public interest and welfare of the City.

Development Code. The City of Jackson Development Code, Title 17 of the Jackson Municipal Code, referred to herein as “this Development Code.”

Dismantled. From which essential equipment, parts or contents have been removed or stripped and the outward appearance verifies the removal.

District. See “Zoning District.”

Docks and Piers, Commercial. Commercial waterfront facilities providing fuel for boats and other watercraft, and mooring facilities.

Drive-in and Drive-thru Sales. Facilities where food or other products may be purchased by motorists without leaving their vehicles. These facilities include fast-food restaurants, drive-through photo, coffee, and dairy product stores, etc.

Drive-in and Drive-thru Services. Facilities where services may be obtained by motorists without leaving their vehicles. These facilities include drive-up bank teller windows, dry cleaners, etc. Does not include: walk-up automatic teller machines (ATMs) or automobile service stations, which are separately defined; or car washes (see “Repair and Maintenance - Vehicle”).

Duplex. A detached residential structure under single ownership containing two dwellings.

Dwelling. One or more habitable rooms, that are designed, used, and/or intended to be used as an independent living space with cooking, sleeping, and sanitary facilities provided within the dwelling unit for the exclusive use of one or more people maintaining a household. A dwelling shall have no more than one kitchen, room, or other area with cooking facilities. All habitable areas for the dwelling unit shall have interior access to and from each other from within the building except for detached living areas and habitable areas above or below attached garages.

Dwelling, Multi-Family. A building or a portion of a building used and/or designed as residences for three or more families living independently of each other. Includes: triplexes, fourplexes (buildings under one ownership with three or four dwelling units, respectively, in the same structure) and apartments (five or more units under one ownership in a single building); townhouse development (three or more attached single-family dwellings where no unit is located over another unit); senior citizen multifamily housing; apartments above commercial space in commercial zoning districts; and common ownership, attached unit projects such as condominiums.

Dwelling, Single Family. A building designed for and/or occupied by one family. Also includes factory-built, modular housing units, constructed in compliance with the Uniform Building Code (UBC), and mobile homes/manufactured housing on permanent foundations. May include the rental of rooms within a dwelling also occupied by the property owner or a primary tenant.

Dwelling, Two Family. See “Duplex.”

Easement, Covenant of. See “Covenant of Easement.”

Easement, Public Service. See “Public Service Easement.”

Eave. The overhanging lower edge of a roof.

Edge of roof. On a pitched roof, the lowest portion of the fascia board covering the roof rafters, or if no fascia board exists, the lowest point of the roof rafters. On a flat roof, the top of the parapet wall.

Electric Utility Facilities. Facilities for production or generation of electrical energy, electrical substations in an electrical transmission system which receives electricity at 100,000 volts or greater, and electrical transmission lines of 100,000 volts or greater, consistent with Government Code Sections 53091 and 53096 and Public Resources Code Section 12808.5.

Electrical and Electronic Equipment, Instruments. Establishments engaged in manufacturing machinery, apparatus, and supplies for the generation, storage, transmission, transformation and use of electrical energy, including:

appliances such as stoves/ovens, refrigerators, freezers, laundry equipment, fans, vacuum cleaners, sewing machines

aviation instruments

electrical transmission and distribution equipment

electronic components and accessories, and semiconductors, integrated circuits, related devices

electronic instruments, components and equipment such as calculators and computers

electrical welding apparatus

lighting and wiring equipment such as lamps and fixtures, wiring devices, vehicle lighting

industrial apparatus

industrial controls

instruments for measurement, testing, analysis and control, associated sensors and accessories

miscellaneous electrical machinery, equipment and supplies such as batteries, X-ray apparatus and tubes, electromedical and electrotherapeutic apparatus, electrical equipment for internal combustion engines

motors and generators

optical instruments and lenses

photographic equipment and supplies

pre-recorded magnetic tape

radio and television receiving equipment such as television and radio sets, phonograph records and surgical, medical and dental instruments, equipment, and supplies

surveying and drafting instruments

telephone and telegraph apparatus

transformers, switch gear and switchboards

watches and clocks

Does not include testing laboratories (soils, materials testing, etc.) (see “Business Support Services”), or research and development facilities separate from manufacturing (see “Research and Development”).

Electrical transmission lines. Overhead utility lines for the transmission of electricity at 100,000 volts or more, between generation and/or switching facilities, and local distribution systems.

Electromagnetic field. The local electric and magnetic fields caused by voltage and the flow of electricity that envelop the space surrounding an electrical conductor.

Emergency Shelter. A facility for the temporary shelter and feeding of indigents or disaster victims, operated by a public or non-profit agency.

Emergency work. The use of any equipment, machinery, vehicle or other activity in a short term effort to protect or restore safe conditions in the City, or work by private or public utilities when restoring utility service.

Enhanced specialized mobile radio. A digital wireless communication technology that specializes in providing dispatching services.

Environmental Impact Report (EIR). An informational document used to assess the physical characteristics of an area and to determine what effects will result if the area is altered by a proposed action, prepared in compliance with the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA).

Equestrian Facilities. Commercial horse, donkey, and mule facilities including:

horse ranches

boarding stables

riding schools and academies

horse exhibition facilities

pack stations

This land use includes barns, stables, corrals, and paddocks accessory and incidental to the above uses. Noncommercial facilities of this type are included in the definition of “Agricultural Accessory Structures.”

Establishment of an adult entertainment establishment. Includes any of the following:

1.     The opening or commencement of an adult entertainment establishment as a new business;

2.     The conversion of an existing establishment, whether or not an adult entertainment establishment, to any of the adult entertainment establishments defined in this subsection;

3.     The addition of any of the adult entertainment establishments defined in this subsection to any other existing adult entertainment establishment; or

4.     The relocation of any adult entertainment establishment.

Exploration or prospecting. The search for minerals by geochemical, geological, geophysical or other techniques, including, but not limited to, assaying, drilling, sampling or any surface or underground work needed to determine the extent, quantity or type of minerals present.

Exotic animal. Non-domesticated animals that require a permit from the California Department of Fish and Game or the United States Department of Agriculture for the raising and keeping of such animal.

Extremely Low Income. Households with income less than 30 percent of area median income.

Family. One or more persons living together in a dwelling unit with common access to and common use of all living, kitchen, and eating areas within the dwelling unit.

Farmer’s Markets. Temporary and/or occasional outdoor retail sales of farm produce from vehicles or temporary stands, located within a parking lot, or a public right-of-way (where authorized by encroachment permit).

Feasible. Capable of being accomplished in a successful manner within a reasonable period of time, taking into account economic, environmental, social and technological factors.

Fisheries and Game Reserves. Commercial fish hatcheries, rearing ponds, fish and game preserves, and game propagation.

Flood or Flooding. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:

1.     The overflow of flood waters;

2.     The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source; and/or

3.     The collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result of erosion or undermining caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, or by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable event which results in flooding.

Flood Boundary and Floodway Map. The official map on which the Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of flood hazard and the floodway.

Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM). The official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to Amador County.

Flood Insurance Study. The official report provided by the Federal Insurance Administration that includes flood profiles, the FIRM, the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map, and the water surface elevation of the base flood.

Floodplain management. The operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, floodplain management regulations, and open space lands.

Floodplain, 100-year. See “One hundred year floodplain.”

Flood proofing. A combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.

Floodway. The channel of a river or other water course and the adjacent land areas that shall be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. Also referred to as “Regulatory floodway.”

Floor Area Ratio (FAR). The Floor Area Ratio (FAR) is the ratio of floor area to total lot area. FAR restrictions are used to limit the maximum floor area allowed on a site (including all structures on the site). The maximum floor area of all structures (measured from exterior wall to exterior wall) permitted on a site (including carports) shall be determined by multiplying the Floor Area Ratio (FAR) by the total net area of the site (FAR x Net Site Area = Maximum Allowable Floor Area (see Figure 7-1)).



Figure 7-1 Floor Area Ratio

Flower tower. A structure that integrates a monopole into a light pole or other utility pole.

Food and Beverage Distribution. A use engaged primarily in wholesale storage and distribution of food and/or beverage manufactured products, supplies, and equipment, including incidental storage and sales activities.

Food Production. Manufacturing establishments producing or processing foods for human consumption and certain related products. Includes:

bakery products

candy, sugar and confectionery products

catering services separate from stores or restaurants

dairy products

fats and oil products

fruit and vegetable canning, preserving, related processing

grain mill products and by-products

meat, poultry, and seafood canning, curing, byproduct processing

miscellaneous food item preparation from raw products

Does not include: bakeries which sell all products on-site (see “Retail Stores, General Merchandise”); beer brewing as part of a brew pub, bar or restaurant (see “Bars and Drinking Places”); beverage production other than dairy products (see “Beverage Production”); slaughterhouses and rendering plants (see “Slaughterhouses and Rendering Plants”); or operations on crops after harvest (see “Agricultural Processing Uses”).

Furniture and Fixtures Manufacturing. Manufacturers which produce wood and metal household furniture, appliances; bedsprings and mattresses; all types of office furniture, and partitions, shelving, lockers and store furniture; and miscellaneous drapery hardware, window blinds and shades. Includes wood and cabinet shops, but not sawmills or planing mills, which are instead included under “Lumber and Wood Products.”

Furniture, Furnishings and Equipment Stores. Stores engaged primarily in selling:

draperies

floor coverings

furniture

glass and chinaware

home furnishings

home sound systems

large musical instruments

lawn furniture

movable spas and hot tubs

office furniture

other household electrical and gas appliances

outdoor furniture

refrigerators

stoves

televisions

General Plan. The City of Jackson General Plan, including all elements thereof and all amendments thereto, as adopted by the City Council under the provisions of Government Code Sections 65300 et seq., and referred to in this Development Code as the “General Plan.”

Glass Products. Manufacturing establishments producing flat glass and other glass products which are pressed, blown, or shaped from glass produced in the same establishment. Does not include artisan and craftsman type operations of a larger scale than home occupations; see “Handcraft Industries and Small Scale Manufacturing.”

Golf Courses/Country Clubs. Golf courses, and accessory facilities and uses including: clubhouses with bar and restaurant, locker and shower facilities; driving ranges; “pro shops” for on-site sales of golfing equipment; and golf cart storage and sales facilities.

Golf Driving Ranges. Commercial recreation facilities independent from golf courses where patrons practice drives.

Grade, Finished. The final elevation of the land surface of a site after completion of development.

Grade, Natural. The elevation of the ground surface in its natural state, before construction, filling, and/or excavation.

Graffiti. Unauthorized inscribing, spraying of paint or making of symbols using chalk, dye, ink, paint, spray paint or similar materials on public or private places, structures or other surfaces.

Grocery Stores. Stores where most of the floor area is devoted to the sale of food products for home preparation and consumption, which typically also offer other home care and personal care products, and which are substantially larger and carry a broader range of merchandise than “Convenience Stores.”

Gross floor area. The area in square feet of all floors within a building, measured from the interior surfaces of the exterior walls.

Half-story. See “Story, Half-Story.”

Handcraft Industries, Small-Scale Manufacturing. Manufacturing establishments not classified in another major manufacturing group, including: jewelry; musical instruments; toys; sporting and athletic goods; pens, pencils, and other office and artists’ materials; buttons, costume novelties, miscellaneous notions; brooms and brushes; and other miscellaneous manufacturing industries.

Haul road. A road along which material is transported from the area of excavation to the processing plant or stock pile area of the surface mining operation or where construction materials are brought to a construction site.

Health/Fitness Facilities. Fitness centers, gymnasiums, health and athletic clubs including indoor sauna, spa or hot tub facilities; indoor tennis, handball, racquetball, archery and shooting ranges and other indoor sports activities.

Historic resource. Any feature, both natural and built, that holds intrinsic value because of its relationship to a time and place.

Home Business. The conduct of a business within a dwelling unit or residential site, employing occupants of the dwelling, with the business activity being subordinate to the residential use of the property.

Hotel or Motel. Facilities with six or more guest rooms or suites, provided with or without meals or kitchen facilities, rented to the general public for overnight or other temporary lodging (less than 30 days). Hotels provide access to most guest rooms from an interior walkway. Motels provide access to most guest rooms from an exterior walkway. Also includes lodging units for recreational developments in the Recreation zoning district; ownership of such lodging units may include timeshares and undivided interest units. Also includes accessory guest facilities such as swimming pools, tennis courts, indoor athletic facilities, accessory retail uses, etc.

Household Pets. The keeping/raising of birds, cats, dogs, or other common household pets, as determined by the City Planner, accessory to a residential use.

Housing unit. Any structure designed or used for the shelter or housing of one or more persons.

Hunting and Fishing Clubs. Areas reserved for public or private hunting of wildlife, fishing, and accessory structures in support of those activities.

Idle. Surface mining operations curtailed for a period of one year or more, by more than 90 percent of the operation’s previous maximum annual mineral production, with the intent to resume those surface mining operations at a future date.

Impulsive noise. A noise of short duration, usually less than one second and of high intensity, with an abrupt onset and rapid conclusion.

Inclusionary Housing. A system that requires a minimum percentage of lower and moderate income housing to be provided in new developments. Inclusionary programs are based on mandatory requirements or development incentives, such as density bonuses.

Incompatible land uses. With respect to surface mining operations, land uses inherently incompatible with mining and/or that require public or private investment in structures, land improvements, and landscaping and that may prevent mining because of the greater economic value of the land and its improvements. Examples of the uses may include high density residential, low density residential with high unit value, public facilities, geographically limited but impact intensive industrial, and commercial.

Indoor Recreation Centers. Establishments providing indoor amusement/entertainment services for a fee or admission charge, including:

bowling alleys

card rooms

coin-operated amusement arcades

dance halls, clubs and ballrooms

electronic game arcades

ice skating and roller skating

pool and billiard rooms as principal uses

Ten or more electronic games or coin-operated amusements in any establishment is considered an arcade as described above, four or less machines are not considered a land use separate from the primary use of the site.

Inoperative. Incapable of functioning or producing activity for mechanical or other reasons.

Intensification of use. A change in the use of a site or structure where the new or modified use is required by Chapter 17.48 (Parking and Loading Standards) to provide more off-street parking spaces than the former use or the owner/operator implements a change in the operational characteristics of the use (e.g. increase in the number of days and/or hours of operation) which have the ability to generate more activity on the site.

Intruding noise level. The total sound level in decibels caused, created, maintained or originating from the source of the noise in question, at a specified location, while the source of the noise in question is in operation.

Kennel, Commercial. Commercial facilities for the boarding of five or more dogs (four months of age or older), or five or more cats for commercial purposes, except for dogs or cats for sale in pet shops, or patients in animal hospitals.

Kennel, Private. The non-commercial keeping of five or more dogs (four months of age or older), or five or more cats.

Land use permit. Authority granted by the City to use a specified site for a particular purpose, including Conditional Use Permits and Minor Conditional Use Permits, Development Plans and Minor Development Plans, Planned Development Permits, Temporary Use Permits, Variances and Minor Variances, and Zoning Clearances, as established by Article IV (Land Use and Procedures) of this Development Code.

Large Family Day Care Home. See “Child Day Care Facilities.”

Large Retail Establishments. Big-box retail facilities are large, industrial-style buildings or stores with footprints that generally range from 20,000 square feet to 200,000 square feet. Most of these facilities are single story structures, but they typically have a three-story mass that stands more than 30 feet tall. These retail facilities include, but are not limited to, discount department stores, outlet stores, and warehouse clubs.

Lattice tower. A structure with three or four steel support legs that supports a variety of antennae. These towers generally range in height from 60 to 200 feet and are constructed in areas where increased height is needed, microwave antennae are required or where the weather demands a more structurally-sound design.

Laundries and Dry Cleaning Plants. Service establishments engaged primarily in high volume laundry and garment services, including: power laundries (family and commercial); garment pressing and dry cleaning; linen supply; diaper service; industrial laundries; carpet and upholstery cleaners. Does not include coin-operated laundries or dry cleaning pick-up stores without dry cleaning equipment; see “Personal Services.”

Laundromat. Service establishments providing washing and/or drying machines on the premises for rental use to the general public.

Libraries and Museums. Public or quasi-public facilities including aquariums, arboretums, art exhibitions, botanical gardens, historic sites and exhibits, libraries, museums, and planetariums, which are generally non-commercial in nature.

Live/Work Quarters (Loft). Buildings or spaces within building that are jointly used for commercial/industrial and residential purposes where the residential use of the space is clearly secondary or accessory to the primary use as a place of work.

Lot or parcel. A recorded lot or parcel of real property under single ownership, lawfully created as required by the Subdivision Map Act and City ordinances, including this Development Code. Types of lots include the following. (See Figure 7-2, Lot Types)

1.     Corner lot. A lot located at the intersection of two or more streets, where they intersect at an interior angle of not more than 135 degrees. If the intersection angle is more than 135 degrees, the lot is considered an interior lot.

2.     Flag lot. A lot having access from the building site to a public street by means of private right-of-way strip that is owned in fee.

3.     Interior lot. A lot abutting only one street.

4.     Key lot. An interior lot, the side of which adjoins the rear property line of a reverse corner lot.

5.     Reverse corner lot. A corner lot, the rear of which abuts a key lot.

6.     Through lot. A lot with frontage on two generally parallel streets.



Figure 7-2 Lot Types

Lot area. Gross lot area is the total area included within the lot lines of a lot, exclusive of adjacent dedicated street rights of way. Net lot area is exclusive of vehicular access easements which limit the use of the lot.

Lot coverage. See “Site Coverage.”

Lot depth. The average linear distance between the front and the rear lot lines or the intersection of the two side lot lines if there is no rear line. (See Figure 7-3, Lot Features). The City Planner shall determine lot depth for parcels of irregular configuration.

Lot frontage. The boundary of a lot adjacent to a public street right-of-way.

Lot line or property line. Any recorded boundary of a lot. Types of lot lines are as follows. (See Figure 7-3 Lot Features).

1.     Front lot line. On an interior lot, the property line separating the parcel from the street. The front lot line on a corner lot is the line with the shortest frontage. (If the lot lines of a corner lot are equal in length, the front lot line shall be determined by the City Planner.) On a through lot, both lot lines are front lot lines and the lot is considered to have no rear lot line.

2.     Interior lot line. Any lot line not abutting a street.

3.     Rear lot line. A property line that does not intersect the front lot line, which is most distant from and most closely parallel to the front lot line.

4.     Side lot line. Any lot line that is not a front or rear lot line.



Figure 7-3 Lot Features

Lot width. The horizontal distance between the side lot lines, measured at right angles to the lot depth at a point midway between the front and rear lot lines. The Director shall determine lot width for parcels of irregular shape.

Lumber and Wood Products. Manufacturing, processing, and sales uses involving the milling of forest products to produce rough and finished lumber and other wood materials for use in other manufacturing, craft, or construction processes. Includes the following processes and products:

containers, pallets and skids

firewood

milling operations

trusses and structural beams

turning and shaping of wood products

wholesaling of basic wood products

wood product assembly

Craft-type shops are included in “Handcraft Industries and Small-Scale Manufacturing.” Other wood and cabinet shops are included under “Furniture and Fixture Manufacturing.” The indoor retail sale of building materials, construction tools and equipment is included under “Building Material Stores.”

Machinery Manufacturing. The manufacturing of machinery and equipment for purposes and products including the following:

boats

bulldozers

carburetors

construction

conveyors

cranes

die casting

dies

dredging

engines and turbines

farm and garden

food products manufacturing

gear cutting

heating, ventilation, air conditioning

industrial trucks and tractors

industrial furnaces and ovens

industrial molds

laundry and dry cleaning

materials handling

mining

oil field equipment

paper manufacturing

passenger and freight elevators

pistons

printing

pumps

refrigeration equipment

textile manufacturing

Major wireless communication facility. A wireless communication facility that:

1.     Is ground-mounted on property not within the public right-of-way;

2.     Is ground-mounted within the public right-of-way, but does not qualify as a microcell facility; or

3.     Is roof- or structure-mounted and exceeds 10 feet in height and/or exceeds the maximum height allowed in the zoning district in which the facility is located.

Manufactured home means a residential building, dwelling unit, or an individual dwelling room or combination of rooms thereof, or building component, assembly, or system manufactured in such a manner that all concealed parts or processes of manufacture cannot be inspected before installation at the building site without disassembly, damage, or destruction of the part which is either wholly manufactured or is in substantial part manufactured at an off-site location to be wholly or partially assembled on-site in accordance with building standards published in the State Building Standards Code. Manufactured home does include a mobile home which was constructed after July 1, 1976, and was issued an insignia of approval by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development.

Map Act. See “Subdivision Map Act.”

Marijuana. All parts of the plant Cannabis sativa L., whether growing or not; the seeds thereof; the resin extracted from any part of the plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant, its seeds or resin, including marijuana products derived therefrom. Unless otherwise specified, “marijuana” shall mean and include marijuana for medical purposes and non-medical marijuana. “Marijuana” does not include industrial hemp as defined by Health and Safety Code Section 11018.5, as may be amended.

Massage parlor. An establishment where, for any form of consideration, alcohol rub, electric or magnetic treatment, fomentation, massage or similar treatment or manipulation of the human body is administered unless the treatment or manipulation is administered by an acupuncturist, chiropractor, massage therapist, medical practitioner, physical therapist or similar professional person licensed by the State.

This definition does not include an athletic club, gymnasium, health club, reducing salon, school, spa or similar establishment where massage therapy or similar manipulation of the human body is offered as an incidental or accessory service.

Mean sea level. The National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a Flood Insurance Rate Map are referenced.

Medical Marijuana Dispensary. Any facility or location where marijuana is stored, placed, cultivated, sold, traded, exchanged, bartered, made available to and/or distributed by or to one or more of the following: a primary caregiver, a qualified patient, or a person with an identification card, whether or not in accordance with California Health and Safety Code Section 11362.5 et seq. However, Medical Marijuana Dispensary shall not include the following uses, as long as the locations of such uses are otherwise regulated by this code or applicable law: a clinic licensed pursuant to Chapter 1 of Division 2 of the Health and Safety Code, a health care facility licensed pursuant to Chapter 2 of Division 2 of the Health and Safety Code, a residential care facility for persons with chronic life-threatening illness licensed pursuant to Chapter 3.01 of Division 2 of the Health and Safety Code, a residential care facility for the elderly licensed pursuant to Chapter 3.2 of Division 2 of the Health and Safety Code, a residential hospice, or a home health agency licensed pursuant to Chapter 8 of Division 2 of the Health and Safety Code, as long as any such use complies strictly with applicable law including, but not limited to, Health and Safety Code Section 11362.5 et seq.

Medical Services - Clinics and Laboratories. Facilities primarily engaged in furnishing outpatient medical, mental health, surgical and other personal health services, but which are separate from hospitals, including:

health management organizations (HMOs)

medical and dental laboratories

medical, dental and psychiatric offices

out-patient care facilities

other allied health services

Counseling services by other than medical doctors or psychiatrists are included under “Offices.”

Medical Services - Extended Care. Residential facilities providing nursing and health-related care as a principal use with in-patient beds, such as: board and care homes; convalescent and rest homes; extended care facilities; skilled nursing facilities. Long-term personal care facilities that do not emphasize medical treatment are included under “Residential Care Homes.”

Medical Services - Hospitals. Hospitals and similar facilities engaged primarily in providing diagnostic services, and extensive medical treatment, including surgical and other hospital services. These establishments have an organized medical staff, inpatient beds, and equipment and facilities to provide complete health care. May include on-site accessory clinics and laboratories, accessory retail uses and emergency heliports (see the separate definition of “Accessory Retail Uses”).

Membership Organization Facilities. Permanent, headquarters-type and meeting facilities for organizations operating on a membership basis for the promotion of the interests of the members, including facilities for:

business associations

civic, social and fraternal organizations

country clubs (golf courses separately defined)

labor unions and similar organizations

political organizations

professional membership organizations

other membership organizations

Metal Fabrication, Machine and Welding Shops. Establishments engaged primarily in the assembly of metal parts, including the following uses that produce metal duct work, tanks, towers, cabinets and enclosures, metal doors and gates, and similar products.

blacksmith and welding shops

sheet metal shops

machine shops and boiler shops

Microcell. A wireless communication facility that:

1.     Contains a maximum of four whip or panel antennae. Each whip antenna does not exceed four inches in diameter and four feet in length. Each panel antenna does not exceed two square feet in surface area;

2.     Contains a maximum of one wave antenna no larger than 10 square feet in surface area;

3.     Has an array of antennae less than 10 feet in height;

4.     Is roof- or structure-mounted or, if within the public right-of-way, is located on top of a light pole or telephone pole or a metal or precast concrete monopole (similar in design to a street light pole or street tree); and

5.     Has a total height, if roof- or structure-mounted, that does not exceed the maximum height allowed in the applicable zoning district in which the facility is located.

Mined lands. The surface, subsurface, and ground water of an area in which surface mining operations will be, are being, or have been conducted, including private ways and roads appurtenant to any area, land excavations, workings, mining waste, and areas in which structures, facilities, equipment, machines, tools, or other materials or property which result from, or are used in, surface mining operations are located.

Minerals. Any naturally occurring chemical element or compound, or groups of elements and compounds, formed from inorganic processes and organic substances, including, but not limited to, coal, peat, and bituminous rock, but excluding geothermal resources, natural gas, and petroleum.

Mining waste. Includes the residual of equipment, liquid, machines, mineral, rock, soil, tools, vegetation or other materials or property directly resulting from, or displaced by, surface mining operations.

Mining and Quarrying. Surface mining operations for aggregates (sand and gravel), and/or other surface or subsurface mineral extraction operations.

Minor wireless communication facility. A wireless communication facility that:

1.     Consists of a microcell; and

2.     Is roof- or structure-mounted and is less than 10 feet in height and does not exceed the maximum height permitted in the zoning district in which the facility is located.

Mixed Use. Properties on which various uses, such as office, commercial, institutional, and residential, are combined in a single building or a single site in an integrated development project with significant functional inter-relationships and a coherent physical design. A “single site” may include contiguous properties.

Mobile Home. A trailer, transportable in one or more sections, that is certified under the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, which is over eight feet in width and 40 feet in length, with or without a permanent foundation and not including recreational vehicle, commercial coach or factory-built housing. A mobile home on a permanent foundation is included under the definition of “Single-Family Dwellings.”

Mobile Home Park. Any site that is planned and improved to accommodate two or more mobile homes used for residential purposes, or on which two or more mobile home lots are rented, leased, or held out for rent or lease, or were formerly held out for rent or lease and later converted to a subdivision, cooperative, condominium, or other form of resident ownership, to accommodate mobile homes used for residential purposes.

Modular Home means a manufactured home which meets the current Uniform Building Code (UBC) adopted by the City; the same as a conventional on-site constructed dwelling. A modular home is not subject to the Federal Department of Housing and Urban Developments nationwide mobile home construction and safety standards code; and therefore, a modular home is not a mobile home. A modular home meeting the current UBC my be places in any zone allowing single-family residential dwellings.

Monopole. A structure composed of a single spire used to support antennae and related equipment.

Mortuaries. Funeral homes and parlors, where deceased are prepared for burial or cremation, and funeral services may be conducted.

Motor Vehicles and Transportation Equipment. Manufacturers of equipment for transporting passengers and cargo by land, air and water, including motor vehicles, aircraft, spacecraft, ships, boats, railroad and other vehicles such as motorcycles, bicycles and snowmobiles. Includes manufacture of motor vehicle parts and accessories; trailers and campers for attachment to other vehicles; self-contained motor homes; and van conversions.

Mounted. Attached or supported.

Multi-Family Dwellings. See “Dwelling, Multi-Family.”

Multiple Tenant Site/Center. A commercial or industrial development consisting of two or more separate businesses that share either the same parcel or structure and use common access and parking facilities.

Municipal Code. The City of Jackson Municipal Code, as it may be amended from time to time by the City Council.

Museum. An institution devoted to the procurement, care, study, and display of objects of lasting interest or value.

Nature reserves. Sites with environmental resources intended to be preserved in their natural state.

Negative Declaration. A statement describing the reasoning that a proposed action will not have a significant adverse effect on the environment, in compliance with the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA).

Noise disturbance. Any sound which endangers or injures the safety or health of human beings or annoys or is objectionable to a reasonable person of normal sensitivity.

Noise in question. Noise suspected of exceeding the standards of this Section.

Noise source. The activity responsible for the noise in question or noise which in fact exceeds the standards of this Section.

Nonconforming Use, Structure, or Parcel. (See Chapter 17.130 Nonconforming Uses, Structures, and Parcels).

Occupancy. All or a portion of a structure occupied by one tenant.

Offices, Accessory to Primary Use. Incidental offices that are customarily accessory to another use and are allowed as part of an approved principal use.

Offices, Business. Establishments providing direct services to consumers, such as insurance agencies; title insurance companies; real estate offices; post offices (e.g. MailBox Etc., American Mailboxes), but not including bulk mailing distribution centers, which are included under “Vehicle and Freight Terminals.”

Does not include: medical offices (see “Medical Services - Clinics and Laboratories”); or offices that are incidental and accessory to another business or sales activity that is the principal use.

Offices, Professional. Professional or government offices including:

accounting, auditing and bookkeeping services

advertising agencies

architectural, engineering, planning and surveying services

attorneys

counseling services

court reporting services

data processing and computer services

detective agencies and similar services

educational, scientific and research organizations

employment, stenographic, secretarial and word processing services

government offices including agency and administrative office facilities

management, public relations and consulting services

photography and commercial art studios

writers and artists offices outside the home

Does not include: medical offices (see “Medical Services - Clinics and Laboratories”) or offices that are incidental and accessory to another business or sales activity that is the principal use. Incidental offices that are customarily accessory to another use are allowed as part of an approved principal use.

Offices, Temporary. A mobile home, recreational vehicle or modular unit, or space within a permanent structure used as a temporary office facility. Purposes for temporary offices may include: construction supervision offices on a construction site or off-site construction yard; a temporary on-site real estate office for a development project; or a temporary business office in advance of permanent facility construction.

Offices, Temporary Real Estate. The temporary use of a dwelling unit within a residential development project as a sales or rental office for the units on the same site, which is converted to residential use at the conclusion of its office use.

One hundred year flood. A flood that has a one percent probability of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. It is identical to the base flood.

One hundred year floodplain. The area subject to innundation by a 100-year flood.

Open space. Land that is maintained in a primarily natural state, and/or primarily without structures other than facilities in support of outdoor recreation.

Operator (surface mining). Any person who is engaged in surface mining operations, or who contracts with others to conduct operations on their behalf, except a person who is engaged in surface mining operations as an employee with wages as the sole compensation.

Outdoor Commercial Recreation. Facilities for various outdoor participant sports and types of recreation where a fee is charged for use, including:

amusement and theme parks

drive-in theaters

go-cart and miniature auto race tracks

health and athletic club outdoor facilities

miniature golf courses

skateboard parks

swim and tennis clubs

tennis courts

water slides

zoos

May also include commercial facilities customarily associated with the above outdoor commercial recreational uses, including bars and restaurants, fast-food restaurants, video game arcades, etc. Spectator facilities are included in the definition of “Sport Facilities and Outdoor Public Assembly.”

Outdoor Retail Sales and Activities. Permanent outdoor sales and rental establishments including autos, lumber, other vehicles and equipment, and other uses where the business is not conducted entirely within a structure.

Overburden. Rock, soil or other materials that lie above a natural mineral deposit or in between deposits, before or after their removal, by surface mining operations.

Owner. In addition to those definitions provided by State law, Municipal Code and case law, the registered owner which includes, but shall not be limited to, the property owner, renter, lessor and/or other residents or guests residing permanently or temporarily on a residential property.

Paper Products. The manufacture of paper and paperboard, from both raw and recycled materials, and their conversion into products such as paper bags, boxes, envelopes, wallpaper, etc.

Parcel. See “Lot, or Parcel.”

Parking Pad. A platform for vehicle parking, constructed on a residential parcel which slopes downward from a street.

Parks and Playgrounds. Public parks, play lots, playgrounds, and athletic fields for non-commercial neighborhood or community use, including tennis courts. If privately-owned, the same facilities are included under the definition of “Outdoor Recreation Facilities.” See also “Golf Courses/ Country Clubs,” “Outdoor Commercial Recreation,” and “Sport Facilities and Outdoor Public Assembly.”

Paving and Roofing Materials. The manufacture of various common paving and petroleum-based roofing materials, including bulk asphalt, paving blocks made of asphalt, creosote wood and various compositions of asphalt and tar. The manufacture of wood roofing materials (shingles, shakes, etc.) is included under “Lumber and Wood Products.”

Person. Any individual, firm, co-partnership, corporation, company, association, joint stock association; city, county, state, or district; and includes any trustee, receiver, assignee, or other similar representative thereof.

Personal communication services. A digital wireless communication technology that has the capacity for multiple communication services and provides a system in which calls are routed to individuals rather than places, regardless of location.

Personal Services. Establishments providing non-medically related services, including beauty and barber shops; clothing rental; dry cleaning pick-up stores; laundromats (self-service laundries); psychic readers; shoe repair shops; tanning salons. These uses may also include accessory retail sales of products related to the services provided.

Pet Shop. A retail store selling live household pets and related supplies. Does not include overnight boarding services or facilities for animals other than those for sale on the site.

Pipelines. Transportation facilities for the conveyance of: crude petroleum; refined petroleum products such as gasoline and fuel oils; natural gas; mixed, manufactured or liquified petroleum gas; or the pipeline transmission of other commodities. Also includes pipeline surface and terminal facilities, including pump stations, bulk stations, surge and storage tanks.

Planning Commission. The Planning Commission of the City of Jackson, appointed by the City Council as provided by Government Code Section 65101.

Plant Nurseries and Garden Supply Stores. Commercial agricultural establishments engaged in the production of ornamental plants and other nursery products, grown under cover or outdoors. Includes stores selling these products, and commercial scale greenhouses. The sale of house plants or other nursery products entirely within a building is also included under “Retail Stores, General Merchandise.” Home greenhouses are included under “Residential Accessory Uses and Structures.”

Plastics and Rubber Products. The manufacture of rubber products such as: tires; rubber footwear; mechanical rubber goods; heels and soles; flooring; and other rubber products from natural, synthetic or reclaimed rubber. Also includes establishments engaged primarily in manufacturing tires. Also includes: establishments engaged in molding primary plastics for other manufacturers, and manufacturing miscellaneous finished plastics products; fiberglass manufacturing, and fiberglass application services. Establishments engaged primarily in recapping and retreading automobile tires are classified in “Repair and Maintenance - Vehicle.”

Premises. Any structure, parcel, real estate or land or portion of land whether improved or unimproved, including adjacent parkways, parking strip, sidewalks and streets.

Primary structure. A structure that accommodates the primary use of the site.

Primary use. The main purpose for which a site is developed, including the activities that are conducted on the site a majority of the hours during which activities occur.

Principal use. The primary or predominant allowed use of any site or structure.

Printing and Publishing. Establishments engaged in printing by letterpress, lithography, gravure, screen, offset, or electrostatic (xerographic) copying, and other “quick printing” services; and other establishments serving the printing trade such as bookbinding, typesetting, engraving, photoengraving and electrotyping. This use also includes establishments that publish newspapers, books and periodicals; and establishments manufacturing business forms and binding devices.

Private Residential Recreation Facilities. Privately-owned, non-commercial outdoor recreation facilities provided for members or project/neighborhood residents, including swim and tennis clubs, park and sport court facilities. Does not include golf courses/country clubs, which are separately defined.

Private wireless communication facility. A wireless communication facility that has not been granted a Certificate of Public Convenience and Necessity by the California Public Utilities Commission (CPUC).

Professional center. An integrated building or site for two or more separate, commercial businesses or tenants. Separate businesses or tenants shall be evident by such factors as separate ownership interests, separate leases, and separate ingress/egress.

Property. Any parcel of land and shall include any alley, parkway, sidewalk or unimproved public easement abutting the parcel.

Property frontage. The front or frontage is that side of a parcel or development site abutting on a public street.

Property owner. The person(s) or entity to whom property tax is assessed, as shown on the latest equalized assessment roll of the County.

Public Improvements and Engineering Standards. The City of Jackson Public Improvements and Engineering Standards, as adopted by the Council.

Public Buildings and Structures. Public agency (including special district) facilities other than public safety and utility facilities as defined below.

Public Safety Facilities. Facilities operated by public agencies including fire stations, other fire prevention and fire fighting facilities, police and sheriff substations and headquarters, including interim incarceration facilities.

Public Service Easement. A right-of-way, easement, or use restriction acquired for public use for sewers, pipelines, polelines, electrical transmission and communication lines, pathways, storm drains, drainage, water transmission lines, and similar purposes.

Public Utility Facilities. Fixed-base structures and facilities serving as junction points for transferring utility services from one transmission voltage to another or to local distribution and service voltages. These uses include any of the following facilities that are not exempted from land use permit requirements by Government Code Section 53091:

corporation and maintenance yards

electrical substations and switching stations

natural gas regulating and distribution facilities

public water system wells, treatment plants and storage

telephone switching facilities

wastewater treatment plants, settling ponds and disposal fields

These uses do not include office or customer service centers (classified in “Offices”); equipment and material storage yards; or public, commercial, and private electromagnetic and photoelectrical transmission, broadcast, repeater and receiving stations for radio, television, telegraph, telephone, cellular or wireless telephone, and data network communications (classified as “Telecommunications Facilities”).

Public wireless communication facility. A wireless communication facility that has been granted a Certificate of Public Convenience and Necessity by the California Public Utilities Commission (CPUC).

Radio frequency radiation. Electromagnetic radiation in the portion of the spectrum from three kilohertz to 300 gigahertz.

Reclamation. The combined process of land treatment that minimizes water degradation, air pollution, damage to aquatic or wildlife habitat, flooding, erosion, and other adverse effects from surface mining operations, including adverse surface effects incidental to underground mines, so that mined lands are reclaimed to a usable condition which is readily adaptable for alternate land uses and create no danger to public health or safety. The process may extend to affected lands surrounding mined lands, and may require backfilling, grading, resoiling, revegetation, soil compaction, stabilization, or other measures.

Recreational vehicle (RV). A motor home, travel trailer, truck camper, or camping trailer, with or without motive power, originally designed for human habitation for recreational, emergency, or other occupancy, which meets all of the following criteria:

1.     It contains less than 320 square feet of internal living room area, excluding built-in equipment, including wardrobe, closets, cabinets, kitchen units or fixtures, and bath or toilet rooms;

2.     It contains 400 square feet or less of gross area measured at maximum horizontal projections;

3.     It is built on a single chassis; and

4.     It is either self-propelled, truck-mounted, or permanently towable on the highways without a towing permit.

Recreational Vehicle Park. A site where one or more lots are used, or are intended to be used, by campers with recreational vehicles or tents. Recreational vehicle parks may include public restrooms, water, sewer, and electric hookups to each lot and are intended as a higher density, more intensively developed use than campgrounds. May include accessory retail uses where they are clearly incidental and intended to serve RV park patrons only.

Recycling Facilities. This land use type includes a variety of facilities involved with the collection, sorting and processing of recyclable materials.

1.     Collection facility. A center where the public may donate, redeem or sell recyclable materials, which may include the following:

a.     Reverse vending machine(s);

b.     Small collection facilities which occupy an area of 350 square feet or less and may include:

(1)    A mobile unit;

(2)    Bulk reverse vending machines or a grouping of reverse vending machines occupying more than 50 square feet; and

(3)    Kiosk-type units which may include permanent structures.

c.     Large collection facilities which occupy an area of more than 350 square feet and/or include permanent structures.

2.     Mobile recycling unit. An automobile, truck, trailer, or van used for the collection of recyclable materials, carrying bins, boxes, or other containers.

3.     Processing facility. A structure or enclosed space used for the collection and processing of recyclable materials for shipment, or to an end-user’s specifications, by such means as baling, briquetting, cleaning, compacting, crushing, flattening, grinding, mechanical sorting, remanufacturing and shredding. Processing facilities include the following types, both of which are included under the definition of “Scrap and Dismantling Yards:”

a.     Light processing facility occupies an area of under 45,000 square feet of collection, processing and storage area, and averages two outbound truck shipments each day. Light processing facilities are limited to baling, briquetting, compacting, crushing, grinding, shredding and sorting of source separated recyclable materials sufficient to qualify as a certified processing facility. A light processing facility shall not shred, compact, or bale ferrous metals other than food and beverage containers; and

b.     A heavy processing facility is any processing facility other than a light processing facility.

4.     Recycling facility. A center for the collection and/or processing of recyclable materials. A “certified” recycling or processing facility is certified by the California Department of Conservation as meeting the requirements of the California Beverage Container Recycling and Litter Reduction Act of 1986. A recycling facility does not include storage containers located on a residentially, commercially or industrially designated site used solely for the recycling of material generated on the site. See “Collection Facility” above.

5.     Recycling or recyclable material. Reusable domestic containers and other materials which can be reconstituted, remanufactured, or reused in an altered form, including glass, metals, paper and plastic. Recyclable material does not include refuse or hazardous materials.

6.     Reverse vending machine. An automated mechanical device which accepts one or more types of empty beverage containers and issues a cash refund or a redeemable credit slip with a value not less than the container’s redemption value, as determined by State law. These vending machines may accept aluminum cans, glass and plastic bottles, and other containers.

A bulk reverse vending machine is a reverse vending machine that is larger than 50 square feet, is designed to accept more than one container at a time, and issues a cash refund based on total weight instead of by container.

7.     Scrap and dismantling yards. Outdoor establishments primarily engaged in assembling, breaking up, sorting, and the temporary storage and distribution of recyclable or reusable scrap and waste materials, including auto wreckers engaged in dismantling automobiles for scrap, and the incidental wholesale or retail sales of parts from those vehicles. Includes light and heavy processing facilities for recycling (see the definitions above). Does not include: places where these activities are conducted entirely within buildings; pawn shops, and other secondhand stores; the sale of operative used cars; or landfills or other waste disposal sites.

Religious Retreats and Organizational Camps. Lodging facilities operated by religious or secular organizations for their members and not open to the general public. Includes convents and monasteries.

Removal of clothing. Striptease, or the removal of clothing, or the wearing of transparent or diaphanous clothing, including models appearing in lingerie, to the point where “specified anatomical areas” are exposed.

Repair and Maintenance—Vehicle. The repair, alteration, restoration, painting, or finishing of automobiles, trucks, recreational vehicles, boats and other vehicles as a principal use, including the incidental wholesale and retail sale of vehicle parts as an accessory use. This use includes major and minor categories. Major vehicle repair facilities deal with entire vehicles. Minor facilities specialize in limited aspects of repair and maintenance (i.e., muffler and radiator shops, quick-lube, etc.).

Includes tire recapping establishments. Does not include automobile parking (see “Commercial Parking and Vehicle Storage”), repair shops that are part of a vehicle dealership on the same site (see “Auto, Mobile home, Vehicle and Parts Sales”); automobile service stations, which are separately defined; or automobile dismantling yards, which are included under “Recycling, Scrap and Dismantling Yards.”

Repair and Maintenance - Consumer Products. Service establishments in which the repair of consumer products is the principal business activity, including: electrical repair shops; television and radio and other appliance repair; watch, clock and jewelry repair; re-upholstery and furniture repair. Does not include shoe repair (see “Personal Services”), or businesses serving the repair needs of heavy equipment (see “Business Support Services”).

Research and Development. Indoor facilities for scientific research, and the design, development and testing of computer software, and electrical, electronic, magnetic, optical and mechanical components in advance of product manufacturing, that are not associated with a manufacturing facility on the same site. Includes chemical and biotechnology research and development. Does not include soils and other materials testing laboratories (see “Business Support Services”), or medical laboratories (see “Medical Services - Clinics and Labs”).

Residential Accessory Uses and Structures. Any use and/or structure that is customarily a part of, and clearly incidental and secondary to, a residence and does not change the character of the residential use. These uses include the following detached accessory structures, and other similar structures normally associated with a residential use of property:

docks and piers

garages

gazebos

greenhouses

spas and hot tubs

storage sheds

studios

swimming pools

tennis and other on-site sport courts

workshops

Also includes the indoor storage of automobiles (including their incidental restoration and repair), personal recreational vehicles and other personal property, accessory to a residential use. Does not include home satellite dish and other receiving antennas for earth-based TV and radio broadcasts; see “Telecommunications Facilities.”

Residential Care Home. This land use consists of a dwelling unit licensed or supervised by any Federal, State, or local health/welfare agency which provides 24-hour nonmedical care of unrelated persons who are handicapped and need of personal services, supervision, or assistance essential for sustaining the activities of daily living or for the protection of the individual in a family-like environment, including but not limited to residential care facilities for the elderly and persons with chronic life-threatening illness, foster care homes, alcoholism or drug abuse recovery or treatment facilities, pediatric day health and respite care facilities, intermediate care facilities for the developmentally disabled, and congregate living health facilities. For the purposes of this definition, a “family dwelling unit” includes a single-family dwelling, a unit in a multifamily dwelling, including a unit in a duplex and a unit in an apartment building, a mobile home, including a mobile home located in a mobile home park, a unit in a cooperative, a unit in a condominium development, a unit in a townhouse development, and a unit in a planned development.

Residential district or zone. Any of the residential zoning districts established by Section 17.06.020 (Zoning Districts Established).

Restaurant, Counter Service. A retail business where customers are served prepared food from a walk-up ordering counter for either on- or off-premise consumption. A restaurant with drive-up or drive-through service is included under the definition of “Drive-in and Drive-Thru Sales.”

Restaurant, Table Service. A retail business selling food and beverages prepared on the site, where most customers are served food at tables for on-premise consumption. These restaurants may also provide food on a take-out basis where take-out is clearly secondary to table service.

Retail Stores, General Merchandise. Stores and shops selling many lines of merchandise. Such types of stores and lines of merchandise include:

antique shop

artists’ supplies

auto parts (not repair or machine shops)

bakeries (retail only)

bicycles

books

cameras and photographic supplies

clothing and accessories

department stores

drug and discount stores

dry goods

fabrics and sewing supplies

florists and houseplant stores (indoor sales only—outdoor sales are “Plant Nurseries”)

general stores

hardware

hobby materials

jewelry

luggage and leather goods

musical instruments, parts and accessories

newsstands

orthopedic supplies

pet stores

religious goods

small wares

specialty shops

sporting goods and equipment

stationery

toys and games

variety stores

Review authority. The individual or official City body (the City Planner, City Manager, Planning Commission, or City Council) identified by this Development Code as having the responsibility and authority to review, and approve or disapprove the permit applications described in Article IV (Land Use and Development Permit Procedures).

Rezoning. An amendment to the Zoning Map which changes the zoning district applied to a site or area to another zoning district.

Roof-mounted. Mounted above the eave line of a structure.

Rooming and Boarding Houses. The renting of individual bedrooms within a dwelling to three or more people, whether or not meals are provided.

Rural Recreation. Facilities for outdoor recreational activities including: outdoor archery, pistol, rifle, and skeet clubs; rodeo facilities; guest ranches; health resorts including outdoor hot springs or hot tub facilities. Hunting and fishing clubs are separately defined.

Schools. Public and private educational institutions, including:

boarding schools

business, secretarial, and vocational schools

community colleges, colleges and universities

elementary, middle, and junior high schools

establishments providing courses by mail

high schools

military academies

professional schools (law, medicine, etc.)

seminaries/religious ministry training facilities

Also includes specialized schools offering instruction in:

art

ballet and other dance

computers and electronics

drama

driver education

language

music

Also includes facilities, institutions and conference centers that offer specialized programs in personal growth and development, such as fitness, environmental awareness, arts, communications, and management. Does not include pre-schools and child day care facilities (see “Child Day Care Facilities”).

Second Hand Stores. Indoor retail establishments that buy and sell used products, including books, clothing, furniture and household goods. The sale of antiques is included under “Retail Stores, General Merchandise.” The sale of cars and other used vehicles is included under “Auto, Mobile Home, Vehicle and Parts Sales.”

Secondary Housing Unit. A second permanent dwelling that is accessory to a primary dwelling on the same site. A residential second unit provides living facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, sanitation, and parking.

Senior Citizen/Disabled Congregate Care Housing. Multifamily residential projects where occupancy is limited to people of 55 years or older and/or people with physical or mental disabilities, and no persons under 18 years of age are permitted as residents. These facilities may include individual apartment units, community dining centers, common recreation areas, and medical facilities.

Service Station. A retail business selling gasoline or other motor vehicle fuels, which may also provide services which are incidental to fuel services. These secondary services may include vehicle engine maintenance and repair, towing and trailer rental services. Does not include the storage or repair of wrecked or abandoned vehicles, vehicle painting, body or fender work, or the rental of vehicle storage or parking spaces.

Setback. The distance by which a structure, parking area or other development feature must be separated from a lot line, other structure or development feature, or street centerline. Setbacks from private streets are measured from the edge of the easement. See also “Yard.” Figure 7-4—Setbacks, shows the location of front, side, street side, rear, and interior setbacks.



Figure 7-4 Setbacks

Shopping Center. Primarily retail commercial sites with at least five separate tenants whose combined gross floor area totals at least 10,000 square feet, and where any underlying separate lots comprising the site are tied together by a binding legal agreement providing rights of reciprocal parking and access.

Short-Term Rental Units (STR). An STR or vacation rental is a rental of a residential dwelling unit or accessory building for periods of less than 31 consecutive days. The rental may be of the entire dwelling unit, an accessory dwelling or one or more rooms in a residence.

Sign. A structure, device, figure, display, message placard, or other contrivance, or any part thereof, situated outdoors or indoors, which is designed, constructed, intended, or used to advertise, or to provide information in the nature of advertising, to direct or attract attention to an object, person, institution, business, product, service, event, or location by any means, including words, letters, figures, designs, symbols, fixtures, colors, illumination, or projected images. Does not include murals, paintings and other works of art that are not intended to advertise or identify any business or product. Does not include product displays immediately be-

hind windows that provide no other advertising of the product (i.e., with prices or other signs or information). (See Figure 7-5—Sign Types.)

“Area of sign” means the number of square feet of the smallest rectangle within which a sign face can be enclosed. In determining the area of an individual sign which has more than one face, the greatest area of sign faces visible from any one point shall be used. The “total area of signs on a site” is the greatest area of sign faces which are visible from any one point.

“American Flag” “Sign” does not include the flag of the United States of America, the flag of the State of California or the flag of the County of Amador, nor any support frame or standard which is used exclusively for display of any such flag; also includes patriotic bunting.

“Animated sign,” means a sign, or any device designed to attract attention by visual means through the movement or semblance of movement of the whole or any part of the sign.

“Banner sign” is any canvas or plastic coated cloth sign which is mounted to a structure with rope or canvas. These signs are considered temporary.

“Billboard” means a sign structure which is available for lease or rent.

“Building face,” means the whole of a building visible in an elevation of the building excluding sloped roof surfaces.

“Bulletin Board” means a sign which accommodates changeable copy and which displays information on activities and events on the premises.

“Community directional sign” means a sign informing the location of a community service organization, public facility, or a church.

“Directory sign” means a sign identifying the location of occupants of a building or group of buildings which are divided into rooms or suites as separate offices or studios.

“Eaves” are the lower boarder of a roof that overhangs the wall.

“Exterior-illuminated sign” means any sign with any part of which is illuminated from an exterior artificial light sources mounted on the sign, another structure, or the ground.

“Fascia” means a flat horizontal band or broad fillet covering the joint between the top of a wall and projecting eves.

“Flashing sign,” means an illuminated sign in which the artificial light is not maintained in a stationary or constant intensity.

“Freestanding sign” means a sign not attached to any building and having its own support structure.

“Historic District” is defined as the metered parking district within the City.

“Identification sign” means any sign identifying an institution in a residential zone, occupant, apartment, residence, school or church, and not advertising any product or service.

“Interior-illuminated sign” means any part of which has characters, letters, figures, or any portion of the sign face or outline thereof illuminated from an interior light source.

“Height of sign” means the vertical distance from average adjacent ground level to the top of the sign including the support structure and any design elements.

“Lot frontage” or “frontage,” means the horizontal distance along a lot line adjacent to a public street, or the side of a lot adjacent to a public street.

“Marquee sign” means a sign placed on the face of a permanent roof structure projecting over the building entrance, which is an integral part of the building (usually a theater or hotel) and is not a fascia extension of the roof or eve.

 

“Monument sign” means a sign which is completely self-supporting, has its base on the ground, and is generally rectangular in form.

“Nonconforming sign” means a sign which is validly installed under laws or ordinances in effect prior to the adoption of this Chapter, but which is in conflict with the provisions of this Chapter.

“Non-illuminated sign” means a sign with no internal or external artificial light source and only incidentally illuminated by ambient light conditions.

“Nonresidential zone” means any zone other than RS, RLD, RSF, RD, RMD, and RHD zone districts.

“Notice” means written correspondence given to a tenant or property owner either by personal delivery or by deposit in the United States mail in a sealed envelope, registered mail, return receipt requested, postage prepaid and addressed to the owner or his or her tenant.

“Off-premises sign” means any sign which directs attention to a business, service, product, or entertainment not sold or offered on the premises on which the sign is located.

“Person” means any individual, partnership, corporation, association or government or any other legal entity.

“Pole sign” is a sign erected on one or more uprights supported from the ground, and which is not a part of any building or structure other than a structure erected solely for the purpose of supporting a sign.

“Premises” means a building or unified complex of buildings on one lot or on two or more contiguous lots under common ownership.

“Price sign,” means a sign on the premises of a service station which contains information on the cost and type of motor fuel only (Refer to Section 13530 et. seq. California Business and Professional Code).

“Projecting sign” means a sign which extends out from a building face or wall so that the sign face is perpendicular or at an angle to the building face or wall.

“Public entrance” means a place of entry at a premises which is accessible to the general public.

“Roof-mounted sign” means any sign located or attached to the eave of a roof of a building.

“Shopping center” means five or more stores with a minimum area of 50,000 square feet, 300 feet of frontage and common off-street parking.

“Second story,” means the highest point of the second floor of a building.

“Sign” means any visual device or representation designed or used for the purpose of communicating a message or identifying or attracting attention to a premises, product, service, person, organization, business or event, with or without the use of the words, visible from outside the premises on which such device is located.

“Sign face” means the visible sign proper including the characters and symbols (excluding essential structural elements which are not an integral part of the display” and including non-structural frame.

“Suspended sign,” means a sign attached to and located below any permanent eave, roof, or canopy.

“Temporary sign” Means any sign, banner, pennant, valance, or advertising display constructed of cloth, canvas, light fabric, cardboard, wall board, or other light materials, with or without frames which remain in use not more than 110 days.

“Wall sign” means a single-faced sign painted on or attached to a building or wall, no part of which extends out from or above a wall more than six inches (excluding window signs).

“Window sign” means a sign displayed within a building or attached to the interior of a window but visible through a window or similar opening for the primary purpose of exterior visibility.



Figure 7-5 Sign Types

Sign Area. The entire area within a perimeter defined by a continuous line composed of right angles using no more than four lines which enclose the extreme limits of lettering, logo, trademark, or other graphic representation.

Sign Height. The vertical distance from the uppermost point used in measuring the area of a sign to the average grade immediately below the sign, including its base or the top of the nearest curb of the street on which the sign fronts, whichever measurement is the greatest.

Sign Lighting, Direct. The method of sign illumination using individual bulbs or other lighting elements to form the alphabetic or numeric characters or graphic elements of the sign, or where the sign face or individual letters or numbers are of translucent material through which light from lighting fixtures inside the sign is transmitted.

Sign Lighting, Indirect. The illumination of a sign by a light fixture separate from the sign that shines light on the sign.

Significant noise. Annoying or disturbing to more than a small percentage of the people within the area impacted by the noise in question.

Simple tone noise. A noise characterized by a predominant frequency(ies) so that other frequencies cannot be readily distinguished. If measured, simple tone noise shall exist if the one third octave band sound pressure level in the band with the tone exceeds the arithmetic average of the sound pressure levels of the contiguous one third octave bands in the following manner:

1.     By five dB for frequencies of 500 Hertz and above;

2.     By eight dB for frequencies between 160 Hertz and 499 Hertz; or

3.     By 15 dB for frequencies less than or equal to 159 Hertz.

Single-Family Dwellings. See “Dwelling, Single Family.”

Single-Room Occupancy (SRO) Housing. A compact dwelling unit with limited cooking and living facilities designed primarily for one individual, within a multiple-unit structure.

Site. A parcel or adjoining parcels under single ownership or single control, considered a unit for the purposes of development or other use.

Site coverage. The percentage of total site area occupied by structures, paving for vehicle use, and all other impervious surfaces. Structure/building coverage includes the primary structure, all accessory structures (e.g., carports, garages, patio covers, storage sheds, trash dumpster enclosures, etc.) and architectural features (e.g., chimneys, balconies, decks, porches, stairs, etc.). Structure/building coverage does not include eave overhangs, second-story balconies, and decks that allow for the drainage of water through the deck surface and are a minimum of 10 feet above the finished grade at all points. `Structure/building coverage is measured from exterior wall to exterior wall. Pavement coverage includes areas necessary for the ingress, egress, outdoor parking, and circulation of motor vehicles. (See Figure 7-6—Site Coverage)



Figure 7-6 Site Coverage

Site Plan Review Committee. A committee established by the City Council consisting of the City Planner, City Engineer, and Building Official. The purpose of the committee is to review applications to ensure compliance with the Development Code.

Slope, Complex. The rate of rise or fall of the natural terrain, expressed as a percentage, of an area with two or more directions of slope. Complex slope is measured by the following formula:

Complex Slope = (0.00229 * I * L) / A

0.00229 = Conversion factor for square feet

I = Contour interval in feet

L = Sum of the length of contour lines in feet

A = Size of the area in acres

Slope, Simple. The rate of rise or fall of the natural terrain, expressed as a percentage, of an area with a single direction of slope. Simple slope is measured by the following formula:

Simple Slope = (V / H) * 100

V = Vertical distance between the highest elevation and lowest elevation of a straight line drawn perpendicular to the sloping surface

H = Horizontal distance of a straight line drawn perpendicular to the sloping surface

Small Family Day Care Homes. See “Child Day Care Facilities.”

Sound level meter. An instrument used for measurement of sound levels, which meets the American National Standard Institute’s Standard S1.4-1971 or most recent revision for Type 1 or Type 2 sound level meters, or an instrument and the associated recording and analyzing equipment that provides equivalent data.

Sound pressure level. A sound, in decibels, 20 times the logarithm to the base 10 of the ratio of the pressure of the sound to a reference pressure of 20 micropascals.

Special flood hazard area (SFHA). An area having special flood or flood-related erosion hazards, and shown on an FHBM or FIRM as Zone A, Al-30 or AE.

Specified anatomical areas. Less than completely and opaquely covered anal region, buttock, female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areole, human genitals, pubic region, or human male genitals in a discernible turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered.

Specified sexual activities. Includes any of the following:

1.     The fondling or other erotic touching of the anus, buttocks, female breasts, human genitals or pubic region;

2.     All sex acts, actual or simulated (e.g., intercourse, oral copulation or sodomy);

3.     Masturbation, actual or simulated; or

4.     Excretory functions (e.g., human excretion, menstruation, urination, vaginal or anal irrigation, etc.) alone or as part of or in connection with any of the activities described above.

Sport Facilities and Outdoor Public Assembly. Indoor and outdoor facilities for spectator- oriented sports and other outdoor public assembly facilities for such activities as outdoor theater productions and concerts. These facilities include: amphitheaters; stadiums and coliseums; arenas and field houses; race tracks; motorcycle racing and drag strips; and other sports that are considered commercial.

State Geologist. An individual holding office in compliance with State law (Public Resources Code, Article 3, Chapter 2 of Division 1, Section 677).

Stealth facility. A communications facility which is designed to blend into the surrounding environment, typically one that is architecturally integrated into a structure. Also referred to as concealed antenna.

Stone and Cut Stone Products. Manufacturing establishments engaged primarily in cutting, shaping, and finishing marble, granite, slate, and other stone for building and miscellaneous uses. Also includes establishments engaged primarily in buying or selling partly finished monuments and tombstones.

Storage, Accessory to Residential Project. Common storage facilities shared by residents of a multifamily housing project or mobile home park.

Storage, Personal Storage Facility. A structure or group of structures containing generally small, individual, compartmentalized stalls or lockers rented as individual storage spaces and characterized by low parking demand.

Story, Half Story.

1.     Story. The portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the next floor above it, or if there is no floor above, the space between the floor and the ceiling above. (See Figure 7-7, Story)

2.     Half-story. A story under a gable, hip or gambrel roof, the top plates of which are no more than two feet above the floor of the story. (See Figure 7-8, Half Story)

 



Figure 7-7 Story



Figure 7-8 Half Story

Stream bed skimming. Excavation of sand and gravel from stream bed deposits above the mean summer water level or stream bottom, whichever is higher.

Street. A public thoroughfare which affords principal means of access to abutting property, including avenue, place, way, drive, lane, boulevard, highway, road, and any other thoroughfare except an alley as defined in this subsection, or a private thoroughfare which affords or has the potential to afford principal means of access to five or more parcels.

Street line. The boundary between a street right-of-way and property.

Structural Clay and Pottery Products. Manufacturing establishments engaged primarily in producing brick and structural clay products, including pipe, china plumbing fixtures, and vitreous china articles, fine earthenware and porcelain products. Artist/craftsman uses are included in “Cottage Industries,” “Handcraft Industries and Small Scale Manufacturing,” “Home Occupations.”

Structure. Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires attachment to the ground or attachment to something located on the ground. For the purposes of this Development Code, the term “structure” includes “buildings.”

Structure-mounted. Mounted to the side of a structure (e.g., a billboard, church steeple, freestanding sign, water tank, etc.).

Structure, primary. See “Primary Structure.”

Studios for Art, Dance, Music, Photography, etc.. Facilities for: individual and group instruction and training in the arts; production rehearsal; photography, and the processing of photographs produced only by users of the studio facilities; and martial arts training studios.

Subdivision. The division, by any subdivider, of any unit or portion of land shown on the latest equalized Amador County assessment roll as a unit or contiguous units, for the purpose of sale, lease or financing, whether immediate or future. Property shall be considered as contiguous units, even if it is separated by roads, streets, utility easement or railroad rights-of-way. Subdivision includes a condominium project, as defined in Section 950 of the Civil Code, a community apartment project, as defined in Section 11004 of the Business and Professions Code, or the conversion of five or more existing dwelling units to a stock cooperative, as defined in Section 11003.2 of the Business and Professions Code.

Subdivision Map Act, or Map Act. Division 2, Title 7 of the California Government Code, commencing with Section 66410 as presently constituted, and any amendments to those provisions.

Supportive Housing. Housing with no limit on length of stay, that is occupied by the target population, and that is linked to an onsite or offsite service that assists the supportive housing resident in retaining the housing, improving his or her health status, and maximizing his or her ability to live and, when possible, work in the community.

Surface mining operations. All, or any part of, the process involved in the mining of minerals on mined lands by removing overburden and mining directly from the mineral deposits, open-pit mining of minerals naturally exposed, mining by the auger method, dredging and quarrying, or surface work incident to an underground mine. Surface mining operations include inplace distillation or retorting or leaching, the production and disposal of mining waste, prospecting and exploratory activities, borrow pitting, streambed skimming, and segregation and stockpiling of mined materials (and recovery of same).

Target Population. Persons with low incomes who have one or more disabilities, including mental illness, HIV or AIDS, substance abuse, or other chronic health condition, or individuals eligible for services provided pursuant to the Lanterman Development Disabilities Services Act (Division 4.5 (commencing with Section 4500) of the Welfare and Institutions Code) and may include, among other populations, adults, emancipated minors, families with children, elderly persons, young adults aging out of the foster care system, individuals existing from institutional settings, veterans, and homeless people.

Telecommunications Facilities. Public, commercial and private electromagnetic and photoelectrical transmission, broadcast, repeater and receiving stations for radio, television, telegraph, telephone, cellular or wireless telephone, and data network communications; including commercial earth stations for satellite-based communications. Includes antennae, towers, commercial satellite dish antennae, and equipment buildings. Does not include telephone, telegraph and cable television transmission facilities utilizing hard-wired or direct cable connections (see “Pipelines and Utility Lines”).

Textile and Leather Products. Manufacturing establishments engaged in performing any of the following operations:

coating, waterproofing, or otherwise treating fabric

dying and finishing fiber, yarn, fabric, and knit apparel

manufacture of knit apparel and other finished products from yarn

manufacture of felt goods, lace goods, non-woven fabrics and miscellaneous textiles

manufacturing of woven fabric, carpets and rugs from yarn

preparation of fiber and subsequent manufacturing of yarn, threads, braids, twine cordage

upholstery manufacturing

Theaters and Meeting Halls. Indoor facilities for public assembly and group entertainment, other than sporting events, including:

civic theaters, meeting halls and facilities for “live” theater and concerts

exhibition and convention halls

meeting halls for rent

motion picture theaters

public and semi-public auditoriums

similar public assembly uses

Does not include outdoor theaters, concert and similar entertainment facilities, and indoor and outdoor facilities for sporting events; see “Sport Facilities and Outdoor Public Assembly.”

Tow Yard. An outdoor storage facility for the temporary storage of towed vehicles.

Townhouse. Three or more attached dwelling units, each typically of two stories, where no unit is located over another unit.

Traffic safety visibility area. A triangular-shaped portion of land established at street intersections to preserve the sight distance of motorists entering or leaving the intersection. The dimensions of the visibility area (described as the sight distance area in the figure) is shown in Figure 3-1 (Fence and Wall Standards).

Trailer Camp means any park, recreational vehicle park, camp, site or lot where one or more spaces are rented, leased or held out for rent to owners or users of trailers or recreational vehicles which are occupied for temporary or season use. Said camp includes all buildings, tents and structures intended for use of the camp. A trailer camp shall not include automobile or recreational vehicle sales lots on which unoccupied trailers are marked for purposes of inspection and sale.

Trailer Camp Unit means a section of ground in a trailer camp of not less than eight hundred square feet of only one automobile and one trailer.

Transient Rental. The rental of single-family or individual multifamily dwellings for overnight or vacation lodging.

Transit Stations and Terminals. Passenger stations for vehicular; also terminal facilities providing maintenance and service for the vehicles operated in the transit system. Includes buses, taxis, railway, etc.

Transit Stop Shelter. A small-scale covered waiting area for busses, taxis, and rail/mass transit stops.

Transitional Housing. Buildings configured as rental housing developments, but operated under program requirements that require the termination of assistance and recirculating the assisted unit to another eligible program recipient at a predetermined future point in time that shall be no less than six months from the beginning of the assistance.

Translucent. Surface that allows light to shine through, but is diffused to the extent that distinct images cannot be perceived.

Tourist Camp means any park, tourist park, tourist court, court site, lot, parcel, or tract of land upon which one or more camp cottages or cabins are located and maintained for the accommodation of transients by the day, week, or month, whether a charge is made or not.

Unit. See “Housing Unit.”

Use. The purpose for which land or a structure is designed, arranged, intended, occupied, or maintained.

Utility Lines. Transportation facilities for the conveyance of water or commodities other than petroleum. Also includes pipeline surface and terminal facilities, including pump stations, bulk stations, surge and storage tanks. Utility lines include facilities for the transmission of electrical energy for sale, including transmission lines for a public utility company. Also includes telephone, telegraph, cable television and other communications transmission facilities utilizing direct physical conduits. Does not include offices or service centers (see “Offices”), or distribution substations (see “Public Safety and Utility Facilities”).

Vacation. Also known as a summary abandonment, the complete or partial abandonment or termination of the public right to use a street, highway, or public service easement.

Variance. A discretionary entitlement that may waive or relax the development standards of this Development Code, in compliance with 17.82 (Variances and Historic Variances).

Vehicle and Freight Terminals. This land use consists of transportation establishments furnishing services incidental to air, motor freight, and rail transportation including:

freight forwarding services

freight terminal facilities

joint terminal and service facilities

packing, crating, inspection and weighing services

postal service bulk mailing distribution centers

transportation arrangement services

trucking facilities, including transfer and storage

Veterinary Clinics, Animal Hospitals, Kennels, Boarding. Office and indoor medical treatment facilities used by veterinarians, including large and small animal veterinary clinics, and animal hospitals. Also includes commercial facilities for the keeping, grooming, boarding or maintaining of four or more dogs four months of age or older, or four or more cats for commercial purposes, except for dogs or cats in pet shops.

Visitor Center. A use devoted to the distribution and sale of information for visitors and other travelers.

Warehouse Retail Stores. Retail stores that emphasize the packaging and sale of products in large quantities or volumes, some at discounted prices, where products are typically displayed in their original shipping containers. Sites and buildings are usually large and industrial in character. Patrons may or may not be required to pay membership fees.

Warehousing. Facilities for the storage of farm products, furniture, household goods, or other commercial goods of any nature. Includes cold storage. Does not include: warehouse, storage or mini-storage facilities offered for rent or lease to the general public (see “Storage, Personal Storage Facilities”); warehouse facilities in which the primary purpose of storage is for wholesaling and distribution (see “Wholesaling and Distribution”); or terminal facilities for handling freight (see “Vehicle and Freight Terminals”).

Wholesaling and Distribution. Establishments engaged in selling merchandise to retailers; to industrial, commercial, institutional, farm, or professional business users; or to other wholesalers; or acting as agents or brokers in buying merchandise for or selling merchandise to such persons or companies. Includes such establishments as:

agents, merchandise or commodity brokers, and commission merchants

assemblers, buyers and associations engaged in the cooperative marketing of farm products

merchant wholesalers

stores primarily selling electrical, plumbing, heating and air conditioning supplies and equipment.

Wireless communication facility. Any public or private structure that supports antennae, microwave dishes and other related equipment that sends and/or receives radiofrequency signals.

Wrecked. Having an outward appearance of damage to parts and contents which is essential to the operation of the item.

Yard. An area between a lot line and a setback, unobstructed and unoccupied from the ground upward, except for projections permitted by this Development Code.

1.     Front yard. An area extending across the full width of the lot between the front lot line and the required setback.

2.     Rear yard. An area extending the full width of the lot between a rear lot line and the required setback.

3.     Side yard. An area extending from the front yard to the rear yard between the nearest side lot line and the required setback.

Zoning clearance. A land use entitlement issued by the City Planner in accordance with the provisions set forth in Section 17.72.030 (Review and Decision).

Zoning district. Any of the residential, commercial, industrial, special-purpose, or combining districts established by Article II of this Development Code (Zoning Districts and Allowable Land Uses), within which certain land uses are allowed or prohibited, and certain site planning and development standards are established (e.g., setbacks, height limits, site coverage requirements, etc.). (Ord. 707 §5, 2019; Ord. 702 §5, 2017)

