KINGSBURG, CALIFORNIA MUNICIPAL CODE 
____________ 
A Codification of the General Ordinances of 
The City of Kingsburg, California 
____________ 
Beginning with Supp. No. 4, 
Supplemented by Municipal Code Corporation 
____________ 

CURRENT OFFICIALS 
OF THE 
CITY OF KINGSBURG, CALIFORNIA 
____________ 
Michelle Roman 
Mayor 
____________ 
Bruce Blayney 
Mayor Pro Tem 
____________ 
Sherman Dix 
Laura North 
Staci Smith 
Council Members 
____________ 
Alexander Henderson 
City Manager 
____________ 
Margarita Moreno 
Finance Director 
____________ 
Abigail Palsgaard 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
    The Kingsburg, California, Municipal Code, has been kept current by regular supplementation by Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., its successor in interest. 
    Beginning with Supplement 4, Municipal Code Corporation will be keeping this code current by regular supplementation. 
    During original codification, the ordinances were compiled, edited and indexed by the editorial staff of Matthew Bender & Company, Inc. 
    The code is organized by subject matter under an expandable three-factor decimal numbering system which is designed to facilitate supplementation without disturbing the numbering of existing provisions. Each section number designates, in sequence, the numbers of the Title, chapter, and section. Thus, Section 2.12.040 is Section .040, located in Chapter 2.12 of Title 2. In most instances, sections are numbered by tens (.010, .020, .030, etc.), leaving nine vacant positions between original sections to accommodate future provisions. Similarly, chapters and titles are numbered to provide for internal expansion. 
    In parentheses following each section is a legislative history identifying the specific sources for the provisions of that section. This legislative history is complemented by an ordinance disposition table, following the text of the code, listing by number all ordinances, their subjects, and where they appear in the codification; and beginning with Supplement No. 4, legislation can be tracked using the "Code Comparative Table and Disposition List." 
    A subject-matter index, with complete cross-referencing, locates specific code provisions by individual section numbers. 
    This supplement brings the Code up to date through Ordinance 2018-006, passed December 19, 2018. 
Municipal Code Corporation 
1700 Capital Circle SW 
Tallahassee, FL 32310 
800-262-2633 
HOW TO USE YOUR CODE 
    This code is organized to make the laws of the city as accessible as possible to city officials, city employees and private citizens. Please take a moment to familiarize yourself with some of the important elements of this code. 
Numbering System. 
    The numbering system is the backbone of a Code of Ordinances; Municipal Code Corporation uses a unique and versatile numbering structure that allows for easy expansion and amendment of this Code. It is based on three tiers, beginning with title, then chapter, and ending with section. Each part is represented in the code section number. For example, Section 2.04.010 is Section .010, in Chapter 2.04 of Title 2. 
Title. 
    A title is a broad category under which ordinances on a related subject are compiled. This code contains about 15 to 20 titles. For example, the first title is Title 1, General Provisions, which may contain ordinances about the general penalty, code adoption and definitions. The titles in this code are separated by tabbed divider pages for quick reference. Some titles are Reserved for later use. 
Chapter. 
    Chapters deal with more specific subjects, and are often derived from one ordinance. All of the chapters on a related subject are grouped in one title. The chapters are numbered so that new chapters which should logically be placed near certain existing chapters can be added at a later time without renumbering existing material. For example, Chapter 2.06, City Manager, can be added between 2.04, City Council, and Chapter 2.08, City Attorney. 
Section. 
    Each section of the code contains substantive ordinance material. The sections are numbered by "tens" to allow for expansion of the code without renumbering. 
Tables of Contents. 
    There are many tables of contents in this code to assist in locating specific information. At the beginning of the code is the main table of contents listing each title. In addition, each title and chapter has its own table of contents listing the chapters and sections, respectively. 
Ordinance History Note. 
    At the end of each code section, you will find an "ordinance history note," which lists the underlying ordinances for that section. The ordinances are listed by number, section (if applicable) and year. (Example: (Ord. 272 § 1, 1992).) 
    Beginning with Supplement No. 4 a secondary ordinance history note will be appended to affected sections. Ordinance history notes will be amended with the most recent ordinance added to the end. These history notes can be cross referenced to the code comparative table and disposition list appearing at the back of the volume preceding the index. 
Statutory References. 
    The statutory references direct the code user to those portions of the state statutes that are applicable to the laws of the municipality. As the statutes are revised, these references will be updated. 
Cross-Reference Table. 
    When a code is based on an earlier codification, the cross-reference table will help users find older or "prior" code references in the new code. The cross-reference table is located near the end of the code, under the tabbed divider "Tables." This table lists the prior code section in the column labeled "Prior Code Section" and the new code section in the column labeled "Herein." 
    As of Supplement No. 4, this table will no longer be updated. 
Ordinance List and Disposition Table. 
    To find a specific ordinance in the code, turn to the section called "Tables" for the Ordinance List and Disposition Table. This very useful table tells you the status of every ordinance reviewed for inclusion in the code. The table is organized by ordinance number and provides a brief description and the disposition of the ordinance. If the ordinance is codified, the chapter (or chapters) will be indicated. (Example: (2.04, 6.12, 9.04).) If the ordinance is of a temporary nature or deals with subjects not normally codified, such as budgets, taxes, annexations or rezones, the disposition will be "(Special)." If the ordinance is for some reason omitted from the code, usually at the direction of the municipality, the disposition will be "(Not codified)." Other dispositions sometimes used are "(Tabled)," "(Pending)," "(Number Not Used)" or "(Missing)." 
    Beginning with Supplement No. 4 this table will be replaced with the "Code Comparative Table and Disposition List." 
Code Comparative Table and Disposition List. 
    Beginning with Supplement No. 4, a Code Comparative Table and Disposition List has been added for use in tracking legislative history. Located in the back of this volume, this table is a chronological listing of each ordinance considered for codification. The Code Comparative Table and Disposition List specifies the ordinance number, adoption date, description of the ordinance and the disposition within the code of each ordinance. By use of the Code Comparative Table and Disposition List, the reader can locate any section of the code as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
Index. 
    If you are not certain where to look for a particular subject in this code, start with the index. This is an alphabetical multi-tier subject index which uses section numbers as the reference, and cross-references where necessary. Look for the main heading of the subject you need, then the appropriate subheadings: 
BUSINESS LICENSE 
See also BUSINESS TAX 
Fee 5.04.030 
Required when 5.04.010 
    The index will be updated as necessary when the code text is amended. 
Instruction Sheet. 
    Each supplement to the new code will be accompanied by an Instruction Sheet. The Instruction Sheet will tell the code user the date of the most recent supplement and the last ordinance contained in that supplement. It will then list the pages that must be pulled from the code and the new pages that must be inserted. Following these instructions carefully will assure that the code is kept accurate and current. Removed pages should be kept for future reference. 
Page Numbers. 
    When originally published, the pages of this code were consecutively numbered. As of Supplement No. 4, when new pages are inserted with amendments, the pages will follow a "Point Numbering System". (Example: 32, 32.1, 32.2, 32.2.1, 32.2.2., 33). Backs of pages that are blank (in codes that are printed double-sided) will be left unnumbered but the number will be "reserved" for later use. 
Electronic Submission. 
    In the interests of accuracy and speed, we encourage you to submit your ordinances electronically if at all possible. We can accept most any file format, including Word, WordPerfect or text files. If you have a choice, we prefer Word, any version. You can send files to us as an e-mail attachment, by FTP, on a diskette or CD-ROM. Electronic files enable us not only to get you your code more quickly but also ensure that it is error-free. Our e-mail address is: ords@municode.com . 
For hard copy, send two copies of all ordinances passed to: 
Municipal Code Corporation 
P.O. Box 2235 
Tallahassee, FL 32316 
Customer Service. 
    If you have any questions about this code or our services, please contact Municipal Code Corporation at 1-800-262-2633 or: 
Municipal Code Corporation 
1700 Capital Circle SW 
Tallahassee, FL 32310 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code and are considered "Included." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code and are considered "Omitted." 
    In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
  
Ord. No. Date Adopted Included/Omitted Supp. No. Supp. No. 7 2010-03 12-15-2010 Included 7 2010-04  1- 5-2011 Included 7 Supp. No. 8 2011-01  3-16-2011 Omitted 8 2012-01  2- 1-2012 Included 8 2012-02  3- 7-2012 Included 8 2012-03  3-21-2012 Omitted 8 Supp. No. 9 2012-04  9-19-2012 Omitted 9 2012-06 10- 3-2012 Included 9 2012-07 11-28-2012 Omitted 9 2012-08 11-28-2012 Included 9 2012-09 12-27-2012 Omitted 9 Supp. No. 10 2004-52(Res.)  8- 5-2004 Included 10 2004-67(Res.) 12- 2-2004 Omitted 10 2013-02 11- 6-2013 Included 10 2014-01  3-19-2014 Omitted 10 Supp. No. 11 92-06 10-7-1992 Included 11 2014-02  5-22-2014 Included 11 2014-03  6- 4-2014 Included 11 2014-04  8- 6-2014 Included 11 2014-05  8-20-2014 Included 11 2014-06  10- 1-2014 Included 11 Supp. No. 12 2015-01  3- 4-2015 Omitted 12 2015-02  4-15-2015 Included 12 2015-03  4-15-2015 Included 12 2015-05  6- 3-2015 Included 12 2015-06  6-17-2015 Included 12 2015-07  7- 1-2015 Omitted 12 2015-08  7- 1-2015 Omitted 12 2015-09  7- 1-2015 Included 12 2015-11 12-16-2015 Included 12 2016-001  3-16-2016 Included 12 2016-002  3-16-2016 Included 12 Supp. No. 13 2016-004  9-21-2016 Included 13 2016-005 12-21-2016 Included 13 2016-006 11- 2-2016 Included 13 Supp. No. 14 2017-001  5-17-2017 Included 14 2017-002  5-17-2017 Included 14 Supp. No. 15 2017-007  9- 6-2017 Included 15 2017-008 12-20-2017 Included 15 2018-002  3- 7-2018 Included 15 2018-003  5-16-2018 Included 15 Supp. No. 16, Update 1 2018-006 12-19-2018 Included 16, Update 1  
EXHIBIT "A" Attached to CITY OF KINGSBURG RESOLUTION NO. 9841 Adopted August 5, 1998 
Setting Forth in Complete and Legally Approved Form and Text 
THE PROPOSED CHARTER OF THE CITY OF KINGSBURG 
SUBMITTED TO THE VOTERS OF THE CITY 
AT THE NOVEMBER 3, 1998 REGULAR MUNICIPAL ELECTION 
_____
CHARTER OF THE CITY OF KINGSBURG, CALIFORNIA 1998 
Preamble: 
    The citizens of the City of Kingsburg do enact and establish this Charter in order to form a better City government for all citizens of the City, to provide for the public health, safety and welfare, to enhance the quality of life for the people of Kingsburg, their children, neighbors, businesses and future citizens and businesses. The citizens of Kingsburg join together to preserve in all ways possible the charm, grace and heritage of the City of Kingsburg's founding citizens by protecting and nurturing the theme of "Swedish Village" together with the Dala Horse logo, and to promote the highest moral standards and values of family, honor, integrity, service and public order in all future undertakings. 
Boundaries of City: 
    The boundaries of the City of Kingsburg shall be as now established and as may be changed in the future as provided by law, by this Charter or by ordinance. 
ARTICLE I - POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE CITY 

Section 1.01. - Powers of the City 
    The City shall have all powers possible for a city to have under the Constitutions of the United States and of the State of California and all applicable State laws as fully and as completely as though they were specifically enumerated in this Charter. 
(A)  General Law Powers. Nothing in this Charter shall be construed to prevent or restrict the City from exercising or consenting to, and the City is hereby authorized to exercise, any and all rights, powers and privileges heretofore or hereafter granted or prescribed by general laws of the State. 
(B)  Municipal Affairs. The City may make and enforce all ordinances and regulations in respect to municipal affairs, subject only to restrictions and limitations provided in this Charter and applicable State Constitutional provisions and decisions of courts with competent jurisdiction. As regards municipal affairs, this Charter shall supersede all laws inconsistent therewith. 
(C)  Bidding. The City may by ordinance adopt geographic boundaries and other guidelines and restrictions (including local preference), governing bidding and other letting or award of public works and other City contracts. 
(D)  Prevailing Wages. The City shall comply with all Federal and State prevailing wage laws applicable to general law cities in California except as otherwise provided by duly-adopted City ordinance regulating municipal affairs. 
(E)  Intergovernmental Powers. The City may exercise any of its powers, perform any of its functions, and participate in the financing thereof, jointly or in cooperation, by contract or otherwise, with any one or more states, the State of California, the United States or any of its agencies, or any governmental agency or local government, special district, the County of Fresno, or other agency or authority created either by the State or the City or under any State or Federal law of constitutional provision. 
(F)  Governmental Cooperation. Whenever possible it is desirable that the City cooperate with other governmental agencies through encouraging the joint delivery or consolidation of services and facilities, toward the reduction of the costs of delivering governmental services and the elimination of duplicative facilities, so long as the City is not financially disadvantaged by such cooperation or consolidation. 
(G)  Interpretation. The powers of the City under this Charter shall be construed liberally in favor of the City, and the specific mention of particular powers in the Charter shall not be construed as limited in any way the powers granted the City in this Article or by this Charter. 
Section 1.02. - Duties and Obligations of the City 
    It shall be the duty, obligation and responsibility of the City and the City Council to develop plans and programs, provide adequate financial resources for, and to implement fully such plans and programs as are necessary to accomplish the duties and obligations set out in this Section, this Charter and State and Federal law. 
(A)  Balanced City Activities. The City Council shall budget for, make provision for, and at all times provide for and maintain a balanced and full range of quality City services, activities and facilities to provide equitably for the quality of life for all economic, social, ethnic and age groups and geographical areas within the City. 
(B) 
Community Development. The City Council shall require the preparation of and shall adopt, comply with and enforce development standards, codes and ordinances which shall apply and be applied uniformly to each and all of public and private properties, which standards shall provide for a well-balanced community, both physically and economically. 
(C) 
Housing. The City shall make an annual review and study regarding adequate housing for all economic levels and needs of the community, and shall facilitate a balanced housing program, which shall include housing code enforcement. 
ARTICLE II - MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL 

Section 2.01. - City Council 
    There shall be a City Council of five (5) members elected at large by the voters. 
(A) 
Registered Voters Eligible. No person shall be eligible to hold the office of Councilmember unless he/she is at the time of assuming office an elector of the City and was a legally registered voter of the City at the time nomination papers were issued to him/her. 
(B) 
Regular Election. The regular election of Councilmembers shall be held in the manner prescribed by law on the first Tuesday after the first Monday of November in even-numbered years or on such other day as the State may determine in the future to conduct the statewide general election in such even-numbered years. 
(C) 
Who Elected. The winners are determined by the highest numbers of votes received. 
(D) 
Procedure for Holding Elections. Unless otherwise provided by ordinance, all City elections shall be held in accordance with the provisions of the California Elections Code insofar as such Code is not in conflict with this Charter or an ordinance adopted pursuant to this Charter. 
(E) 
Council Election and Terms. Councilmembers shall serve a term of four (4) years which terms shall be staggered for election so that either three (3) or two (2) new terms of office are open for election at each regular election described in 2.01(B), above. 
Section 2.02. - General Powers and Duties of the City Council 
    All powers of the City shall be vested in the City Council, except as otherwise provided by this Charter, and the Council shall provide for the exercise thereof and for the performance of all duties and obligations imposed on the City by this Charter and by law. The Council shall make policy for the City and, additionally, shall be responsible to the people of Kingsburg for, but not limited to, the following duties and responsibilities: 
(A) 
Considering ordinances and resolutions and adopting those which it determines to be necessary for the governance, proper administration and adequate financing of the City; 
(B) 
Providing oversight of the City Manager and all municipal activities under his/her purview; 
(C) 
Carrying out all provisions of this Charter, ordinances and applicable State and Federal laws; 
(D) 
Conducting such reviews and taking such actions as may be required for the effective governance and financing of the City; and 
(E) 
Performing such other duties as may by State law, ordinance or resolution be assigned to the City Council, but in no way conflict with the duties of the City Manager as set out in this Charter. 
(F) 
The City shall establish residential growth control regulations which will place a limit on the number of residential building permits that may be issued annually. 
(Res. No. 2004-52, 8-5-2004, approved at referendum on 11-2-2004) 
Section 2.03. - Mayor 
    There is hereby created the office of Mayor. Only a member of the City Council shall be eligible to hold the office of Mayor. The Council shall select the Mayor, who shall serve at the pleasure of the Council. 
Section 2.04. - Duties of Mayor 
    The duties of the Mayor shall be assigned by the Council by ordinance, which shall include, but not be limited to, the duties listed in this Section. The Mayor shall be the chief representative of the City Council and shall: 
(A) 
Be responsible for public relations activities and represent the City Council for ceremonial purposes; 
(B) 
Preside at meetings of the Council; 
(C) 
Represent the City Council in intergovernmental relations, personally or by a representative designated by him/her; 
(D) 
Provide leadership and marshal citizen participation in City activities and civic affairs; 
(E) 
Report to the public from time to time on the affairs of the City; 
(F) 
Recommend appropriate and necessary policy and legislation to the Council; 
(G) 
Recommend to the Council programs for the physical, economic, social and cultural development of the City; 
(H) 
Be and possess the authority and attributes of a Councilmember; 
(I) 
Meet regularly and as appropriate with the City Manager for the purpose of providing guidance as to the intent of the policies and actions of the Council, expressing the desires of the Council and its members, and advising the City Manager relative to assuring that Council policies are implemented; 
(J) 
Jointly with the Council, at least annually, evaluate the performance of the City Manager; 
(K) 
In civil emergencies declared by the Governor of the State of California, be the head of government for the purpose of exercising emergency powers as set out in State law; and 
(L) Possess such authority and perform such duties as are granted or required by this Charter or by the Council, provided such additional duties shall not conflict with any other provision of this Charter. 
Section 2.05. - Mayor Pro Tem 
    There is hereby created the office of Mayor Pro Tem. The City Council shall select the Mayor Pro Tem who shall serve as Mayor Pro Tem at the pleasure of the Council. In the absence of the Mayor, the Mayor Pro Tem shall possess and perform the duties of Mayor. 
Section 2.06. - City Council Compensation and Expenses 
    The compensation and expenses of the Council shall be in accordance with State law and the provisions of this Charter. 
(A)  City Council to Determine. The City Council may determine the salary and compensation of the Mayor, Mayor Pro Tem, and Councilmembers by ordinance, but no ordinance increasing such salary or compensation shall become effective until the commencement of the terms of Councilmembers elected at the next regular Council election. 
(B)  Expense Reimbursement. The Mayor, Mayor Pro Tem and Councilmembers shall receive reimbursement for their actual and necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their duties of office, such reimbursement to be made pursuant to a schedule of expenses adopted by the Council by resolution, which schedule shall be applicable uniformly to the Council and all City employees and officers. 
Section 2.07. - Prohibitions on City Council 
    No Councilmember shall hold any other City office or City employment during the term for which elected or appointed to the Council or for two years afterwards. Nothing in this Section shall be construed to prohibit the Council from selecting any current or former Councilmember to represent the City on the governing board of any regional or intergovernmental agency nor to prohibit any Councilmember from service to the City as a reserve police officer or volunteer firefighter/paramedic or in any similar reserve, volunteer or auxiliary capacity. 
(A)  Restriction on Personnel Powers. Neither the Council nor any of its members may in any manner control or demand the appointment or removal of any City department head or employee whom the City Manager or any subordinate of the City Manager is empowered to appoint. But the Council may express its views and fully and freely discuss with the City Manager anything pertaining to appointment and removal of such department heads and employees. 
(B)  Restriction on Interference With City Manager. Neither the Mayor nor any Councilmember shall interfere with the execution of the powers and duties of the City Manager. Except for purposes of inquiry, the Mayor and Councilmembers shall deal with the administrative service solely through the City Manager, and neither the Mayor nor any Councilmember shall give orders to, discipline or threaten any subordinate of the City Manager, either publicly or privately. 
Section 2.08. - Council Vacancies 
    The office of a Councilmember shall become vacant upon the occurrence of any event of vacancy or other event which would result in removal from or forfeiture of such office under State law governing such matters for general law cities or under the express provisions of this Charter. Whenever a vacancy in the City Council arises, from whatever cause arising, the vacancy shall be filled by the City Council as provided herein. 
(A)  Filling of Vacancy. Within fifteen (15) working days of the occurrence of the Council vacancy, following a published notification of such vacancy, persons who are eligible for and interested in filling the vacancy shall file a standard application with the City Clerk. On the 16th working day following the creation of the vacancy, the City Clerk shall provide to the remaining Councilmembers the applications of all eligible applicants. Within 30 calendar days of receipt of said applications the City Council shall make an appointment from among the eligible applicants or shall call a special election to fill such vacancy; provided, for any vacancy which occurs at any time on or after thirty (30) days prior to the close of the regular filing period for the next regular municipal election, the City Council may instead determine that the office shall be filled by election to be held in conjunction with the regular election of Councilmembers at that next regular municipal election for a successor to serve the then-remaining balance of the term of the vacant office, or a new term, whichever applies. 
(B)  Limit on Appointment. Notwithstanding Section 2.08(A) hereof, any Councilmember appointed to fill a vacancy more than thirty (30) days prior to the close of the regular filing period for the next regular municipal election shall stand for election to any then-remaining balance of the term of that office; and an election for that then-remaining balance of the term of that office shall be conducted and held in conjunction with the regular election of Councilmembers at that next regular municipal election. 
(C)  Forfeiture of Office. A Councilmember shall forfeit his/her office and the office shall become vacant if the Councilmember: 
(1) Fails to meet or maintain throughout his/her term of office all qualifications for the office required by this Charter and by State law for the office of councilmember of general law cities; 
(2) Is convicted in a criminal proceeding or expressly found in a civil proceeding of knowingly violating any express provision of this Charter or of failing to execute or abide by any mandatory provision hereof; 
(3) Is convicted of a designated crime specified in the Constitution or the law of the State; 
(4) Fails to attend three consecutive regular meetings of the Council without prior permission or being excused by the Council; or 
(5) Fails to attend at least 85 % (eighty-five percent) of the regular meetings of the Council during any twelve month period, without prior permission or being excused by the Council. 
Section 2.09. - Council Attendance 
    Councilmembers shall endeavor to be in attendance when the City Council is in session. Regular meeting attendance matters shall be determined as provided in this Section. 
(A)  Prior Permission. Each Councilmember shall request prior permission to be absent from any regular meeting of the Council he/she plans not to attend. Such request shall be made directly or through others orally or in writing at any time prior to commencement of the regular meeting to be missed. Each request shall include the date of and reason(s) for the absence. Each request shall be announced on the record in public session and noted in the minutes as soon as the request is made. The request shall be deemed approved unless it is disapproved immediately after such announcement and notation by a separate majority roll call vote of all other Councilmembers then present in favor of a motion to disapprove the absence, which motion must include express reasons for such disapproval based on past practice and attendance. 
(B)  Request to be Excused. Each Councilmember who fails to attend a regular meeting of the Council without obtaining prior permission for that absence in accordance with (A), above, shall thereafter request to be excused from such failure to attend. Such request shall be made directly or through others orally or in writing at any time prior to adjournment of the next regular meeting following the regular meeting the Councilmember failed to attend. Each request shall include the date of and reason(s) for the absence. Each request shall be announced on the record in public session and noted in the minutes as soon as the request is made. The request shall be deemed approved unless it is disapproved immediately after such announcement and notation by a separate majority roll call vote of all other Councilmembers then present in favor of a motion to disapprove the absence, which motion must include express reasons for such disapproval based on past practice and attendance. 
(C)  Agenda Attendance Items. All published agendas for Council meetings shall include mandatory consideration of all such Council attendance items as soon as they arise. 
Section 2.10. - Council Organization, Meeting and Rules 
    The process for the selection of Mayor and Mayor Pro Tem, the time and place of regular meetings, the method of calling meetings and the rules of order for the conduct of proceedings by the Council shall be as established by ordinance. 
Section 2.11. - Independent Audit 
    The City Council shall provide for an independent annual audit of all City financial accounts and documents and may provide for more frequent or more specialized audits as it deems necessary. 
(A)  Auditor Limitations. All audits shall be made by a certified public accountant firm experienced in city auditing, which audit firm may not provide services to the City other than audit and allied financial reporting services for a period of five (5) years after the conduct of any such annual audit. 
(B)  Designation of Auditor. The Council shall select such audit firm for a period not exceeding five (5) years, but the designation for any particular fiscal year shall be made no later than sixty (60) days before the end of the first fiscal year to be audited. The selected firm may not succeed itself as City auditor, but may serve for five one (1) year terms, or any combination not exceeding a total of five (5) years. 
(C)  Comprehensive Audit and Evaluation. The annual audit shall be comprehensive of all City departments, funds, agencies and accounts, and shall include an evaluation of the City budgeting and accounting system as to compliance with generally accepted accounting principles and modern practices for an integrated and computerized city financial management system utilizing all possible advanced data handling, accounting and control techniques and procedures. 
(D)  Records Review. The audit also shall include an evaluation of the maintenance and retention integrity and safety of all City records and documents of all departments. 
(E)  Treasury Review. The audit also shall include an evaluation of the safety, security, integrity and collateralization of all City deposits, investments and financial obligations, including a review of the solvency and safety of all City depositories. 
(F)  Audit Submitted at Council Meeting. The annual audit and written report attendant thereto shall be submitted by the audit firm at a properly-convened meeting of the Council at which presentation and consideration for approval of the annual audit appears on the published agenda, the audit and report to be available and open to public inspection at least ten (10) days prior to the meeting at which they are to be presented and considered. 
Section 2.12. - Ordinances in General 
    Ordinances adopted by the City Council shall be enacted or repealed in the form: "The City Council of the City of Kingsburg does ordain as follows: ...". 
(A)  Form of Ordinance. Every proposed ordinance shall be introduced in writing and in the form required for final adoption. An ordinance may be read by title only at the time of its introduction, and must be available to the public in full text when introduced. The title of an ordinance shall reflect accurately the subject of the ordinance. 
(B)  Adoption of Ordinance. An ordinance may be introduced by any Councilmember at any regular, special or adjourned Council meeting. The second reading and adoption of the introduced ordinance shall be conducted at a regular, adjourned, or special meeting of the Council, which meeting shall be not less than five calendar days after its introduction. The ordinance may be read by title only at second reading. 
(C)  Ordinance Availability. The City Clerk shall be provided a copy of any proposed ordinance prior to its introduction and adoption, and shall make copies of proposed ordinances available at reasonable cost of duplication to the public or interested persons. The public shall have an opportunity to be heard on the proposed ordinance at any meeting the proposed ordinance is considered. 
(D)  Ordinance Effect. All ordinances other than emergency ordinances and other ordinances which take immediate effect under State law, shall go into effect thirty days after adoption, or such later date as may be specified in the ordinance or State law. 
(E)  Adoption of Codes by Reference. The Council may adopt standard codes, compilations and codifications by reference in the manner allowed by State law without specific verbatim publication or codification in the City Code. 
(F)  Publication of Ordinance. The City Clerk shall publish every ordinance adopted by the City Council within the time required by State law either in full text or in brief summary(ies) thereof as allowed by State law, the minimum publication to be within fifteen (15) days following such adoption in a newspaper of general circulation in the City or, if there is no newspaper of general circulation in the City, by posting in three (3) public places in the City. 
(G)  Ordinance Review. All ordinances shall be collectively reviewed not less than once every five (5) years to assure conformance with State and Federal law, and to assure that all ordinances remain relevant, current and consistent. 
Section 2.13. - Emergency Ordinances 
    To meet a public emergency affecting life, health or property or for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health or safety, the City Council may adopt emergency ordinances, but such ordinances may not levy taxes; grant, renew or extend a franchise; or authorize the borrowing of money except as provided herein for emergency appropriations. 
(A) Form and Manner of Emergency Ordinance. An emergency ordinance shall be introduced in the form and manner prescribed for ordinances herein, except that it plainly shall be designated as an emergency ordinance and shall contain, after the enacting clause, a declaration stating that such public emergency or need for immediate preservation exists and describing such public emergency or need for immediate preservation in clear and specific terms. 
(B) Required Vote. An emergency ordinance may be adopted with or without amendment or rejected at the meeting at which it is introduced, but the affirmative vote of at least four Councilmembers if the Council consists of five members, three Councilmembers if the Council consists of only four members, and all three members if the Council consists of only three members shall be required for adoption. 
(C) Publication of Emergency Ordinance. After adoption, an emergency ordinance shall be published or posted in full text as prescribed for other adopted ordinances. An emergency ordinance shall become effective upon adoption or at such later time as it may specify. 
ARTICLE III - CITY MANAGER 

Section 3.01. - City Manager Form of Government Established 
    The City Manager form of government and the City Manager position are established by this Charter in order that the public business may be carried out in the most efficient, best coordinated, well-planned and properly programmed manner with reference to both the work performed and the expense incurred. 
Section 3.02. - Appointment by Majority Vote of Council; Qualifications 
    The City Manager shall be appointed by a majority vote of the City Council solely on the basis of administrative and executive ability and qualifications, and shall serve at the pleasure of the City Council. 
Section 3.03. - Hours of Work 
    The City Manager shall devote full time to the duties of City Manager and the interests of the City except as otherwise expressly agreed by the City Council. The City Manager shall be salaried and shall not receive overtime pay. The City Manager shall serve the number of hours and days of work necessary to the proper performance of his/her duties. 
Section 3.04. - Residency 
    Residence in the City at the time of appointment of a City Manager shall not be required as a condition of appointment, but within one hundred eighty (180) days after reporting for work (or such other time period as considered reasonable by the City Council) the City Manager must locate, establish residence and continue to reside within City limits and within a reasonable response time and/or distance from City Hall as determined by the City Council. 
Section 3.05. - Eligibility 
    No member of the City Council shall be eligible for appointment as City Manager until at least two (2) years have elapsed after he or she has ceased to be a member of the City Council. 
Section 3.06. - Bond 
    The City Manager shall furnish a corporate surety bond to be approved by the City Council in such sum as may be determined by the City Council and shall be conditioned upon the faithful performance of the duties of the position. The premium for such bond shall be a proper charge against the City. 
Section 3.07. - Compensation 
    The City Manager shall receive such compensation as the City Council shall from time-to-time determine. In addition, the City Manager shall be reimbursed for or advanced all actual and necessary expenses incurred in the performance of his official duties, or incurred when traveling on business pertaining to the City under direction of the City Council. Reimbursement or advance shall only be made, however, when a verified itemized claim, setting forth the sums expended for which reimbursement or advance is requested, has been presented and duly approved and allowed in accordance with procedures adopted by the City Council. 
Section 3.08. - Acting City Manager 
    The City Manager shall appoint one of the other officers or department heads of the City to serve as Acting City Manager during any temporary absence or disability of the City Manager. In case of the absence or disability of the City Manager and failure to appoint an Acting City Manager, the City Council directly or through the Mayor may make the appointment. 
Section 3.09. - Powers and Duties 
    The City Manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the City under the direction and control of the City Council. The City Manager shall be responsible to the City Council for the proper and efficient administration of all affairs of the City, and charged with those administrative functions enumerated herein and otherwise delegated or assigned to him or her by the City Council. In addition to his/her general powers as chief administrative officer, and not as a limitation thereon, it shall be the duty of the City Manager and he/she shall have the following powers: 
(A)  Enforcement of laws. To ensure that the provisions of this code and all other laws and ordinances are properly enforced within the City; 
(B)  Personnel and departmental administration. Subject to the provisions of the Kingsburg Municipal Code and to any rules and regulations promulgated by the Council thereunder: 
(1) To appoint, promote, discipline and dismiss all subordinate employees of the City, except the City Attorney, City Clerk and City Treasurer; 
(2) To give timely notice to the Council of all actions of the City Manager in regard to the appointment, promotion, discipline and dismissal of any City employee; 
(3) To transfer employees from one department to another; and 
(4) To consolidate or combine offices, positions, departments or units with Council approval; 
(C)  Control of officers and departments. Subject to the provisions of the Kingsburg Municipal Code and to any rules and regulations promulgated by the Council thereunder, to exercise control over all departments and divisions of the City government and over all appointive officers and employees thereof save and except the City Attorney, City Clerk and City Treasurer, provided departmental reorganizations shall be made only with prior Council approval; 
(D)  Attend Council meetings. To attend all meetings of the Council and its committees, unless excused therefrom by the Council, except when the City Manager's evaluation, discipline or removal is under consideration by the Council; 
(E)  Recommend adoption of ordinances. To recommend to the Council for adoption such measures and ordinances as are deemed necessary or expedient; 
(F)  Advice as to finances. To keep the Council at all times fully advised as to the financial condition and needs of the City; 
(G)  Prepare budget. To prepare and submit to the Council the annual budget; 
(H)  Prepare salary plan. To periodically prepare and recommend to the Council a salary plan; 
(I)  Establish purchasing system. Subject to prior Council approval, to establish a centralized purchasing system for all City offices, departments and agencies; 
(J)  Investigate City affairs. To make investigations into the affairs of the City, any department or division thereof, any contract, or the proper performance of any obligation running to the City; 
(K)  Investigate complaints. To investigate all complaints in relation to matters concerning the administration of the government of the City and in regard to the service maintained by public utilities in the City, and to see that all franchises, permits and privileges granted by the City are faithfully observed; 
(L)  Supervise public property. To exercise general supervision over all public buildings, public parks and other public property which are under the control and jurisdiction of the Council and not specifically delegated to a particular board or officer, and to control, supervise and inspect all public work being done by the City; 
(M)  Take inventories. To compile and preserve inventories of all City real and personal property and annually thereafter to the end that the same may be kept current; 
(N)  Other agency duties. To perform such duties as are consistent with these provisions for other official agencies created by the City Council (such as the Kingsburg Redevelopment Agency and Kingsburg Financing Authority) consistent with law and as directed by the governing bodies thereof; and 
(O)  To perform additional duties. To perform such other duties and exercise such other powers as may be delegated to him/her from time-to-time by the provisions of the Kingsburg Municipal Code, ordinances, resolutions and actions of the Council. 
Section 3.10. - Council-Manager Relations 
    Except for matters of inquiry, the City Council shall deal with the administrative services and personnel of City through the City Manager, and neither the City Council nor the members thereof shall give orders or instructions to any subordinates of the City Manager, but shall voice their policies and instructions through the City Manager. The City Manager shall take orders and instructions from the City Council only when it sits in a duly-convened meeting. 
Section 3.11. - Departmental Cooperation 
    It shall be the duty of all subordinate officers, City Attorney, City Clerk and City Treasurer to assist the City Manager in administering the affairs of the City efficiently, economically and harmoniously so far as may be consistent with their duties as prescribed by law, this Charter and City ordinances. 
Section 3.12. - Removal/Discipline of City Manager 
    The removal or discipline of the City Manager shall be effected only by a majority vote of the whole City Council as then constituted at a duly convened Council meeting. 
Section 3.13. - Limitation on Removal 
    Notwithstanding any other provision hereof, the City Manager shall not be removed from his/her position or disciplined (other than for disability, serious misconduct or willful failure or refusal to perform the duties of City Manager) for a period of sixty (60) days following the date any member of the Council takes office by election or appointment. The purpose of this provision is to allow any newly elected or appointed member of the City Council or a reorganized City Council to observe the actions and ability of the City Manager. After the expiration of said sixty (60) day period, the other provisions of this Charter regarding the removal or discipline of the City Manager shall apply and be effective. 
Section 3.14. - Agreements of Employment 
    Nothing in this article shall be construed as a limitation on the power or authority of the City Council to enter into any agreement with the City Manager delineating additional terms and conditions of employment not inconsistent with any provisions of this Charter. 
ARTICLE IV - DEPARTMENTS, AGENCIES AND EMPLOYEES 

Section 4.01. - Departments and Department Heads 
    The City Manager shall recommend and the City Council shall by ordinance create, reorganize and abolish departments and divisions thereof as necessary for the effective management of the City, in addition to those created by this Charter. 
(A)  Department Head Appointments. The City Manager shall appoint a head of each department, which person shall be qualified in the field of expertise encompassed within the department of assignment. 
(B)  Department Head Removal. All department heads shall serve at the pleasure of the City Manager and be subject to his/her direction and supervision. 
(C)  Requirements. All department heads shall be City employees for the purposes of powers and duties, and be provided employment agreements executed by the City Manager and ratified by the City Council setting out the terms and conditions of employment, pay, benefits, goals and objectives, a requirement for periodic and regular performance evaluations, obligations, discipline and termination. 
(D)  Restrictions. No department head may engage in any incompatible business, occupation or activity. 
Section 4.02. - City Clerk 
    The office of City Clerk is hereby created. The City Clerk shall be a department head and may be either a full or part time position or may consist of an appointment and assignment of duties to a regular City employee. The City Clerk shall be appointed by and serve at the pleasure of the City Council which shall also determine the compensation for such office. 
(A)  Duties of City Clerk. The duties of the City Clerk shall be to act as Clerk to the City Council and all other City agencies and authorities, to fulfill all duties thereof enumerated in this Charter, to maintain the integrity of and to provide for public access to, safety of, and inspection of all City public records, and to perform all duties required of a City Clerk by State law. 
(B)  Document Provision Duty. Within ten (10) days following the adoption of the resolution certifying the results of a municipal election at which Councilmembers are elected, the City Clerk shall provide each newly elected Councilmember with copies of the City Charter, City Code, City budget, last annual audit, last annual and current City Manager reports, and any other readily available materials which contains information which will facilitate the knowledge of the Councilmember on assumption of office. 
(C)  Automatic Cessation of Appointment. If a regular City employee is appointed City Clerk, such appointment shall cease upon that employee's termination from regular service. 
Section 4.03. - City Treasurer. 
    The City Treasurer shall be appointed by the Council which shall also determine the compensation for such office. The Treasurer shall be appointed solely on the basis of executive and administrative qualifications and shall serve at the pleasure of the Council. The Council may establish a separate position of City Treasurer or may appoint a regular City employee as Treasurer. 
(A)  Power and duties. The Treasurer shall perform the duties prescribed by State law and City ordinance and shall periodically provide a Treasurer's report to the Council as required. 
(B)  Automatic Cessation of Appointment. If a regular City employee is appointed Treasurer, such appointment shall cease upon that employee's termination from regular service. 
Section 4.04. - City Attorney 
    The office of City Attorney is hereby created. The City Attorney shall be a department head, may be either full or part time and shall serve at the pleasure of the City Council. The City Attorney shall be the chief legal officer of the City, whose duties shall include but not be limited to: 
(A)  Duties. Advising the City Council, individual Councilmembers, the City Manager and his/her assistants, and department heads regarding the law relating to City affairs. 
(B)  Additional Duties. Representing the City in legal proceedings, prepare all ordinances and other needed legal documents, select and retain specialist counsel when and where there is a need for such specialized legal services and perform such other duties as may be prescribed by ordinance. 
(C)  Approval of Contracts. Review and approve all City contracts as to legal form. 
Section 4.05. - Special Counsel 
    The City Council may retain special counsel when representation by the City Attorney would create an impermissible conflict or in other circumstances as determined by the City Council. 
Section 4.06. - Personnel System 
    The City Council shall provide by ordinance for the establishment, regulation and maintenance of a personnel system governing those City human resource policies and procedures necessary to effective administration of the employees of the City. The ordinance shall include, but not be limited to, classification, pay, benefits, selection processes, appointments, force reduction, discipline, training, grievances, evaluations and fair employment practices. 
Section 4.07. - Planning Commission 
    There shall be a Planning Commission of not less than seven (7) members. No person may be a member of the Planning Commission unless he/she is an elector of and maintains his/her residence in the City. The number, powers, duties, other qualifications, appointment, removal, and compensation, if any, of the Commission shall be set by ordinance. 
Section 4.08. - Boards, Commissions and Committees 
    The City Council may create other boards, commissions and committees and prescribe their powers and duties, determine the number and qualification of the members, their method of selection, term of office and removal, and fix their compensation, if any. Such boards and commissions shall be advisory to the Council and shall not exercise any administrative powers except as the Council shall otherwise determine by ordinance. 
ARTICLE V - MUNICIPAL FINANCE 

Section 5.01. - Local Property Taxes 
    The City Council may not levy local general or special property taxes except as allowed by law and Council ordinance. To the full extent allowed by law, the people of Kingsburg reserve by referendum and initiative all rights to rescind, enact or adjust any such local tax by majority voter approval of a local election measure. 
Section 5.02. - Revenues 
    The Council shall maintain a revenue structure adequate to meet City financial requirements for execution of balanced programs determined by the City Council to be necessary to carry out the Council's powers, duties, obligations and mandates. 
Section 5.03. - Local Budget, Accounting and Fiscal Provisions 
    The Council shall establish local budget and accounting procedures consistent with State law and standard municipal accounting practices providing for the following: 
(A) Noticed public hearing and adoption by June 30 of a balanced budget for the following fiscal year for each agency under the Council's direct control. 
(B) A budget format setting forth estimated revenues and operating and capital expenditures by source, fund and/or department, together with such reserve accounts as the Council shall determine to be appropriate. 
(C) Budget revisions during the fiscal year, including provision for supplemental appropriations arid transfers within and between budgets, funds, accounts and/or departments. 
(D) Fiscal control measures regarding deposit, expenditure and investment of funds consistent with the foregoing. 
Section 5.04. - Ridding, Purchasing and Contracting 
    The City shall comply with all Federal and State bidding, purchasing and contracting laws applicable to general law cities except as otherwise provided by duly-adopted City ordinance regulating municipal affairs. 
ARTICLE VI - ELECTIONS 

Section 6.01. - Election Procedures 
    Unless otherwise provided by ordinance, all elections shall be held in accordance with the provisions of the State Elections Code for the holding of municipal elections, so far as the same are not in conflict with this Charter. 
(A)  Special Elections . The Council may call special elections for such purposes as the Council may prescribe. A special election may be held on any date specified by the Council. 
(B)  Initiative, Referendum and Recall. The electors of the City reserve to themselves the powers of initiative and referendum and the recall of elective officers, to be exercised in the manner prescribed by State law. 
(C)  Tie Votes. If at any election two or more persons tie for election by receiving equal highest number of votes for a City office, the tie shall be resolved by a special runoff election involving only those who were so tied, that election to be held in the City on a Tuesday not less than 40 nor more than 125 days after the administrative or judicial certification of the election that resulted in such tie. 
Section 6.02. - General Municipal Elections. 
    Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, general municipal elections shall be held on the first Tuesday after the first Monday in November in even-numbered years or on such other day as the State may determine in the future to conduct the statewide general election in such even-numbered years. 
Section 6.03. - Separation of Partial/Full Term(s) of Office at Elections. 
    When an election for the then-remaining term(s) of office of Councilmember(s) is to be held at the same time as the regular election of Councilmembers to full four (4) year terms of office, the partial term(s) shall be separated from the full terms in the notice, nomination, ballot, election, counting and certification processes. No person may be nominated at the same election for both a partial and full term of office of Councilmember. 
ARTICLE VII - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Section 7.01. - Conflicts of Interest 
    During their service with the City, all officers, agents and employees shall comply with all Federal, State and City laws, rules and regulations regarding conflicts of interest and incompatible or prohibited actions and activities. For a period of two (2) years after departure from City service, no former City officer, agent or employees shall, for compensation, act as agent for or represent any other party in connection with any City matter which that officer, agent or employee had actively participated in adopting, developing, administering or implementing during such prior service. 
Section 7.02. - Franchises 
    Franchises may be granted, reviewed or modified by the Council on such terms and conditions as the Council shall determine in accordance with State law. The Council shall adopt by ordinance, resolution or other action, procedures establishing provisions for noticed public hearing prior to action on any franchise, the duration of franchises and franchises required to be obtained for use of public property. 
Section 7.03. - Definitions 
    Unless the provision or the context otherwise requires, as used in this Charter: 
(A) "Shall" is mandatory and "may" is permissive. 
(B) "City" is the City of Kingsburg and "department," "commission," "agency," "authority," "officer," or "employee" is a department, commission, agency, authority, officer, or employee, as the case may be, of the City of Kingsburg. 
(C) "Council" is the City Council of the City of Kingsburg. 
(D) "Councilmember" is a member of the City Council. 
(E) "Law" includes ordinance. 
(F) "Property tax" means those taxes imposed on real property based on a percentage of value (i.e. ad valorem). 
(G) "State" is the State of California. 
(H) "Federal" is the government of the United States of America. 
(I) "Voter" shall be as defined by State law. 
Section 7.04. - Violations 
(A)  Misdemeanors and Infractions. A violation of any ordinance of the City shall constitute a misdemeanor unless by ordinance it is made an infraction. The maximum fine or penalty for a misdemeanor or infraction shall be the same as established by the general laws, unless a contrary intention is expressed in the ordinance. 
(B)  Enforcement. Such violation may be prosecuted by City authorities in the name of the People of the State of California or redressed by civil action. 
(C)  Charter Compliance. Compliance with any mandated duty prescribed in this Charter may be had through civil action or, if appropriate, criminal proceedings. 
ARTICLE VIII - CHARTER AMENDMENT 

Section 8.01. - Charter Amendment 
    Amendments to this Charter shall be approved by a majority of the voters of the City at a regular or special election as set by State law, the Council or this Charter. 
(A)  Method of Amendment. An amendment to this Charter may be framed and proposed in any manner provided by law, including: 
(1) An ordinance, resolution, measure or proposal of the City Council containing the full text of the proposed amendment either initiated by the Council itself or adopted by the Council after report and recommendation of a Charter Review Commission appointed by the Council; 
(2) A report with specific full text as prepared by a duly elected Charter Commission as created pursuant to State law; and/or 
(3) An initiative by the voters of the City. 
(B)  Effect of Amendment. If a majority of the registered voters of the City voting upon a proposed Charter amendment vote in favor of it, the amendment shall become effective when accepted and filed by the Secretary of State and shall become operative at that time or at the time fixed in the amendment, whichever is later. The City Clerk shall file the approved Charter amendment with the Secretary of State within forty-five (45) days following the election. 
ARTICLE IX - TRANSITION/SEVERABILITY/ CONTINUATION 

Section 9.01. - Transition/Severability Provision 
    All City ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations which are in force when this Charter becomes effective shall remain in effect until repealed or modified, except to the extent that they conflict or are inconsistent with express provisions of this Charter. If any provision of this Charter is held to be invalid the other provisions of the Charter shall not be affected thereby. If the application of the Charter or any of its provisions to any person or circumstance is held invalid the application of the Charter and its provisions to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected thereby. 
Section 9.02. - Transition of Current Elected Officials 
    At the time of the adoption of this Charter, Councilmembers then serving shall serve until the end of the term for which they have been elected, and until their successors have been elected and qualified. 
Section 9.03. - Continuity of Rights, Duties, Acts, Officers and Employees 
    The City and all City officers, agents and employees shall each continue to own, possess and control all rights and property of every kind and nature owned, possessed or controlled immediately prior to the effective date of this Charter, and shall remain subject to all prior debts, obligations and liabilities. 
(A) Continuation of Acts. All agreements, franchises, policies and actions lawfully placed in force or effect prior to the effective date of this Charter and not legally in conflict or inconsistent herewith, are continued in force until repealed or amended. 
(B) Continuation of Officers and Employees. The present officers and employees of the City shall retain their respective offices and employments subject to the provisions of this Charter. 
END 
Title 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Chapters: 
Chapter 1.04 - GENERAL PROVISIONS AND DEFINITIONS 
Sections: 

1.04.010 - Generally. 
    Unless the particular provision or the context otherwise requires, the general rules, grammatical interpretations, and definitions set forth in this chapter shall govern the construction of this code, and this code shall be construed with a view to effect its objects and to promote justice. 
(Prior code § 12-1000) 
1.04.020 - Territorial applicability. 
    This code shall refer only to the omission or commission of acts within the territorial limits of the city, and to that territory outside of the city over which the city has jurisdiction or control by virtue of the Constitution, or any law, or by reason of any ownership or control of property. 
(Prior code § 12-1001) 
1.04.030 - Reference to ordinances-Amendments. 
    Any reference in this code to any ordinance shall mean an ordinance of this city, and any reference to such an ordinance or to any provision of this code shall mean such ordinance or provision as now or hereafter amended. 
(Prior code § 12-1002) 
1.04.040 - Headings. 
    The headings of titles, chapters, articles, and sections shall not necessarily govern, limit, or modify the scope, meaning, or intent of any provision of this code, but may be used as an aid in interpretation. 
(Prior code § 12-1003) 
1.04.050 - Section and subsection. 
    "Section" means section of this code, unless some other source is specifically mentioned. 
    "Subsection" means a subsection of the section in which the term occurs, unless some other section is expressly mentioned. 
(Prior code § 12-1005) 
1.04.060 - Titles of officers. 
    Officers, departments, boards, commissions, and employees referred to in this code shall refer to officers, departments, boards, commissions, and employees of the city, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise. 
(Prior code § 12-1006) 
1.04.070 - Acts by deputy. 
    The power or duty of any officer or employee of the city may be exercised or performed by a deputy of such officer or employee, or by a person otherwise duly authorized pursuant to law, unless otherwise expressly provided. 
(Prior code § 12-1007) 
1.04.080 - Writing. 
    Writing includes any form of recorded message capable of comprehension by ordinary visual means. Whenever any notice, re-port, statement, or record is required or authorized by this code, it shall be made in writing in the English language, unless it is expressly provided otherwise. 
(Prior code § 12-1008) 
1.04.090 - Conflicting provisions. 
    Whenever any provision of any code herein adopted by reference is contrary to or conflicts with the express provisions of this code pertaining to the same subject matter, the provisions of this code shall prevail over the provisions of such code adopted herein by reference. In the event of any conflict or inconsistency between any sections of this code dealing with the same subject matter, the section containing the more restrictive provisions shall govern. 
(Prior code § 12-1009) 
1.04.100 - Severability. 
    If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of this code, as herein enacted or hereafter amended, is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by any court, such shall not be construed to affect the validity of the remaining portions of this code, and it is hereby declared that such remaining portions of this code would have been adopted, notwithstanding that any part or portion is thus held to be invalid or unconstitutional. 
(Prior code § 12-1010) 
1.04.110 - Definitions. 
A.  Grammatical Interpretations. 
1.  Genders. Any gender includes the other genders. 
2.  Singular and Plural. The singular number includes the plural, and the plural number includes the singular. 
3.  Tenses. Words used in the present tense include the past and future tenses and vice versa unless manifestly inapplicable. 
4.  Shall and May. "Shall" is mandatory, and "may" is permissive. 
5.  Words and Phrases. Words and phrases used in this code and not specifically defined shall be construed according to the context and approved usage of the language. 
B.  Definitions. 
    "City" means the municipal corporation of the state known as the City of Kingsburg, or the territory within the limits of the city, as required by the context. 
    "City Hall" means the City Hall building, located at Draper and Marion Streets in the city. 
    "Code," when unmodified, means the Kingsburg Municipal Code. 
    "Council" or "city council" means the city council of the city. 
    "County" means the county of Fresno. 
    "Goods" includes wares or merchandise. 
    Motor Vehicles. Whenever any words or phrases used in this code are not defined, but are defined in the Vehicle Code of the State of California, and amendments thereto, such definitions shall apply. 
    "Oath" means affirmation. 
    "Operate" means to carry on, keep, conduct, or maintain. 
    "Owner," applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant, or tenant by the entirety of the whole or of a part of such building or land. 
    "Person" means any individual natural person, firm, partnership, joint venture , association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, trust, business trust, receiver, or trustee, and any municipal, political, or governmental corporation, district, body, or agency, other than the city. 
    "Personal property" means money, goods, chattels, things in action, and evidences of debt. 
    "Property" means both real and personal property. 
    "Quarter" and "quarterly", when used to designate a period of time, mean the first three calendar months of any given year or any succeeding period of three calendar months. 
    "Real property" includes lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
    "Sale" includes any sale, exchange, barter, hypothecation, or offer for sale. 
    "State" means the state of California. 
    "Street" means all streets, highways, avenues, lanes, alleys, courts, places, squares, sidewalks, parkways, curbs, or other public ways in the city which have been or may hereafter be dedicated and open to public use, or such other public property so designated in any law of the state. 
    "Tenant" or "Occupant", applied to a building or land, means any person who occupies the whole or part of such building or land, whether alone or with others. 
    "Vehicle" means a device by which any person or property may be propelled, moved or drawn upon a highway, except a device moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
    "Verification" means a declaration under penalty of perjury. 
    "Year" and "calendar year" mean January 1 through December 31 of any given year. 
    "Year, fiscal" means July 1 of any given year through June 30 of the following year. 
(Prior code §§ 12-2000-12-2093) 
Chapter 1.08 - ELECTIONS 
Sections: 

1.08.010 - State law applicable. 
    All municipal elections held within the city shall be held under the general election laws of the state so far as the same may be applicable. 
(Prior code § 25-1000) 
1.08.020 - Election date, expenses. 
A.  The Kingsburg municipal election shall hereafter be held on the same date as the statewide general election in California commencing with November, 1984. 
B.  All prior ordinances or resolutions to the contrary are herewith repealed. 
C.  The entire ordinance codified in this section shall not be codified in the Kingsburg Municipal Code but the city clerk shall give the notice to all registered voters as required by state law. 
D.  That upon properly documented proof of expenses incurred relating to the county's costs, over and above their costs of processing general statewide elections, the city shall reimburse the county for such expenses through its normal warrant procedure. 
(Ord. 445, 1985; Ord. 420 § 2, 1984) 
Chapter 1.12 - OFFICIAL NOTICES 
Sections: 

1.12.010 - Service. 
    Whenever a notice is required to be given under this code, unless different provisions herein are otherwise specifically made, such notice maybe given either by personal delivery thereof to the person to be notified or by deposit in the United States mail in a sealed envelope, postage prepaid, addressed to such person to be notified, at his/her last known business or residence address as the same appears in the public records of the city or other records pertaining to the matter to which such notice is directed. Service by mail shall be deemed to have been completed at the time of deposit in the United States mail. 
(Prior code § 13-0000) 
1.12.020 - Proof of service. 
    Proof of giving any notice may be made by the certificate of any officer or employee of the city, or by affidavit of any person over the age of eighteen (18) years, which shows service in conformity with this code, or other provisions of law applicable to the subject matter concerned. 
(Prior code § 13-0001) 
Chapter 1.16 - ENFORCEMENT 
Sections: 

1.16.010 - Citation of violators. 
A.  Pursuant to the provisions of Part 2, Title 3, Chapter 5C of the Penal Code of the state, if any person is arrested for a violation of any provision of this code or of any other ordinance of the city, the violation of which is punishable as a misdemeanor, and such person is not immediately taken before a magistrate as set forth in said Penal Code, the arresting officer shall prepare in duplicate a written notice to appear in court, containing the name and address of such person, the offense charged, and the time and place where and when such person shall appear in court. 
B.  The time specified in the notice to appear must be at least ten (10) days after such arrest. 
C.  The place specified in the notice to appear shall be either: 
1.  Before a judge of the Fresno County Superior Court; or 
2.  Before an officer authorized by the county or city to receive a deposit of bail. 
D.  The officer shall deliver one copy of the notice to appear to the arrested person, and the arrested person, in order to secure release, must give his/her written promise so to appear in court by signing the duplicate notice which shall be retained by the officer. Thereupon the arresting officer shall forthwith release the person arrested from custody. 
E.  1.  The officer shall, as soon as practicable, file the duplicate notice with the magistrate specified therein. Thereupon, pursuant to said Chapter 5C of the Penal Code, the magistrate shall fix the amount of bail which in his/her judgment, in accordance with the provisions of Sections 1275 of the Penal Code of the state, will be reasonable and sufficient for the appearance of the defendant, and shall endorse upon the notice a statement signed by him/her in the form set forth in Section 815a of the Penal Code of the state. The defendant may, prior to the date upon which he/she promised to appear in court, deposit with the magistrate the amount of bail thus set. Thereafter, at the time when the case is called for arraignment before the magistrate, if the defendant shall not appear, either in person or by counsel, the magistrate may declare the bail forfeited, and may in his/her discretion order that no further proceedings shall be held in such case. 
2.  Upon the making of such order that no further proceedings be had, all sums deposited as bail shall forthwith be paid into the county treasury for distribution pursuant to Section 1463 of the Penal Code. 
F.  No warrant shall be issued on such charge for the arrest of a person who has given such promise to appear in court unless and until he/she has violated such promise or has failed to deposit bail, to appear for arraignment, trial or judgment, or to comply with the terms and provisions of the judgment, as required by law. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; prior code § 14-0004) 
1.16.020 - Failure to appear-Misdemeanor. 
    Any person willfully violating his/her written promise to appear in court is guilty of a misdemeanor regardless of the disposition of the charge upon which he/she was originally arrested. 
(Prior code § 14-0005) 
1.16.030 - Issuance of warrant. 
A.  When a person signs a written promise to appear at the time and place specified in the written promise to appear and has not posted bail, as provided in Section 14-0004 hereof and in Section 853.6 of the Penal Code of the state, the magistrate shall issue and have delivered for execution a warrant for his/her arrest within twenty (20) days after his/her failure to appear as promised; or, if such person promises to appear before an officer authorized to accept bail other than a magistrate and fails to do so on or before the date which he/she promised to appear, then within twenty (20) days after the delivery of such written promise to appear by the officer to a magistrate having jurisdiction over the offense. 
B.  When such person violates his/her promise to appear before an officer authorized to receive bail other than a magistrate, the officer shall immediately deliver to the magistrate having jurisdiction over the offense charged the written promise to appear and the complaint, if any, filed by the arresting officer. 
(Prior code § 14-0006) 
1.16.040 - Enforcing officers-Generally. 
    The chief of police and all officers and employees of the police department, excepting clerks, stenographers and others whose duties do not fall within the scope of law enforcement service, are hereby declared to be and are peace officers, and as such have all powers conferred upon peace officers or policemen by the laws of the state, together with all powers conferred upon them by the city; and they are empowered to enforce, and are charged with the duty of enforcing, any and all provisions of this code or of any other ordinance of the city where the violation of such provision or provisions would constitute a misdemeanor. 
(Prior code § 14-0007) 
1.16.050 - Enforcing officers for limited purposes. 
    When in this code, or in any other ordinance of the city, an officer or employee of the city is empowered to enforce, or charged with the duty of enforcing any particular provision or provisions of this code or of any other ordinance of the city, the violation of which provision or provisions would constitute a misdemeanor, the officer or employee so empowered, or so charged with such duty, shall be deemed to be a peace officer for the purpose of enforcing such provision or provisions, and as such and for such limited purpose shall have all powers conferred upon peace officers by the laws of the state, together with all other powers conferred upon peace officers in the city. 
(Prior code § 14-0008) 
1.16.060 - Enforcing officers-Powers of deputy. 
    Whenever a duty, right, power, privilege, or immunity is granted to, or imposed upon a city officer or employee, the duty may be performed, or the right, power, privilege, or immunity exercised by any subordinate or aide to the officer or employee who has been so charged by the officer or employee, or when the obligations of the position of the subordinate or aide charge him/her with performing the duty or charge him/her with exercising or entitle him/her to exercise the right, power, privilege, or immunity. 
(Prior code § 14-0009) 
1.16.070 - Issuance of permits-Violations of law. 
    When in this code, or in any other ordinance of the city, an officer or employee of the city is empowered and has the duty to issue a regulatory permit, and the officer or employee has reason to believe that the applicant is engaged in, or has on his/her premises a violation of law, ordinance, or city regulation, and exercise of the permit will propagate, encourage, or perpetuate the violation, then the officer or employee, with the approval of the city attorney, may refuse to issue the permit until such time that it is established that the violation has been abated or does not exist, provided that the officer or employee may, with the permission of the city attorney, issue the permit upon conditions reasonably calculated to eliminate the violation and in such case the permit may be revoked upon failure to perform or conform to the condition. 
(Prior code § 14-0010) 
1.16.080 - Reserve police officers-Power to arrest. 
A.  The Kingsburg Police Chief hereby has authority to grant twenty-four (24) hour powers of arrest to Reserve Police Officers who have met minimum state and local standards. 
B.  The ordinance codified in this section shall become effective thirty (30) days following its adoption and shall be published once in a newspaper of local circulation. 
(Ord. 92-08, 1992) 
Chapter 1.20 - GENERAL PENALTY 
Sections: 

1.20.010 - Code violation penalties. 
    No person shall violate any provision of this code. Each person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of this code is committed, continued or permitted by such person and punishable accordingly. In addition to the penalties provided herein, any violation of this code shall be deemed a public nuisance and may be abated as such by the city. Violations of this code are hereby classified, and punishable, as follows: 
A.  Infractions. Except as provided in subsection B of this section, any violations of this code shall be an infraction. Every such violation shall be punishable as provided in the general laws of the state for infractions. 
B.  Misdemeanors. Any violation of the provisions of the Title 8 (Land Use Regulations) of this code shall be misdemeanors and punishable by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment in the county jail for not more than one year or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. 451, 1986: prior code § 14-0000) 
1.20.020 - Aiding and abetting. 
    Whenever any act or omission is prohibited by this code, such prohibition shall be deemed also to prohibit the causing, permitting, aiding, abetting, suffering, or concealing such act or omission, and any person who shall so cause, permit, aid, abet, suffer, or conceal such act or omission shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and shall be punishable in accordance with the punishment prescribed for such act or omission. 
(Prior code § 14-0001) 
1.20.030 - Agents, etc. 
    Whenever any provision of this code proscribes the conduct of any person, such proscription shall apply to each manager, lessee, agent, servant, officer, employee, or other person purporting to act for or on behalf of such person. 
(Prior code § 14-0002) 
1.20.040 - Responsibility of occupant. 
    The occupant of any premises upon which a violation of this code is apparent, the owner of any object or material placed or remaining anywhere in violation of this code, or the occupant of any premises served by any excavation or structure made or erected in violation of this code, as the case may be, shall be deemed prima facie responsible for the violation so evidenced and subject to the penalties provided therefor. 
(Prior code § 14-0003) 
Title 2 - ADMINISTRATION AND PERSONNEL 
Chapters: 
Chapter 2.04 - CITY COUNCIL 
Sections: 

2.04.010 - Regular meetings. 
    The city council shall hold regular meetings in accordance with and on the day(s) and at the time(s) and place(s) as the city council shall determine from time to time by duly adopted resolution. 
(Ord. 97-04, 1997: Ord. 479, 1989: Ord. 472, 1989: Ord. 448, 1986: prior code § 21-1000) 
2.04.020 - Special meetings. 
    Special meetings may be called at any time by the mayor, or by three members of the city council, by delivering personally or by mail written notice to each councilperson and to each local newspaper of general circulation, radio or television station requesting notice in writing. Such notice must be delivered personally or by mail at least twenty-four (24) hours before the time of such meeting as specified in the notice. 
    The call and notice shall specify the time and place of the special meeting and the business to be transacted. No other business shall be considered at such meetings. Such written notice may be dispensed with as to any councilperson who at or prior to the time the meeting convenes files with the city clerk a written waiver of notice. Such written notice may also be dispensed with as to any councilperson who is actually present at the meeting at the time it convenes. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; prior code § 21-1001) 
2.04.030 - Meetings to be public-Exception for closed sessions. 
    All regular and special meetings of the city council shall be public; provided, however, the city council may hold closed sessions during a regular or special meeting, from which the public may be excluded, for the purpose of considering the matters referred to in Section 54957 of the Government Code of the State of California. 
    No member of the city council, employee of the city, or any other person present during a closed session of the council shall disclose to any person the content or substance of any discussion which took place during said closed session unless the city council shall authorize the disclosure of such information by majority vote. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; prior code § 21-1002) 
2.04.040 - Posting notices of meetings, agenda items and action taken. 
A.  Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Article and to comply with applicable state statutes, the procedures in this section shall apply to meetings of the Kingsburg city council and all other boards and commissions of the city. 
B.  Notices of all meetings, regular or special, shall be posted at the entrance to the Kingsburg City Hall, as follows: for regular meetings, at least seventy-two (72) hours prior to meeting; for special meetings, at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to meeting. The city clerk or secretary to the board or commission involved shall prepare a declaration as to such posting which shall be kept for public reference. 
C.  Said notice shall consist of a copy of the proposed agenda for said meeting which contains a brief description of each item of business to be transacted or discussed at said meeting. Said agenda shall follow the order of business as set forth in this section. 
D.  No action may be taken on any item not appearing on said posted agenda except as permitted under applicable provisions of the Brown Act. This does not preclude discussion of staff reports presented at regular meetings that provide the legislative body, board or commission with updated information on city business. If action is to be taken based upon staff reports then the subject matter should be described on the agenda unless excepted therefrom as set forth in subsection (C) above. 
E.  In the event any person objects to any action taken by the planning commission or any other board or commission of the city and seeks to nullify same under applicable provisions of the Brown Act, said board or commission shall provide a full and detailed confidential report to the city council and the city attorney concerning said matter. 
F.  The city council may adopt supplementary regulations by resolution as to such meeting procedures. 
(Ord. 459, 1987: prior code § 21-1003) 
2.04.050 - Council correspondence. 
A.  Availability to the Public. Correspondence addressed to the city council which is received by the city clerk or any other officer or employee of the city shall not become a public record until received and filed by the council at a regular, special or adjourned meeting of the council. Correspondence received in the city clerk's office or other offices after twelve o'clock (12:00 p.m.) noon on the Thursday preceding a regular council meeting shall not be placed on the agenda unless it concerns a matter to be considered by the council at the next regular meeting or is determined by the mayor to be an urgent matter which should be brought to the immediate attention of the council. Correspondence shall not be read aloud at a council meeting unless requested by a majority vote of the council. 
B.  Authority of City Clerk. The city clerk is authorized to open and examine all mail or other written communications addressed to the city council and to give it immediate attention to the end that all administrative business referred to in said communications and not necessarily requiring council action may be acted upon between council meetings. 
(Prior code § 21-1004) 
2.04.060 - Order of business. 
    The business of the city council at its meetings shall be taken up for consideration and disposition in whatever order is set forth on the agenda for said meeting, subject to the majority vote of the council to change said order. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; Ord. 444, 1985: prior code § 21-1005) 
2.04.070 - Preparation of minutes. 
    The city clerk shall have exclusive responsibility for preparation of the minutes. Any directions for changes in the minutes shall be made only by majority action of the city council. Minutes shall be included in the next meetings' agenda packet. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; prior code § 21-1006) 
2.04.090 - Presiding officer. 
    The mayor shall be the presiding officer at all meetings of the city council. In the absence of the mayor, the mayor pro tempore shall preside. In the absence of both the mayor and mayor pro tempore, the city clerk shall call the council to order, whereupon a temporary presiding officer shall be elected by the councilpersons present to serve until the arrival of the mayor or mayor pro tempore or until adjournment. Wherever in this chapter the term mayor is used, it shall apply equally to the presiding officer as defined in this section. 
(Prior code § 21-1008) 
2.04.100 - Powers and duties of presiding officer. 
A.  Participation. The presiding officer may move, second, debate and vote from the chair. 
B.  Question to be Stated. The presiding officer or such member of the city staff as he/she may designate shall verbally restate each question immediately prior to calling for the vote. Following the vote, the city clerk shall announce whether the question carried or was defeated. The presiding officer in his/her discretion may publicly explain the effect of a vote for the audience, or he/she may direct a member of the city staff to do so, before proceeding to the next item of business. 
C.  Signing of Documents. The presiding officer shall sign all ordinances, contracts, and other documents necessitating his/her signature which were adopted in his/her presence, unless he/she is unavailable, in which case the signature of an alternate presiding officer may be used. 
D.  Sworn Testimony. The presiding officer may require any person addressing the city council to be sworn as a witness and to testify under oath, and the presiding officer shall so require if directed to do so by a majority of the council. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; prior code § 21-1009) 
2.04.110 - Rules of debate. 
A.  Getting the Floor. Every councilperson desiring to speak shall first address the chair, gain recognition by the presiding officer, and shall confine him/herself to the question under debate, avoiding personalities and indecorous language. 
B.  Questions to Staff. Every councilperson desiring to question the city staff shall, after recognition by the presiding officer, address his/her questions to the city manager, the city attorney, or any other department head, who shall be entitled either to answer the inquiry him/herself or to designate a member of his/her staff for that purpose. 
C.  Interruptions. A councilperson, once recognized, shall not be interrupted when speaking unless called to order by the presiding officer, unless a point of order of personal privilege is raised by another councilperson, or unless the speaker chooses to yield to a question by another councilperson. If a councilperson, while speaking, is called to order, he/she shall cease speaking until the question of order is determined and, if determined to be in order, he/she may proceed. Members of the city staff after recognition by the presiding officer shall hold the floor until completion of their remarks or until recognition is withdrawn by the presiding officer. 
D.  Points of Order. The presiding officer shall determine all points of order subject to the right of any councilperson to appeal to the council. If an appeal is taken, the question shall be, "Shall the decision of the presiding officer be sustained?" A majority vote shall conclusively determine such question of order. 
E.  Point of Personal Privilege. The right of a councilperson to address the council on a question of personal privilege shall be limited to cases in which his/her integrity, character or motives are questioned or where the welfare of the council is concerned. A councilperson raising a point of personal privilege may interrupt another councilperson who has the floor only if the presiding officer recognizes the privilege. 
F.  Privilege of Closing Debate. The councilperson moving the adoption of an ordinance or motion shall have the privilege of closing the debate. 
G.  Limitation on Debate. No councilperson shall be allowed to speak more than once upon any particular subject until every other councilperson desiring to do so shall have spoken. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; prior code § 21-1010) 
2.04.120 - Remarks of councilperson and synopsis of debate. 
    A councilperson may request through the presiding officer the privilege of having an abstract of his/her statement on any subject under consideration by the council entered in the minutes. If the council consents thereto, such statement shall be entered in the minutes. 
(Prior code § 21-1011) 
2.04.130 - Protest against council action. 
    Any councilperson shall have the right to have the reasons for his/her dissent from, or his/her protest against, any action of the council entered in the minutes. Such dissent or protest to be entered in the minutes shall be made in the following manner: "I would like the minutes to show that I am opposed to the action for the following reasons ..." 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; prior code § 21-1012) 
2.04.140 - Rules of order. 
    Except as provided in this code, the city charter, other rules adopted by the city council, or applicable provisions of state law, the procedures of the council shall be governed by the latest revised edition of Robert's Rules of Order. 
(Prior code § 21-1013) 
2.04.150 - Failure to observe rules of order. 
    Rules adopted to expedite the transaction of the business of the council in an orderly fashion are deemed to be procedural only and the failure to strictly observe such rules shall not affect the jurisdiction of the council or invalidate any action taken at a meeting that is otherwise held in conformity with law. 
(Prior code § 21-1014) 
2.04.160 - Addressing the council. 
A.  Manner of Addressing Council. Each person desiring to address the council shall, state his/her name and address for the record, state the subject he/she wishes to discuss, state whom he/she is representing if he/she represents an organization or other persons, and, unless further time is granted by majority vote of the council, shall limit his/her remarks to five minutes. All remarks shall be addressed to the council as a whole and not to any member thereof. No question shall be asked a councilperson or a member of the city staff without the permission of the presiding officer. 
B.  Spokesman for Group of Persons. In order to expedite matters and to avoid repetitious presentations, whenever any group of persons wishes to address the council on the same subject matter, it shall be proper for the presiding officer to request that a spokesman be chosen by the group to address the council and, in case additional matters are to be presented by any other member of said group, to limit the number of such persons addressing the council. 
C.  After Motion. After a motion has been made or a public hearing has been closed, no member of the public shall address the council from the audience on the matter under consideration without first securing permission to do so by a majority vote of the city council. 
(Prior code § 21-1015) 
2.04.170 - Rules of decorum. 
A.  Councilpersons. While the council is in session, the members must preserve order and decorum, and a member shall neither by conversation or otherwise delay or interrupt the proceedings or the peace of the council nor disturb any member while speaking or refuse to obey the orders of the presiding officer. Members of the council shall not leave their seats during a meeting without first obtaining the permission of the presiding officer. 
B.  Employees. Members of the city staff and employees shall observe the same rules of order and decorum as are applicable to the city council, with the exception that members of the city staff may leave their seats during a meeting without first obtaining the permission of the presiding officer. 
C.  Persons Addressing the Council. Any person making impertinent, slanderous, or profane remarks or who becomes boisterous while addressing the council shall be called to order by the presiding officer and, if such conduct continues, may at the discretion of the presiding officer be ordered barred from further audience before the council during that meeting. 
D.  Members of the Audience. Any person in the audience who engages in disorderly conduct such as handclapping, stamping of feet, whistling, using profane language, yelling, and similar demonstrations, which conduct disturbs the peace and good order of the meeting, or who refuses to comply with the lawful orders of the presiding officer shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon instructions from the presiding officer it shall be the duty of the sergeant-at-arms to remove any such person from the council chamber and to place him/her under arrest. 
(Prior code § 21-1016) 
2.04.180 - Enforcement of decorum. 
    The chief of police, or such member or members of the police department as he/she may designate, shall be sergeant-at-arms of the city council and shall carry out all orders given by the presiding officer for the purpose of maintaining order and decorum at the council meetings. Any councilperson may move to require the presiding officer to enforce the rules and the affirmative vote of a majority of the council shall require him/her to do so. 
(Prior code § 21-1017) 
2.04.200 - Voting procedure. 
    Any vote of the council, including a roll call vote, may be registered by the members by answering "yes" for an affirmative vote or "no" for a negative vote upon his/her name being called by the city clerk, or by pressing a switch to cause a green light to show for an affirmative vote or a red light to show for a negative vote upon a vote being called for by the presiding officer. The result of any vote registered by means of a lighting system shall be audibly announced by the city clerk and recorded in the minutes as the vote. 
(Prior code § 21-1019) 
2.04.210 - Disqualification for conflict of interest. 
    Any councilperson who is disqualified from voting on a particular matter by reason of a conflict of interest shall publicly state or have the presiding officer state the nature of such disqualification in open meeting. Where no clearly disqualifying conflict of interest appears, the matter of disqualification may, at the request of the councilperson affected, be decided by the other councilpersons. A councilperson who is disqualified by reason of a conflict of interest in any matter shall not remain in his/her seat during the debate and vote on such matter, but shall request and be given the permission of the presiding officer to step down from the council table and leave the council chamber. A councilperson stating such disqualification shall not be counted as part of a quorum and shall be considered absent for the purpose of determining the outcome of any vote on such matter. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; prior code § 21-1020) 
2.04.220 - Failure to vote. 
    Every councilperson should vote unless disqualified by reason of a conflict of interest. A councilperson who abstains from voting in effect consents that a majority of the quorum may decide the question voted upon. 
(Prior code § 21-1021) 
2.04.230 - Tie vote. 
    Tie votes shall be lost motions and may be reconsidered. 
(Prior code § 21-1022) 
2.04.240 - Changing vote. 
    A member may change his/her vote only if he/she makes a timely request to do so immediately following the announcement of the vote and prior to the time that the next item in the order of business is taken up. A councilperson who publicly announces that he/she is abstaining from voting on a particular matter shall not subsequently be allowed to withdraw his/her abstention. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; prior code § 21-1023) 
2.04.250 - Reconsideration. 
    A motion to reconsider any action taken by the council may be made only on the day such action was taken. It may be made either immediately during the same session, or at a recessed or adjoined session thereof. Such motion may be made only by one of the councilpersons who voted with the prevailing side. Nothing herein shall be construed to prevent any councilperson from making or remaking the same or any other motion at a subsequent meeting of the council. 
(Prior code § 21-1024) 
2.04.260 - Ordinances, resolutions and contracts. 
    No ordinance shall be presented to the council unless ordered by a majority vote of the council, or requested by the mayor, or prepared by the city attorney on his/her own initiative. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; prior code § 21-1025) 
2.04.270 - Reading of ordinances and resolutions. 
    At the time of adoption of a resolution, and either at the time of introduction or passage of an ordinance, it shall be read in full except when, after reading the title, further reading is waived by a regular motion adopted by unanimous vote of the councilpersons present. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; prior code § 21-1026) 
2.04.300 - By-district electoral system. 
A.  Pursuant to California Government Code Section 34886, members of the city council of the City of Kingsburg, shall be elected by-district in five (5) single-member districts. 
B.  1.  Beginning with the general municipal election in November 2018, members of the city council shall be elected in the electoral districts established by Section 2.04.310 and subsequently reapportioned as provided by state law. Elections shall take place "by-district" as that term is defined in California Government Code Section 34871, meaning one member of the city council shall be elected from each district, by the voters of that district alone. Each member of the city council shall serve a four-year term until his or her successor is qualified. 
2.  Except as provided in subdivision (4) of this section, the council member elected or appointed to represent a district must reside in that district and be a registered voter in that district, and any candidate for city council must live in, and be a registered voter in, the district in which he or she seeks election at the time nomination papers are issued, pursuant to California Government Code Section 34882 and Elections Code Section 10227. 
3.  Termination of residency in a district by a council member shall create a vacancy for that council district unless a substitute residence within the district is immediately declared and established within thirty (30) days after the termination of residency. 
4.  Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, the members of the city council in office at the time this section takes effect shall continue in office until the expiration of the full term to which he or she was elected and until his or her successor is qualified. At the end of the term of each council member, that member's successor shall be elected on a by-district basis in the districts established in Section 2.04.310 and as provided in Section 2.04.320. 
5.  An appointee to fill a vacancy in the office of a city council member who was elected at large prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived and continues in office pursuant to subdivision (4), may reside anywhere within the corporate boundaries of the city. If a special election is required by law to fill any portion of such term that was initially elected at large, that special election shall be conducted at-large by all the voters of the city. Upon the expiration of the original term, the council member's successor shall be elected on a by-district basis in the districts established in Section 2.04.310 and as provided in Section 2.04.320. 
(Ord. No. 2018-003, § 1, 5-16-2018) 
2.04.310 - Establishment of city council electoral districts. 
A.  Five (5) members of the city council shall be elected on a "by-district" basis from the council districts as reflected in Exhibit 1 to the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, which is incorporated herein by reference. A true and accurate street-by-street description of the district boundaries reflected in Exhibit 1 shall be on file in the office of the City of Kingsburg city clerk. 
B.  To the extent there is a conflict between the street-by-street descriptions on file in the office of the city clerk, and the map reflected in Exhibit 1 to the ordinance codified herein, the map reflected in Exhibit 1 shall prevail. 
C.  The council districts specified in Exhibit 1 shall continue in effect until they are amended or repealed in accordance with law and this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2018-003, § 1, 5-16-2018) 
2.04.320 - Election schedule. 
    Council members shall be elected in council districts 1, 4, and 5 beginning at the general municipal election in November 2018, and every four (4) years thereafter. Council members shall be elected in council districts 2 and 3 beginning at the general municipal election in November 2020, and every four (4) years thereafter. 
(Ord. No. 2018-003, § 1, 5-16-2018) 
Chapter 2.06 - COUNCILMEMBER SALARIES, COMPENSATION AND EXPENSES 
Sections: 

2.06.010 - Purpose. 
    This chapter implements Section 2.06 of the charter of the city of Kingsburg ("charter") which directs the city council of the city of Kingsburg ("city") to determine the salary and compensation of councilmembers by ordinance (including the salary and compensation of those serving as mayor or mayor pro-tem and to provide for reimbursement of their actual and necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their duties of office pursuant to a uniform schedule of expenses duly adopted by resolution; and coordinates those provisions with implementation of Section 2.07 of the charter expressly allowing councilmembers to serve the city as reserve police officers or volunteer firefighter/paramedics or in any similar reserve, volunteer or auxiliary capacity. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; Ord. 2002-03 § 1 (part), 2002) 
2.06.020 - Salaries. 
A.  Current Salary. Except as provided below, each councilmember shall receive a salary as set by ordinance, payable at the same time and in the same manner as salaries for other city officers and employees. 
B.  Mayor's Additional Salary. The councilmember serving as mayor shall also receive as salary the additional sum of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per month, payable at the same time and in the same manner as salaries for other city officers and employees. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; Ord. 2002-03 § 1 (part), 2002) 
2.06.030 - Future increases or decreases. 
A.  Ordinance Required. Any future increase or decrease in the salary and/or other compensation established by this chapter shall be by duly enacted ordinance as required by subsection (A) of Section 2.06 of the charter. 
B.  Increases Deferred. Any increase in the salaries and/or other compensation established by this chapter shall not become effective before the ordinance adopting same has taken effect and councilmembers elected at a regular council election have commenced terms of office. 
(Ord. 2002-03 § 1 (part), 2002) 
2.06.040 - Expenses. 
    Councilmembers shall be reimbursed for their actual and necessary expenses incurred in their performance of their duties of office pursuant to the reimbursement policy established by resolution of the council duly adopted from time to time in conformity with subsection (B) of Section 2.06 of the charter. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; Ord. 2002-03 § 1 (part), 2002) 
2.06.050 - Councilmembers rendering reserve, volunteer, auxiliary and similar services to city. 
A.  No Conflict/Incompatibility. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this chapter or any other ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation of the city, those councilmembers who render other services to the city of Kingsburg as referenced in this chapter, whether as reserve police officers, volunteer firefighter/paramedics or in any similar reserve, volunteer or auxiliary capacity, are hereby found and declared to be performing services as authorized by the express provisions of Section 2.07 of the charter. 
B.  Expenses/Benefits. Councilmembers so performing may receive meals, transportation and lodging from the city or reimbursement for same; may receive expenses in accordance with the resolution and schedule of expenses adopted in accordance with Section 2.06.040 above; and/or may also receive workers compensation, liability, disability, life, health, membership(s) or other similar insurance coverage(s), membership(s) and/or benefit(s) on the same or equivalent basis as such coverage(s), membership(s) and/or benefit(s) are extended or provided to others rendering similar services in a reserve, volunteer, auxiliary or similar capacity. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; Ord. 2002-03 § 1 (part), 2002) 
Chapter 2.08 - CITY MANAGER 
Sections: 

2.08.010 - City manager form of government adopted. 
    The city manager form of government is hereby adopted for the city. The proper administration of the city requires this action in order that the public business may be carried out in the most efficient, best coordinated, well-planned and properly programmed manner with reference to both the work performed and the expense incurred. By reason thereof, the position of city manager is hereby created. 
(Ord. 92-05, 1992: prior code § 22-8000) 
2.08.020 - Appointment by majority vote of council-Qualifications. 
    The city manager shall be appointed by a majority vote of the city council solely on the basis of his/her administrative and executive ability and qualifications, and shall hold office for and during the pleasure of the city council. 
(Ord. 92-05, 1992: prior code § 22-8001) 
2.08.030 - Hours of work. 
    The city manager shall devote full time to the duties of city manager and the interests of the city except as otherwise expressly agreed by the city council. The city manager shall be salaried and shall not receive overtime pay. The city manager shall serve the number of hours and days of work necessary to the proper performance of his/her duties. 
(Ord. 92-05, 1992: prior code § 22-8002) 
2.08.040 - Residency. 
    Residence in the city at the time of appointment of a city manager shall not be required as a condition of appointment, but within one hundred eighty (180) days after reporting for work (or such other time period as considered reasonable by the city council) the city manager must locate within a reasonable distance from City Hall as determined by the city council. 
(Ord. 92-05, 1992: prior code § 22-8003) 
2.08.050 - Eligibility. 
    No member of the city council shall be eligible for appointment as city manager until at least one year has elapsed after he/she has ceased to be a member of the city council. 
(Ord. 92-05, 1992: prior code § 22-8004) 
2.08.060 - Bond. 
    The city manager shall furnish a corporate surety bond to be approved by the city council in such sum as may be determined by the city council and shall be conditioned upon the faithful performance of the duties of the position. The premium for such bond shall be a proper charge against the city. 
(Ord. 92-05, 1992: prior code § 22-8005) 
2.08.070 - Compensation. 
    The city manager shall receive such compensation as the city council shall from time-to-time determine. In addition, the city manager shall be reimbursed for all actual and necessary expenses incurred in the performance of his/her official duties, or incurred when traveling on business pertaining to the city under direction of the city council. Reimbursement shall only be made, however, when a verified itemized claim, setting forth the sums expended for which reimbursement is requested, has been presented and duly approved and allowed in accordance with procedures adopted by the city council. 
(Ord. 92-05, 1992: prior code § 22-8006) 
2.08.080 - Assistant city manager. 
    The city manager shall appoint the assistant city manager to serve as city manager during any temporary absence or disability of city manager. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; Ord. 92-05, 1992: prior code § 22-8007) 
2.08.090 - Powers and duties. 
    The city manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the city under the direction and control of the city council. The city manager shall be responsible to the city council for the proper and efficient administration of all affairs of the city, and charged with those administrative functions enumerated herein and otherwise delegated or assigned to him/her by the city council. In addition to his/her general powers as chief administrative officer, and not as a limitation thereon, it shall be the duty of the city manager and he/she shall have the power: 
A.  Enforcement of Laws. To see that the provisions of this code and all other laws and ordinances are properly enforced within the city. 
B.  Personnel and Departmental Administration. Subject to the provisions of Chapter 6 of this Title 2 of the Kingsburg Municipal Code and to any rules and regulations promulgated by the council thereunder: 
1.  To appoint, promote, discipline and dismiss all subordinate employees of the city, except the city attorney, city clerk and city treasurer; 
2.  To give timely notice to the council of all actions of the city manager in regard to the appointment, promotion, discipline and dismissal of any city employee; 
3.  To transfer employees from one department to another; and 
4.  To consolidate or combine offices, positions, departments or units with council approval. 
C.  Control of Officers and Departments. To exercise control over all departments and divisions of the city government and over all appointive officers and employees thereof save and except the city attorney, city clerk and city treasurer, provided departmental reorganizations shall be made only with prior council approval. 
D.  Attend Council Meetings. To attend all meetings of the council and its committees, unless excused therefrom by the council, except when the city manager's removal is under consideration by the council. 
E.  Recommend Adoption of Ordinances. To recommend to the council for adoption such measures and ordinances as are deemed necessary or expedient. 
F.  Advice as to Finances. To keep the council at all times fully advised as to the financial condition and needs of the city. 
G.  Prepare Budget. To prepare and submit to the council the annual budget. 
H.  Prepare Salary Plan. To periodically prepare and recommend to the council a salary plan. 
I.  Establish Purchasing System. Subject to prior council approval, to establish a centralized purchasing system for all city offices, departments and agencies. 
J.  Investigate City Affairs. To make investigations into the affairs of the city, any department or division thereof, any contract, or the proper performance of any obligation running to the city. 
K.  Investigate Complaints. To investigate all complaints in relation to matters concerning the administration of the government of the city and in regard to the service maintained by public utilities in the city, and to see that all franchises, permits and privileges granted by the city are faithfully observed. 
L.  Supervise Public Property. To exercise general supervision over all public buildings, public parks and other public property which are under the control and jurisdiction of the council and not specifically delegated to a particular board or officer, and to control, supervise and inspect all public work being done by the city. 
M.  Take Inventories. To compile and preserve inventories of all city real and personal property and annually thereafter to the end that the same may be kept current. 
N.  Other Agency Duties. To perform such duties as are consistent with these provisions for other official agencies created by the city council (such as the Kingsburg redevelopment agency and Kingsburg financing authority) consistent with law and as directed by the governing bodies thereof. 
O.  To Perform Additional Duties. To perform such other duties and exercise such other powers as may be delegated to him/her from time-to-time by the provisions of this code and other ordinances, resolutions and actions of the council. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; Ord. 92-05, 1992: prior code § 22-8008) 
2.08.100 - Council-manager relations. 
    Except for matters of inquiry, the city council shall deal with the administrative services and personnel of city through the city manager, and neither the city council nor the members thereof shall give orders or instructions to any subordinates of the city manager, but shall voice their policies and instructions through him/her. The city manager shall take his/her orders and instructions from the city council only when sitting in a duly convened meeting of the city council. 
(Ord. 92-05, 1992: prior code § 22-8009) 
2.08.110 - Departmental cooperation. 
    It shall be the duty of all subordinate officers, city attorney, city clerk and city treasurer to assist the city manager in administering the affairs of the city efficiently, economically and harmoniously so far as may be consistent with their duties as prescribed by law, this code, and other laws of the city. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; Ord. 92-05, 1992: prior code § 22-8010) 
2.08.120 - Removal of city manager. 
    The removal of the city manager shall be effected only by a majority vote of the whole city council as then constituted in a duly convened council meeting. 
(Ord. 92-05, 1992: prior code § 22-8011) 
2.08.130 - Limitation on removal. 
    Notwithstanding any other provisions here, the city manager shall not be removed from office (other than for disability, serious misconduct or willful failure or refusal to perform the duties of city manager) during or within a period of sixty (60) days next succeeding any municipal election at which a member of the city council is elected or when a new city councilperson is appointed in lieu of election. The purpose of this provision is to allow any newly elected or appointed member of the city council or a reorganized city council to observe the actions and ability of the city manager. After the expiration of said sixty (60) day period, the other provisions of the ordinance codified in this chapter regarding the removal of the city manager shall apply and be effective. 
(Ord. 92-05, 1992: prior code § 22-8012) 
2.08.140 - Agreements of employment. 
    Nothing in this article shall be construed as a limitation on the power or authority of the city council to enter into any agreement with the city manager delineating additional terms and conditions of employment not inconsistent with any provisions of this article. 
(Ord. 92-05, 1992: prior code § 22-8013) 
2.08.150 - Assistant city manager-Powers and duties. 
    Performs powers and duties as listed in Section 2.08.090 "City manager powers and duties" as assigned by the city manager. 
(Added during 5-08 supplement) 
Chapter 2.12 - CITY CLERK 
Sections: 

2.12.010 - Duties. 
    The city clerk shall perform such duties, and exercise such powers, as are set forth in applicable state laws and the provisions of this code, or as otherwise directed by the council, including without limitation: 
A.  Keep safely in the City Hall all records and books pertaining to his/her office, establish an accurate system of filing all records, and keep all books for the convenience of those who are entitled to see the same. 
B.  Supervise functions in connection with the enforcement, billing, collection, and record keeping of the city business license fee. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; prior code § 22-2000) 
2.12.020 - Delegation. 
    The city clerk shall take personal charge of all duties pertaining to his/her office, and shall not delegate any of his/her work to any other person or persons unless he/she has first obtained consent of the council. 
(Prior code § 22-2001) 
Chapter 2.16 - OFFICIAL BONDS, SALARIES AND EXPENSES 
Sections: 

2.16.010 - Salaries-Purpose. 
    This article is enacted pursuant to the authority of Sections 36514.5, 36516, 36516.2 and 36516.5 of the California Government Code, as existing or as hereafter may be amended. 
(Prior code § 21-2000) 
2.16.020 - Salaries-Increase or decrease. 
A.  Any future increase or decrease in the salaries established hereunder shall be by duly enacted ordinance pursuant to California Government Code Section 36516. 
B.  The effective date of any increase herein or here- after made shall be in accordance with California Government Code Section 36516.5. 
(Prior code § 21-2003) 
2.16.030 - Salaries designated. 
A.  City Clerk. The salary of the city clerk shall be set from time to time by the council by resolution or in the annual budget. 
B.  City Treasurer. The salary of the city treasurer shall be set from time to time by the council by resolution or in the annual budget. 
C.  City Council. Each member of the council shall receive, as salary the sum as established by ordinance, pursuant to Section 36516 of the California Government Code, payable at the same time and in the same manner as salaries for other city officers and employees. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; prior code §§ 21-2002, 22-2002, 22-3000, 22-5002) 
2.16.040 - Official bonds. 
    The following officers shall execute surety bonds to the city, conditional upon the faithful performance of the duties of such offices, to be in such form and substance as may be approved by the council: 
A.  City treasurer; 
B.  City clerk. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; prior code § 22-1000) 
2.16.050 - Expenses. 
    Councilmembers shall be reimbursed for actual and necessary expenses incurred in the performance of official duties pursuant to California Government Code Section 36514.5. 
(Prior code § 21-2004) 
Chapter 2.20 - CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS 
Sections: 

2.20.010 - Enforcement responsibility. 
    In addition to enforcement by any peace officer, the provisions of this code described below may also be enforced by the code enforcement officers designated: 
A.  By the building official: 
1.  Public Safety. 
a.  Chapter 2.40-Emergency services. 
b.  Chapter 15.40-Uniform Fire Code. 
2.  Public Welfare. 
a.  Chapter 8.20-Summary abatement of public nuisances. 
3.  Building Regulations. 
a.  Chapter 15.04-In general. 
b.  Chapter 15.08-Uniform Building Code. 
c.  Chapter 15.12-Uniform Mechanical Code. 
d.  Chapter 15.16-Uniform Housing Code. 
e.  Chapter 15.20-Uniform Sign Code. 
f.  Chapter 15.24-Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings. 
g.  Chapter 15.28-National Electric Code. 
h.  Chapter 15.32-Uniform Plumbing Code. 
i.  Chapter 15.36-Uniform Swimming Pool, Spa and Hot Tub Code. 
4.  Land Use. 
a.  Title 17-Zoning. 
b.  Title 17-Special Provisions. 
B.  By the fire chief and/or his/her authorized representative: 
1.  Public Safety. 
a.  Chapter 8.04-Fire prevention. 
b.  Chapter 2.40-Emergency services. 
2.  Public Welfare. 
a.  Chapter 8.20-Summary abatement of public nuisances. 
3.  Building Regulations. 
a.  Chapter 15.08-Uniform Building Code. 
b.  Chapter 15.24-Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings. 
c.  Chapter 15.28-National Electric Code. 
d.  Chapter 15.40-Uniform Fire Code. 
    In the absence of the designated code enforcement officer, his/her duly appointed deputy may exercise enforcement authority in accordance with this code. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; Ord. 93-08, 1993) 
2.20.020 - Authority of the code enforcement officers. 
    The code enforcement officers of the city are hereby authorized by the council, pursuant to Sections 832, 836.5 and 19(d) of the Penal Code of the State and subject to the provisions thereof, to arrest a person without a warrant whenever the code enforcement officer has reasonable cause to believe that the person to be arrested has either violated the relevant portion of this code in the code enforcement officer's presence or has failed to correct a violation of the relevant portion of this code and therefore has committed a misdemeanor, misdemeanor/infraction or infraction which the code enforcement officer has the discretionary duty to enforce. 
(Ord. 93-08, 1993) 
2.20.030 - Citations-Authority to issue. 
    Each code enforcement officer is further authorized by the council to issue a notice to appear and to release such person on his/her written promise to appear in court pursuant to Sections 853.5 and 853.6 of the Penal Code of the state. Under no circumstance may any code enforcement officer take the person to be arrested into custody. 
(Ord. 93-08, 1993) 
2.20.040 - Citations-Refusal to sign. 
    In the event the person to be arrested demands to be taken before the magistrate or refuses to provide his/her written promise to appear in court, the code enforcement officer shall either: 
A.  Summon a police officer and explain the situation with a request that the police officer arrest and take the person into custody; or 
B.  Seek the assistance of the city attorney and request that a complaint be prepared and filed against such person. 
(Ord. 93-08, 1993) 
2.20.050 - Training requirements. 
    In addition to any mandatory course of training prescribed by the commission of peace officer standards pursuant to Section 832 of the Penal Code of the State, the chief of police may establish and cause to be administered, at the discretion of the chief of police, a special enforcement training program designed to instruct the code enforcement officers from time-to-time regarding the provisions of this code to be enforced, the evidentiary prerequisites to proper prosecution for violations thereof, the appropriate procedures for making arrests or otherwise prudently exercising such arrest and citation authority, and the limitations attendant thereto. 
(Ord. 93-08, 1993) 
2.20.060 - Citations-Filing. 
    The code enforcement officers shall maintain files of executed citations, and such citations shall be filed with the appropriate magistrate. 
(Ord. 93-08, 1993) 
Chapter 2.24 - PEACE OFFICER STANDARDS AND TRAINING 
Sections: 

2.24.010 - Training of police officers. 
A.  The city of Kingsburg declares that it desires to qualify to receive aid from the state of California under the provisions of Section 13522, Chapter 1, of Title 4, Part 4, of the California Penal Code. 
B.  Pursuant to Section 13510(a), Chapter 1, the police department will adhere to standards for recruitment and training established by the California Commission on Peace Officer Standards and Training (POST). 
C.  Pursuant to Section 13512, Chapter 1, the commission and its representatives may make such inquiries as deemed appropriate by the commission to ascertain that the department's peace officers and public safety dispatcher personnel adhere to standards for selection and training established by the Commission on Peace Officer Standards and Training. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; Ord. 471 §§ 1-3, 1988: prior code § 22-7000) 
Chapter 2.28 - PLANNING COMMISSION 
Sections: 

2.28.010 - Commission established. 
    A planning commission hereby is established for the city. 
(Prior code § 23-1000) 
2.28.020 - Composition-Appointment. 
A.  The commission shall consist of seven members appointed by the mayor, with the consent of the council. 
B.  A member of the council shall be appointed as advisory member to the commission by resolution of the council, and such other advisory members to the commission as the council may determine may be appointed by resolution of the council. 
(Prior code § 23-1001) 
2.28.030 - Terms. 
A.  The terms of office for each member of the commission shall be four years, except the first members, who shall so classify themselves by lot that their terms of office shall expire as follows: Two at the end of 1959, and two at the end of one year thereafter, and three at the end of two years thereafter. 
B.  Vacancies for unexpired terms shall be filled by appointment for the portion of the unexpired term only. 
(Prior code § 23-1002) 
2.28.040 - Compensation. 
    The members of the commission shall not receive any compensation for their services. 
(Prior code § 23-1003) 
2.28.050 - Chairperson. 
    The commission shall elect from its members a chairperson and vice-chairperson, and the chairperson and vice-chairperson shall serve for one year and until their successors are elected. In case of the absence of the chairperson and the vice-chairperson the commission shall select a chairperson pro tem. 
(Prior code § 23-1004) 
2.28.060 - Meetings-Quorum. 
A.  The commission shall meet at least once a month at such time and place as it may fix by resolution. 
B.  Special meetings may be called at any time by the chairperson or by three members, and by written notice served upon each member of the commission at least three days before the time specified for the proposed meeting. 
C.  Four members of the commission shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business (except in such cases where the state statute requires a two-thirds majority vote). 
(Prior code § 23-1005) 
2.28.070 - Records-Secretary. 
    The commission shall keep a proper record of its actions, findings and proceedings. The planning director shall appoint a secretary to the commission whose duty it shall be to keep all records of the actions, findings, and proceedings of the commission. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; prior code § 23-1006) 
2.28.080 - Powers and duties. 
    The commission shall have all of the powers and duties defined in state law, this code, and resolutions of the council. 
(Prior code § 23-1007) 
Chapter 2.32 - REDEVELOPMENT AGENCY 
Sections: 

2.32.010 - Purpose. 
    It is hereby found, determined and declared that there is a need for a redevelopment agency to function in the city in accordance with the provisions of the community redevelopment law. 
(Prior code § 27-1000) 
2.32.020 - Established-Authority. 
    Said redevelopment agency is hereby established pursuant to Section 33101 of the community redevelopment law, to be known as the Kingsburg redevelopment agency. Said redevelopment agency is authorized to transact business and exercise its power under provisions of the community redevelopment law. 
(Prior code § 27-1001) 
2.32.030 - City council duties. 
    Pursuant to the provisions of Section 33200 of the community redevelopment law, the city council hereby declares itself to be the redevelopment agency of the city of Kingsburg. 
(Prior code § 27-1002) 
2.32.040 - Agency to serve public interest. 
    The city council finds and determines that the designation of the city council as the redevelopment agency will serve the public interest and promote the public health, safety and welfare in an effective manner in that this public body is best able to serve the needs of the community to implement the purposed of the community redevelopment law. 
(Prior code § 27-1003) 
2.32.050 - Filing of certified copy. 
    The city clerk is directed to cause a certified copy of the ordinance codified in this chapter to be filed in the office of the Secretary of State. 
(Prior code § 27-1004) 
2.32.060 - Property acquisition. 
    Prior to July 19, 1995, the agency's program for the acquisition of real property by eminent domain, with respect to the Kingsburg Redevelopment Project, is hereby described as follows: 
(a)  In an effort to implement this plan, it may be necessary for the agency to acquire property in the project. Except as specifically exempted in the plan, the agency may acquire, but is not required to acquire, real property located in the project in accordance with the plan by gift, devise, exchange, purchase, eminent domain, or any other lawful method. The agency shall attempt to use all other avenues of acquisition to implement this plan prior to the use of eminent domain. 
(b)  If the agency utilizes eminent domain proceedings to acquire property within the project it must commence said proceedings within twelve (12) years of the date of the adoption of the plan unless extended by amendment of the redevelopment plan. 
(Ord. No. 2009-03, § 2, 2009) 
Chapter 2.36 - CITY RECORDS 
Sections: 

2.36.010 - Destruction of city records. 
    Duplicate and obsolete records of the city shall be destroyed by a means which will not allow them to be readily restored or reconstituted, and under the following procedure: 
A.  In accordance with Sections 34090, 34090.5, 34090.7 and 53921, California Government Code, and other applicable law. 
B.  After application for their destruction has been approved by the city attorney or his/her duly authorized representative. 
C.  Upon approval by resolution of the city council after the aforesaid approval by the city attorney or his/her authorized representative has been granted. 
(Ord. 391 § 2, 1980) 
Chapter 2.40 - EMERGENCY SERVICES 
Sections: 

2.40.010 - Purpose. 
    The declared purposes of this chapter are to provide for the preparation and carrying out of plans for the protection of persons and property within this city in the event of an emergency; the direction of the emergency organization; and the coordination of the emergency functions of this city with all other public agencies, corporations, organizations, and affected private persons. 
(Prior code § 44-0000) 
2.40.020 - Emergency defined. 
    As used in this chapter, "emergency" means the actual or threatened existence of conditions of disaster or of extreme peril to the safety of persons and property within this city caused by such conditions as air pollution, fire, flood, storm, epidemic, riot, or earthquake, or any man-made or natural disasters or other conditions, including conditions resulting from war or imminent threat of war, but other than conditions resulting from a labor controversy, which conditions are or are likely to be beyond the control of the services, personnel, equipment, and facilities of this city, requiring the combined forces of other political subdivisions to combat. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; prior code § 44-4001) 
2.40.030 - Disaster council-Membership. 
    The Kingsburg disaster council is hereby created and shall consist of the following: 
A.  The mayor, who shall be chairperson. 
B.  The director of emergency services, who shall be vice-chairperson. 
C.  The assistant director of emergency services. 
D.  Such chiefs of emergency services as are provided for in a current emergency plan of this city, adopted pursuant to this chapter. 
E.  Such representatives of civic, business, labor, veterans, professional, or other organizations having an official emergency responsibility, as may be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the city council. 
(Prior code § 44-0002) 
2.40.040 - Disaster council-Powers and duties. 
    It shall be the duty of the Kingsburg disaster council, and it is hereby empowered, to develop and recommend for adoption by the city council, emergency and mutual aid plans and agreements and such ordinances and resolutions and rules and regulations as are necessary to implement such plans and agreements. The disaster council shall meet upon call of the chairperson, or in his/her absence from the city or inability to call such meeting, upon call of the vice-chairperson. 
(Prior code § 44-0003) 
2.40.050 - Director and assistant director-Appointment. 
A.  There is hereby created the office of director of emergency services. The director shall be appointed by the mayor with the advice and consent of the city council. 
B.  There is hereby created the office of assistant director of emergency services. The assistant director shall be appointed by the mayor with the advice and consent of the city council. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; prior code § 44-0004) 
2.40.060 - Director and assistant director-Powers and duties. 
    The director is hereby empowered to: 
A.  Request the city council to proclaim the existence or threatened existence of a "local emergency" if the city council is not in session. Whenever a local emergency is proclaimed by the director, the city council shall take action to ratify the proclamation within seven days thereafter or the proclamation shall have no further force or effect. 
B.  Request the Governor to proclaim a "state of emergency" when, in the opinion of the director the locally available resources are inadequate to cope with the emergency. 
C.  Control and direct the effort of the emergency organization of this city for the accomplishment of the purposes of this chapter. 
D.  Direct cooperation between the coordination of services and staff of the emergency organization of this city; and resolve questions of authority and responsibility that may arise between them. 
E.  Represent this city in all dealings with public or private agencies on matters pertaining to emergencies as defined herein. 
F.  In the event of the proclamation of a "local emergency" as herein provided, the proclamation of a "state of emergency" by the Governor or the Director of the State Office of Emergency Services, or the existence of a "state of war emergency," the director is hereby empowered: 
1.  To make and issue rules and regulations on matters reasonably related to the protection of life and property as affected by such emergency; provided, however, such rules and regulations must be confirmed at the earliest practicable time by the city council; 
2.  To obtain vital supplies, equipment, and such other properties found lacking and needed for the protection of life and property and to bind the city for the fair value thereof and, if required immediately, to commandeer the same for public use; 
3.  To require emergency services of any city officer or employee and, in the event of the proclamation of a "state of emergency" in the county in which this city is located or the existence of a "state of war emergency," to command the aid of as many citizens of this community as he/she deems necessary in the execution of his/her duties; such persons shall be entitled to all privileges, benefits, and immunities as are provided by state law for registered disaster service workers; 
4.  To requisition necessary personnel or material of any city department or agency; and 
5.  To execute all of his/her ordinary powers of his/her day-to-day office, all of the special powers conferred upon him/her by this chapter, or by resolution or emergency plan pursuant hereto adopted by the city council, all powers conferred upon him/her by any statute, by any agreement approved by the city council, and by any other lawful authority. 
G.  The mayor shall designate the order of succession to the office of director of emergency services, to take effect in the event that the director is unavailable to attend meetings and otherwise perform his/her duties during an emergency. Such order of succession shall be approved by the city council. 
H.  The assistant director shall, under the supervision of the director and with the assistance of emergency service chiefs, develop emergency plans and manage the emergency programs of this city; and shall have such other powers and duties as may be assigned by the director. 
(Prior code § 44-0005) 
2.40.070 - Emergency organization. 
    All officers and employees of this city, together with those volunteer forces enrolled to aid them during an emergency, and all groups, organizations, and persons who may by agreement or operation of law, including persons impressed into service under the provisions of Section 2.40.060(F)(1) and (3) of this code, be charged with duties incident to the protection of life and property in this city during such emergency, shall constitute the emergency organization of the city of Kingsburg. 
(Prior code § 44-0006) 
2.40.080 - Emergency plan. 
    The Kingsburg disaster council shall be responsible for the development of the city of Kingsburg emergency plan, which plan shall provide for the effective mobilization of all of the resources of this city, both public and private, to meet any condition constituting a local emergency, state of emergency, or state of war emergency; and shall provide for the organization, powers and duties, services and staff of the emergency organization. Such plan shall take effect upon adoption by resolution of the city council. 
(Prior code § 44-0007) 
2.40.090 - Expenditures. 
    Any expenditures made in connection with emergency activities, including mutual aid activities, shall be deemed conclusively to be for the direct protection and benefit of the inhabitants and property of the city of Kingsburg. 
(Prior code § 44-0008) 
2.40.100 - Penalty for certain violations. 
    It shall be a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or by imprisonment for not to exceed six months, or both, for any person, during an emergency, to: 
A.  Willfully obstruct, hinder, or delay any member of the emergency organization in the enforcement of any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter, or in the performance of any duty imposed upon him/her by virtue of this chapter. 
B.  Do any act forbidden by any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter, if such act is of such a nature as to give or be likely to give assistance to the enemy or to imperil the lives or property of inhabitants of this city, or to prevent, hinder, or delay the defense or protection thereof. 
C.  Wear, carry, or display, without authority, any means of identification specified by the emergency agency of the state. 
(Prior code § 44-0009) 
Chapter 2.44 - UNCLAIMED PROPERTY 
Sections: 

2.44.010 - Custody. 
    The police department shall take charge of all lost, stolen and unclaimed property which is turned over to or comes into the possession of the city or any of its departments, and shall retain the possession thereof subject to the provisions of this article. 
(Prior code § 24-1000) 
2.44.020 - Records. 
    The police department shall keep a record of all such property, together with the date, description and name, if any, of the person from whom taken, and the place and circumstances under which taken, found or recovered. 
(Prior code § 24-1001) 
2.44.030 - Waiting period. 
    If no owner appears within ninety (90) days after such property comes into the possession of the police department and offers reasonable proof, satisfactory to the chief of police, of his/her ownership and compensates for the expenses, if any, incurred in the removal, maintenance, preservation and keeping of said property, as the chief of police shall determine, then the title to such property shall thereupon vest in the city; provided, however, that the police department shall exercise due diligence to ascertain the owner and notify him/her of its possession of such property; and provided, further that the title to clothing, bedding, wearing apparel and other similar property which comes into the possession of the police department shall vest in the city, after the expiration of thirty (30) days, unless the owner reclaims same, and all such property may, in the discretion of the chief of police, be delivered over gratuitously to any charitable organization after said thirty (30) day period. 
(Ord. 95-04, 1995: prior code § 24-1002) 
2.44.040 - Disposition. 
A.  The chief of police shall have power in his/her discretion to summarily destroy all liquors, burglar tools, knives, firearms, deadly weapons, and other similar articles coming into the possession of the city, or deliver same for use by other departments of the city or by other governmental agencies, or to otherwise dispose of same in such other manner as he/she shall deem expedient and proper. 
B.  If any property so taken into the possession of the police department, except as hereinbefore specified, shall remain unclaimed for a period of six months, or if the claimant shall refuse to pay the charges for same as herein prescribed, or fail to establish right of ownership, then the said property may at any time thereafter be sold. Prior to the date of the sale of any motor vehicle, thirty (30) days' notice by registered mail shall be given to the legal and registered owners of such vehicle as same appear upon the registration certificate, if any, or on the records of the Department of Motor Vehicles at Sacramento. (Amended during 5-08 supplement; prior code § 24-1003) 
2.44.050 - Manner of sale. 
    At the time and place fixed for such sale, such property shall be sold at public auction to the highest bidder by the chief of police, or by any employee or officer of the city whom he/she shall designate; provided, however, that the right shall be reserved to reject any and all bids. The proceeds from such sales shall be paid over to the city clerk and deposited in the general fund of the city. 
(Prior code § 24-1004) 
2.44.060 - Stolen or embezzled property. 
    Nothing contained in this article shall be deemed to apply to stolen or embezzled property which comes into the custody of peace officers under Sections 1407-1411 of the state Penal Code. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; prior code § 24-1005) 
2.44.070 - Return of property to finder. 
    Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, if the true owner does not appear during the six-month period and claim the property, it may be delivered back to the person who delivered it to the chief of police if at the time of delivery or prior to disposition of the property such person has indicated in writing that he/she wishes to assert a claim to the property as a finder. 
(Prior code § 24-1006) 
Chapter 2.48 - PERSONNEL SYSTEM 
Sections: 

2.48.010 - Adoption of personnel system. 
    In order to establish an equitable and uniform procedure for dealing with personnel matters; to attract to municipal service the best and most competent persons available; to assure that appointments and promotions of employees will be based on merit and fitness; and to provide a reasonable degree of security for qualified employees, the following personnel system is adopted. 
(Prior code § 26-1000) 
2.48.020 - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter, the following terms shall be defined as indicated: 
    "Appointment power" means the officers of the city who, in their individual capacities, or as a board, commission, or city council, have the final authority to make the appointment to the position to be filled. 
    "Class" means all positions sufficiently similar in duties, authority, and responsibility to permit grouping under a common title in the application with equity of common standards of selection, transfer, demotion and salary. 
    "Competitive service" means all positions of employment in the service of the city except those specifically excluded by this chapter. 
    "Days" means calendar days unless otherwise stated. 
    "Demotion" means the movement of an employee from one class to another class having a lower maximum rate of pay. 
    "Examination" means selection techniques used to measure the relative capacities of the persons applying for positions within the competitive service. 
    "Employment list" means a list of names of persons who may be considered for employment with the city under specified conditions. 
    "Layoff" means the separation of employees from the active work force due to lack of work or funds, or to the abolition of positions by the city council for the above reasons or due to organization changes. 
    "Position" means a group of duties and responsibilities in the competitive service requiring the full-time or part-time employment of one person. 
    "Probationary period" means a working test period during which an employee is required to demonstrate his/her fitness for the position to which he/she is appointed by actual performance of the duties of the position. 
    "Promotion" means the movement of an employee from one class to another class having a higher maximum rate of pay. 
    "Provisional appointment" means an appointment of a person who possesses the minimum qualifications established for a particular class and who has been appointed to a position in that class in the absence of available eligibles. 
    "Reinstatement" means the reemployment without examination of a former regular employee or probationary employee. 
    "Suspension" means the temporary separation from the service of an employee without pay, for disciplinary purposes. 
    "Transfer" means a change of an employee from one position to another position in the same class or in a comparable class. 
(Prior code § 26-1001) 
2.48.030 - Personnel officer. 
    The city manager shall be the personnel officer. The city manager may delegate any of the powers and duties conferred upon him/her as personnel officer under this chapter to any other officer or employee of the city or may recommend that such powers and duties be performed under contract as provided in Section 26-1014 of this chapter. The personnel officer shall: 
A.  Attend all meetings of the personnel board and serve as its secretary; 
B.  Administer all the provisions of this chapter and of the personnel rules not specifically reserved to the city council; 
C.  Prepare and recommend to the city council personnel rules and revisions and amendments to such rules; 
D.  Prepare or cause to be prepared a position classification plan, including class specifications, and revisions of the plan. The plan, and any revisions thereof, shall become effective upon approval by the city council; 
E.  Provide for the publishing or posting of notices of examinations for positions in the competitive service; the receiving of applications therefore; the conducting and grading of examinations; and the certification to the appointing power of a list of all persons eligible for appointment to the appropriate position in the competitive service. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; prior code § 26-1002) 
2.48.040 - Competitive service. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all offices, positions and employments in the service of the city, except: 
A.  The city manager; 
B.  Elective officers; 
C.  Members of appointive boards, commissions, and committees; 
D.  Persons engaged under contract to supply expert, professional, technical or any other service; 
E.  City attorney; 
F.  Emergency employees who are hired to meet the immediate requirements of an emergency condition, such as extraordinary fire, flood, or earthquake which threatens life or property; 
G.  Employees, other than those listed elsewhere in this section, who are not regularly employed in permanent positions; 
H.  Such limited key, sensitive and/or critical management, professional, supervisory and/or confidential positions as the council shall determine from time to time and designate by resolution. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; Ord. 95-01, 1995; prior code § 26-1005) 
2.48.050 - Adoption and amendment of rules and regulations. 
    Personnel rules and regulations shall be adopted by resolution of the city council after notice of such action has been publicly posted in at least three public places designated by the city council and at least five days prior to city council consideration. The personnel officer shall give reasonable written notice to each recognized employee organization affected by the ordinance, rule, resolution or regulation or amendment thereof proposed to be adopted by the city council. Amendments and revisions may be suggested by any interested party and shall be processed as provided in the personnel rules. The rules shall establish regulations governing the personnel system including: 
A.  Preparation, installation, revision, and maintenance of a position classification plan covering all positions in the competitive service, including employment standards and qualifications for each class; 
B.  Public announcement of all examinations and acceptance of applications for employment; 
C.  Preparation and conduct of examinations and the establishment and use of resulting employment lists containing names of persons eligible for appointment; 
D.  Certification and appointment of persons from employment lists, and the making of provisional appointments; 
E.  Establishment of probationary periods; 
F.  Evaluation of employees during the probationary period; 
G.  Transfer, promotion, demotion, reinstatement, disciplinary action and layoff of employees in the competitive service; 
H.  Separation of employees from the city service; 
I.  The establishment of adequate personnel records; 
J.  The establishment of appeal procedures concerning the interpretation or application of this chapter and any rules adopted hereunder. 
    The city council may wish to include within the scope of the rules and regulations such personnel matters as vacation, holidays, sick leave benefits, overtime, and grievance procedures. 
K.  Attendance and leave; 
L.  Grievance and complaint; 
M.  Seniority; and 
N.  Overtime and standby. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; prior code § 26-1006) 
2.48.060 - Appointments. 
A.  Appointments to vacant positions in the competitive service shall be made in accordance with the personnel rules. Appointments and promotions shall be based on merit and fitness, to be ascertained so far as practicable by competitive examination. Examinations may be used and conducted to aid in the selection of qualified employees and shall consist of selection techniques which will test fairly the qualifications of candidates, such as achievement and aptitude tests, written tests, personal interview, performance tests, physical agility tests, evaluation of daily work performance, work samples, or any combinations of these or other tests. The probationary period shall be considered an extension of the examination process. Physical and medical tests may be given as a part of any examination. 
B.  In any examination, the personnel officer may include, in addition to competitive tests, a qualifying test or tests and set minimum standards therefore. 
C.  Appointments shall be made by the personnel officer upon recommendations of the head of the affected department. 
D.  When an appointment is to be made to a vacancy in the competitive service, the appointing officer may hire the best qualified person on the eligible list, order of appearance notwithstanding. 
E.  Notwithstanding any other provision of any other ordinance, this code or city rule and/or regulation, when a new position is created as a result of evolution of duties and where services have been previously satisfactorily performed for the city by an incumbent in the predecessor position for at least one continuous prior year of service at an average of no less than two-thirds of the hours equivalent to full-time employment at the time of creation of the new position, such an incumbent may be certified and appointed to the new position without creation of an eligible list regardless of whether the predecessor position was part of the competitive service. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; Ord. 97-03 § 1, 1997: prior code § 26-1007) 
2.48.070 - Probationary period. 
A.  All regular appointments, including promotional appointments, shall be for a probationary period of not less than six months, except that the probationary period for police and fire employees shall not be less than twelve (12) months. During the probationary period, the employee may be rejected at any time without the right of appeal or hearing. 
B.  An employee rejected during the probationary period from a position to which he/she has been promoted shall be reinstated to a position in the class from which he/she was promoted unless he/she is discharged from the city service as provided in this chapter and the rules. 
C.  An employee in the competitive service promoted or transferred to a position not included in the competitive service shall be reinstated to a position in the class from which he/she was promoted or transferred if action is taken to reject him/her unless he/she is discharged in the manner provided in this chapter and the personnel rules for positions in the competitive service. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; prior code § 26-1008) 
2.48.080 - Status of present employees. 
A.  Any person holding a position included in the competitive service who, on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, shall have served continuously in such position, or in some other position in the competitive service, for a period equal to the probationary period prescribed in the rules for his/her class, shall assume regular status in the competitive service in the position held on such effective date without qualifying test, and shall thereafter be subject in all respects to the provisions of this chapter and the personnel rules. 
B.  Any other persons holding positions in the competitive service shall be regarded as probationers who are serving out the balance of their probationary periods as prescribed in the rules before obtaining regular status. The probationary period shall be computed from the date of appointment or employment. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; prior code § 26-1009) 
2.48.090 - Applicability of rules to certain exempt positions. 
    The provisions of the personnel rules relating to attendance and leaves shall apply to the incumbents of full-time exempt positions, unless otherwise specified. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; prior code § 26-1010) 
2.48.100 - Demotion, dismissal, reduction in pay, suspension. 
A.  Any appointing power shall have the right, for due cause, to demote, dismiss, reduce in pay, or suspend without pay for thirty (30) calendar days, any regular employee. Advance notice of such action must be in writing and served personally on such employee, except where an emergency situation exists, in which case the notice shall be served within three working days of the action taken. Such notice shall specify the penalty, contain a statement of the charges, the reasons for the charges, notify the employee of the right of appeal and representation by counsel, and shall state how and when the employee shall respond. 
B.  The provisions of this section shall not apply to reductions in pay which are a part of a general plan to reduce salaries and wages or to eliminate positions. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; prior code § 26-1011) 
2.48.110 - Right of appeal. 
A.  Any employee in the competitive service shall have the right to appeal to the personnel board any disciplinary action, or alleged violation of this chapter or the rules and regulations adopted pursuant to the chapter, except in those instances where the right of appeal is specifically prohibited by this chapter or the rules and regulations adopted pursuant to this chapter. 
B.  All appeals shall be concluded as expeditiously as possible and in accordance with the requirements and procedures as set forth in the personnel rules and regulations adopted pursuant to this chapter. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; prior code § 26-1012) 
2.48.120 - Layoff and reemployment. 
A.  Whenever in the judgment of the city council it becomes necessary in the interest of the economy, or because the necessity for a position no longer exists, the city council may abolish any position or employment in the competitive service; and the employee holding such position for employment may be laid off without taking disciplinary action and without the right of appeal. 
B.  The order of layoff of employees shall be established by the personnel officer on the recommendation of the department head involved. The department head shall take into consideration the job performance and length of service of employees in preparing a recommended layoff list; provided, however, that no regular or probationary employee shall be laid off his/her position in any department while any emergency, temporary or provisional employee is serving in the same class in that department. 
C.  Employees to be laid off shall be given such prior notice as is reasonable under the circumstances. 
D.  The names of regular and probationary employees laid off or demoted in lieu of layoff shall be placed upon reemployment lists for one year for those classes requiring basically the same qualifications, duties and responsibilities of the class from which layoff or demotion in lieu of layoff was made. 
E.  Persons whose names are placed on reemployment lists in accordance with this section, and who are reemployed within the prescribed period shall be regarded as having been on leave of absence during this period of absence and entitled to all benefits accruing from such leave. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; prior code § 26-1013) 
2.48.130 - Improper political activity. 
    The political activities of city employees shall conform to pertinent provisions of state law. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; prior code § 26-1014) 
2.48.140 - Discrimination. 
    No person in the competitive service, or seeking admission thereto, shall be employed, promoted, demoted, or discharged, or in any way favored or discriminated against because of political opinions or affiliations, race, color, ancestry, national origin, religious creed, sex, or because of the exercise of his/her rights under Section 3502 of the Government Code. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; prior code § 26-1015) 
2.48.150 - Right to contract for special services. 
    The city manager shall consider and make recommendations to the city council regarding the extent to which the city should contract for the performance of technical services in connection with the establishment or operation of the personnel system. The city council may contract with any qualified person or public or private agency for the performance of all or any of the following responsibilities and duties imposed by this chapter: 
A.  The preparation of personnel rules and subsequent revisions and amendments thereof; 
B.  The preparation of a position classification plan, and subsequent revisions and amendments thereof; 
C.  The preparation, conduct and grading of competitive tests; 
D.  The conduct of employee training programs; 
E.  Special and technical services of advisory or informational character on matters relating to personnel administration. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; prior code § 26-1016) 
Chapter 2.50 - COMMUNITY SERVICES COMMISSION 
Sections: 

2.50.010 - Commission established. 
    A community services commission is hereby established for the city. 
(Ord. 2007-03 § 1 (part), 2007) 
2.50.020 - Composition-Appointment. 
A.  The commission shall consist of seven members appointed by the mayor with the consent of the council and two student representatives who are full-time students at Kingsburg high school and selected by the administration of Kingsburg high school. The student members will be nonvoting members. 
B.  A member of the council shall be appointed as advisory member to the commission by resolution of the council, and such other advisory members to the commission as the council may determine may be appointed by resolution of the council. 
(Ord. 2007-03 § 1 (part), 2007) 
2.50.030 - Terms. 
A.  The terms of office for each member of the commission shall be four years. 
    The student representatives shall serve for a one-year term. 
B.  Vacancies for unexpired terms of members of the commission shall be filled by appointment by the council for only the portion of the unexpired term. Vacancies for the unexpired term of a student representative shall be filled by appointment by the administration of Kingsburg high school for only the portion of the unexpired term. 
C.  Absence of a member from two consecutive regular meetings of the commission without providing prior oral notification to the chairperson of the commission and city staff in the community services department of his/her absence from such meeting, may have his/her office declared vacant by the chairperson of the commission. 
(Ord. 2007-03 § 1 (part), 2007) 
2.50.040 - Compensation. 
    The members of the commission shall not receive compensation for their services. 
(Ord. 2007-03 § 1 (part), 2007) 
2.50.050 - Chairperson. 
    The commission shall elect from its members a chairperson and vice-chairperson and the chairperson and vice-chairperson shall serve for one year and until their successors are elected. In case of the absence of the chairperson or vice-chairperson, the commission shall select a chairperson pro tem. 
(Ord. 2007-03 § 1 (part), 2007) 
2.50.060 - Records-Secretary. 
    The commission shall keep a proper record of its actions, findings and proceedings. The council shall appoint by resolution a secretary to the commission whose duty it shall be to keep all records of the actions, findings, and proceedings of the commission. 
(Ord. 2007-03 § 1 (part), 2007) 
2.50.070 - Meetings-Quorum. 
A.  The commission shall meet on such date and at such time and place as it may be fixed by the commission. Notice of such meetings are to be posted. 
B.  Special meetings may be called at any time by the chairperson or by four members, and by written notice served upon each member of the commission at least seventy-two (72) hours before the time specified for the proposed meeting and publicly posted. 
C.  Four (4) members of the commission shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business, (except in such cases, if any, where applicable law requires a two-thirds ( 2/3 ) majority vote). A number of members less than a quorum may adjourn a meeting from time to time to a certain date and time. 
D.  All decisions of the commission shall be by a majority vote of the members present. 
(Ord. 2007-03 § 1 (part), 2007) 
(Ord. No. 2015-11, § 1, 12-16-2015) 
2.50.080 - Powers and duties. 
    The commission shall have the following powers and duties: 
A.  To recommend to the council the establishment of systems of parks, playgrounds and recreation; 
B.  To recommend to the council the acquisition and operation of recreation centers; 
C.  To investigate and recommend to the council programs requiring cooperation between the governing bodies of any two or more public authorities or with the federal government or any department of the city; 
D.  To advise the council on those human relations or social services issues referred to it by the city council; 
E.  To render annually a full report of its work and accomplishments to the council. 
(Ord. 2007-03 § 1 (part), 2007) 
Title 3 - REVENUE AND FINANCE 
Chapters: 
Chapter 3.04 - FISCAL PROVISIONS GENERALLY 
Sections: 

3.04.010 - Civil debts. 
    The amount of any fee, service charge, utility charge, license, or tax of any nature whatsoever imposed by any provision of this code shall be deemed a civil debt owing to the city. An action may be commenced in the name of the city in any court of competent jurisdiction for the collection of the amount of any such delinquent or unpaid fee, service charge, utility charge, license or tax, together with any penalties applicable thereto as prescribed by this code. The remedy prescribed by this section shall be cumulative, and the use of an action to collect such an amount as a debt by civil action shall not bar the use of any other remedy provided by this code or by law for the purpose of enforcing the provisions thereof. 
(Prior code § 14-0011) 
3.04.020 - Special gas tax street improvement fund. 
    There is hereby established in the city treasury a special fund to be known as the "gas tax fund." All moneys received by the city from the state under the provisions of the Streets and Highways Code for the acquisition of real property or interests therein for, or the construction, maintenance, or improvement of, streets or highways other than state highways shall be paid into said fund. All moneys in said fund shall be expended exclusively for the purposes authorized by, and subject to all of the provisions of, Article 5, Chapter 1, Division 1 of the Streets and Highways Code. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; prior code § 32-0001) 
3.04.030 - Assessment and collection. 
    The duties of assessing property and collecting taxes, provided by law to be performed by the assessor and tax collector of the city, shall be performed by the assessor and tax collector of the county, in accordance with the provisions of Sections 51500 through 51519 of the Government Code, for each fiscal year until this section is repealed. 
(Prior code § 34-0001) 
3.04.040 - Claims against the city. 
    Section 935 of the Government Code of the state of California provides authority for establishing claims procedures for those claims against the city of Kingsburg for money or damages not governed by state or local laws. 
    Accordingly, not withstanding the exemptions set forth in Section 905 of the Government Code of the State of California, all claims against the city of Kingsburg for damages or money, when a procedure for processing such claims is not otherwise provided by state or local laws, shall be presented within the time limitations and in the manner prescribed by Sections 910 through 915.2 of the Government Code of the State. Such claims shall further be subject to the provisions of Section 945.6 through 946 of the Government Code of the state relating to the prohibition of suits in the absence of the presentation of claims and action thereon by the city council. 
(Ord. 96-04, 1996) 
Chapter 3.08 - PROPERTY TRANSFER TAX* 
Sections: 

3.08.010 - Title. 
    This chapter shall be known as the "real property transfer tax ordinance of the city of Kingsburg." It is adopted pursuant to the authority contained in Part 6.7 (commencing with Section 11901) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the State of California. 
(Prior code § 39-0001) 
3.08.020 - Tax imposed. 
    There is hereby imposed on each deed, instrument or writing by which any lands, tenements, or other realty sold within the city shall be granted, assigned, transferred or otherwise conveyed to, or vested in, the purchaser or purchasers, or any other person or persons, by his/her or their direction, when the consideration or value of the interest or property conveyed (exclusive of the value of any lien or encumbrances remaining thereon at the time of sale) exceeds one hundred dollars ($100.00), a tax at the rate of twenty-seven and one-half cents for each five hundred dollars ($500.00) or fractional part thereof. 
(Prior code § 39-0002) 
3.08.030 - Payment. 
    Any tax imposed pursuant to Section 3.08.020 hereof shall be paid by any person who makes, signs or issues any document or instrument subject to the tax, or for whose use or benefit the same is made, signed or is sued. 
(Prior code § 39-0003) 
3.08.040 - Exemption-Debt. 
    Any tax imposed pursuant to the ordinance codified in this chapter shall not apply to any instrument in writing given to secure a debt. 
(Prior code § 39-0004) 
3.08.050 - Exemption-Government. 
    Any deed, instrument or writing to which the United States or any agency or instrumentality thereof, any state or territory, or political subdivision thereof, is a party shall be exempt from any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter when the exempt agency is acquiring title. 
(Prior code § 39-0005) 
3.08.060 - Exemption-Insolvency-Change in identity. 
    Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply to the making, delivering or filing of conveyances to make effective any plan of reorganization or adjustment: 
A.  Confirmed under the Federal Bankruptcy Act, as amended; 
B.  Approved in any equity receivership proceeding in a court involving a railroad corporation, as defined in subdivision (m) of Section 205 of Title II of the United States Code, as amended; 
C.  Approved in any equity receivership proceeding in a court involving a corporation, as defined in subdivision (3) of Section 506 of Title II of the United States Code, as amended; or 
D.  Whereby a mere change in identity, form or place of organization is effected. 
    Subsections (a) to (d), inclusive, of this section shall only apply if the making, delivery or filing of instruments of transfer or conveyances occurs within five years from the date of such confirmation, approval or change. 
(Prior code § 39-0006) 
3.08.070 - Exemption-SEC. 
    Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply to the making or delivery of conveyances to make effective any order of the Securities and Exchange Commission, as defined in subdivision (a) of Section 1033 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954; but only if: 
A.  The order of the Securities and Exchange Commission, in obedience to which such conveyance is made, recites that such conveyance is necessary or appropriate to effectuate the provisions of Section 79k of Title 15 of the United States Code, relating to the Public Utility Holding Company Act of 1935; 
B.  Such order specifies the property which is ordered to be conveyed; and 
C.  Such conveyance is made in obedience to such order. 
(Prior code § 39-0007) 
3.08.080 - Exemption-Partnerships. 
A.  In the case of any realty held by a partnership, no levy shall be imposed pursuant to this chapter by reason of any transfer of an interest in a partnership or otherwise, if: 
1.  Such partnership (or another partnership), is considered a continuing partnership within the meaning of Section 708 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954; and 
2.  Such continuing partnership continues to hold the realty concerned. 
B.  If there is a termination of any partnership within the meaning of Section 708 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, for purposes of this chapter, such partnership shall be treated as having executed an instrument whereby there was conveyed, for fair market value (exclusive of the value of any lien or encumbrance remaining thereon), all realty held by such partnership at the time of such termination. 
C.  No more than one tax shall be imposed pursuant to this chapter by reason of a termination described in subsection (b), and any transfer pursuant thereto, with respect to the realty held by such partnership at the time of such termination. 
(Prior code § 39-0008) 
3.08.090 - Administration. 
    The county recorder shall administer this chapter in conformity with the provisions of Part 6.7 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code and the provisions of any county ordinance adopted pursuant thereto. 
(Prior code § 39-0009) 
3.08.100 - Refunds. 
    Claims for refund of taxes imposed pursuant to this chapter shall be governed by the provisions of Chapter 5 (commencing with Section 5096) of Part 9 of Division 1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the State of California. 
(Prior code § 39-0010) 
3.08.110 - Operative date. 
    This chapter shall become operative upon the operative date of any ordinance adopted by the County of Fresno, pursuant to Part 6.7 (commencing with Section 11901) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state of California, or upon the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, whichever is the later. 
(Prior code § 39-0011) 
3.08.120 - County clerk. 
    Upon its adoption the city clerk shall file two copies of the ordinance codified in this chapter with the county recorder of Fresno County. 
(Prior code § 39-0012) 
Chapter 3.12 - SALES AND USE TAX 
Sections: 

3.12.010 - Title. 
    This chapter may be known and cited as the uniform local sales and tax law of the city. 
(Prior code § 35-0001) 
3.12.020 - Purpose. 
    The council hereby declares that this chapter is adopted to achieve the following, among other purposes, and directs that the provisions hereof be interpreted in order to accomplish those purposes: 
A.  To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which complies with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state; 
B.  To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which incorporates provisions identical to those of the sales and use tax law of the state insofar as those provisions are not inconsistent with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code; 
C.  To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which imposes such tax and provides a measure therefor that can be administered and collected by the State Board of Equalization in a manner that adapts itself as fully as practical to, and requires the least possible deviation from, the existing statutory and administrative procedures followed by the State Board of Equalization in administering and collecting the California State Sales and Use Taxes; and 
D.  To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which can be administered in a manner that will be, to the degree possible, consistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, minimize the cost of collecting city sales and use taxes and at the same time minimize the burden of record keeping upon persons subject to taxation under the provisions of this chapter. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; prior code § 35-0002) 
3.12.030 - Operative date-Contract with state. 
    This chapter shall become operative on July 1, 1959, and prior thereto this city shall contract with the State Board of Equalization to perform all functions incident to the administration and operation of this Sales and Use Tax Chapter; provided, that if this city shall not have contracted with the State Board of Equalization, as above set forth, prior to July 1, 1959, this chapter shall not be operative until the first day of the first calendar quarter following the execution of such a contract by the city and by the State Board of Equalization; and provided further, that this chapter shall not be operative prior to the operative date of the Uniform Local Sales and Use Tax Ordinance of the County of Fresno. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; prior code § 35-0003) 
3.12.040 - Sales tax. 
A.  For the purposes of this chapter, all retail sales are consummated at the place of business of the retailer unless the tangible personal property sold is delivered by the retailer or his/her agent to an out-of-state destination or to a common carrier for delivery to an out-of-state destination. The gross receipts from such sales shall include delivery charges, when such charges are subject to the State Sales and Use Tax, regardless of the place to which delivery is made. In the event a retailer has no permanent place of business in the city or has more than one place of business, the place or places at which the retail sales are consummated shall be determined under rules and regulations to be prescribed and adopted by the Board of Equalization. 
B.  1.  Except as hereinafter provided, and except insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the State, all of the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of such Code, as amended and in force and effect on July 1, 1959, applicable to sales taxes are hereby adopted and made a part of this section as though fully set forth herein. 
2.  Wherever, and to the extent that, in Part 1 Division 2 of the State Revenue and Taxation Code, the state is named or referred to as the "taxing agency," the city shall be substituted therefore. Nothing in this subdivision shall be deemed to require the substitution of the name of the city for the word "state" when that word is used as part of the title of the State Controller, the State Treasurer, the State Board of Control, the State Board of Equalization, or the name of the State Treasury, or of the Constitution of the State of California; nor shall the name of the city be substituted for that of the state in any section when the result of that substitution would require action to be taken by or against the city or any agency thereof, rather than by or against the State Board of Equalization, in performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of this chapter; and neither shall the substitution be deemed to have been made in those sections, including, but not necessarily limited to, sections referring to the exterior boundaries of the state, where the result of the substitution would be to provide an exemption from this tax with respect to certain gross receipts which would not otherwise be exempt from this tax while those gross receipts remain subject to tax by the state under the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code; nor to impose this tax with respect to certain gross receipts which would not be subject to tax by the state under such provisions of that code; and, in addition, the name of the city shall not be substituted for that of the state in Sections 6701, 6702 (except in the last sentence thereof), 6711, 6715, 6737, 6797, and 6828 of the Revenue and Taxation Code as adopted. 
3.  If a seller's permit has been issued to a retailer under Section 6067 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, an additional seller's permit shall not be required by reason of this section. 
4.  There shall be excluded from the gross receipts by which the tax is measured: 
a.  The amount of any sales or use tax imposed by the state of California upon a retailer or consumer. 
b.  The gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the city in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; Ord. 417 § 1, 1983; prior code § 35-0004) 
3.12.050 - Use tax. 
A.  1.  Except as hereinafter provided and except insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the State, all of the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of such code, as amended and in force and effect on July 1, 1959, applicable to use taxes are hereby adopted and made a part of this section as though fully set forth herein. 
2.  Wherever, and to the extent that, in Part 1 of Division 2 of the said Revenue and Taxation Code the state is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the name of this city shall be substituted therefore. Nothing in this subsection shall be deemed to require the substitution of the name of this city for the word "state" when that word is used as part of the title of the State Controller, the State Treasurer, the State Board of Control, the State Board of Equalization, or the name of the State Treasurer, or of the Constitution of the State of California; nor shall the name of the city be substituted for that of the state in any section when the result of that substitution would require action to be taken by or against the city or any agency thereof rather than by or against the State Board of Equalization, in performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of this chapter; and neither shall the substitution be deemed to have been made in those sections, including but not necessarily limited to, sections referring to the exterior boundaries of the state, where the result of the substitution would be to provide an exemption from this tax with respect to certain storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not otherwise be exempt from this tax while such storage, use or other consumption remains subject to tax by the state under the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the said Revenue and Taxation Code, or to impose this tax with respect to certain storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not be subject to tax by the state under the said provisions of that code; and in addition, the name of the city shall not be substituted for that of the state in Sections 6701, 6702 (except in the last sentence thereof), 6711, 6715, 6737, 6797 and 6828 of the said Revenue and Taxation Code as adopted, and the name of the city shall not be substituted for the word "state" in the phrase "retailer engaged in business in this state" in Section 6203 nor in the definition of that phrase in Section 6203. 
3.  There shall be exempt from the tax due under this section: 
a.  The amount of any sales or use tax imposed by the State of California upon a retailer or consumer. 
b.  The storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property, the gross receipts from the sale of which has been subject to sales tax under a sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code by any city and county, county, or city in this state. 
c.  In addition to the exemptions provided in Section 6366 and 6366.1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, the storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; Ord. 417 § 2, 1983; prior code § 35-5000) 
3.12.060 - Amendments. 
    All amendments of the Revenue and Taxation Code enacted subsequent to the effective date of this chapter, including amendments adopted and effective to and including July 1, 1959, which relate to the sales and use tax and which are not inconsistent with part 1.5 of division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code shall automatically become a part of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 35-0006) 
3.12.070 - Enjoining collection forbidden. 
    No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall issue in any suit, action or proceeding in any court against the state or this city, or against any official of the state or of this city, to prevent or enjoin the collection under this chapter or part 1.5 of division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected. 
(Prior code § 35-0007) 
3.12.080 - Violations. 
    Any retailer or other person who fails or refuses to furnish any return required to be made or who fails or refuses to furnish a supplemental return or other data required by the State Board of Equalization or who renders a false or fraudulent return, and any person required to make, render, sign or verify any report who makes any false or fraudulent return with intent to defeat or evade the determination of amount due required by law to be made is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; prior code § 35-0009) 
3.12.090 - Tax rates. 
A.  New Rate. Notwithstanding anything in this chapter to the contrary, effective on and after 12:01 a.m., July 1, 2001, the sales and use taxes imposed by the provisions of this chapter (the "uniform local sales and use tax law" in effect in the city of Kingsburg) shall be reduced below the current legal maximum rate of nine-hundred fifty one-thousands of one percent to a new rate of nine hundred fifty one thousandths of one percent. 
B.  Purpose. The purpose of this change of rate is to simultaneously reciprocally increase the amount of such taxes realized by the county of Fresno by the difference in rate of five one-thousandths of one percent. This portion of the city's maximum legally allowed sales/use taxes is being shared with the county of Fresno in accordance with and reliance upon full, complete and timely performance of that certain "Memorandum of Understanding between the County of Fresno, the city of Kingsburg and the Kingsburg Redevelopment Agency" dated as of October 16, 1990 ("Mou"). 
C.  Automatic Cessation-Notice. If for any reason the full purposes of this change of rate are not completely and timely realized in accordance with the MOU or otherwise, then (without the necessity of further action of the city council) subdivision (a) of this section shall automatically and immediately cease to be operative or of any further force or effect. In such event, the full legal maximum rate prescribed elsewhere in this chapter (the city's "Uniform Local Sales and Use Tax Law") shall immediately become operative, effective and applicable to all sales and use taxes in the city of Kingsburg. As required by law, the city shall give prompt notice to the State Board of Equalization of any change in rate triggered by this subsection (C) of this section so that such change in rate can be implemented forthwith. 
(Ord. 2001-04 § 1, 2001: Ord. 99-02 § 1, 1999: Ord. 98-01 § 1, 1998: Ord. 97-01 § 1, 1997: Ord. 96-01 § 1, 1996: Ord. 95-02 § 1, 1995: Ord. 94-04 § 1, 1994: Ord. 93-10 § 1, 1993: Ord. 92-02 § 1, 1992: Ord. 91-06 § 1, 1991) 
Chapter 3.14 - PUBLIC SAFETY TRANSACTIONS AND USE TAX[1] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Section 18 of Ord. No. 2018-002, adopted March 7, 2018, provides that the authority to levy the tax imposed by said ordinance shall expire on September 30, 2028, unless otherwise extended by voter approval. 

3.14.010 - Title. 
    This chapter shall be known as the "City of Kingsburg Public Safety Transactions and Use Tax Ordinance." The City of Kingsburg hereinafter shall be called "city." This chapter shall be applicable in the incorporated territory of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2018-002, § 1, 3-7-2018) 
3.14.020 - Operative date. 
    "Operative date" means the first day of the first calendar quarter commencing more than one hundred ten (110) days after the adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. The operative date of this chapter shall be October 1, 2018. 
(Ord. No. 2018-002, § 2, 3-7-2018) 
3.14.030 - Purpose. 
    This chapter is adopted to achieve the following, among other purposes, and directs that the provisions hereof be interpreted in order to accomplish those purposes: 
A.  To impose on retail transactions and use tax in accordance with the provisions of Part 1.6 (commencing with Section 7251) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code and Section 7285.9 of Part 1.7 of Division 2 which authorizes the city to adopt this tax ordinance which shall be operative if 66.66% of the electors voting on the measure vote to approve the imposition of the tax at an election called for that purpose. 
B.  To adopt a retail transactions and use tax ordinance that incorporates provisions identical to those of the Sales and Use Tax Law of the State of California insofar as those provisions are not inconsistent with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code. 
C.  To adopt a retail transactions and use tax ordinance that imposes a tax and provides a measure therefore that can be administered and collected by the California Department of Tax and Fee Administration in a manner that adapts itself as fully as practicable to, and requires the least possible deviation from, the existing statutory and administrative procedures followed by the California Department of Tax and Fee Administration in administering and collecting the California State Sales and Use Taxes. 
D.  To adopt a retail transactions and use tax ordinance that can be administered in a manner that will be, to the greatest degree possible, consistent with the provisions of Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, minimize the cost of collecting the transactions and use taxes, and at the same time, minimize the burden of record keeping upon persons subject to taxation under the provisions of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. 
(Ord. No. 2018-002, § 3, 3-7-2018) 
3.14.040 - Contract with state. 
    Prior to the operative date, the city shall contract with the California Department of Tax and Fee Administration to perform all functions incident to the administration and operation of this transactions and use tax ordinance; provided, that if the city shall not have contracted with the California Department of Tax and Fee Administration prior to the operative date, it shall nevertheless so contract and in such a case the operative date shall be the first day of the first calendar quarter following the execution of such a contract. 
(Ord. No. 2018-002, § 4, 3-7-2018) 
3.14.050 - Transactions tax rate. 
    For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail, a tax is hereby imposed upon all retailers in the incorporated territory of the city at the rate of one percent of the gross receipts of any retailer from the sale of all tangible personal property sold at retail in the incorporated territory of the city on and after the operative date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. 
(Ord. No. 2018-002, § 5, 3-7-2018) 
3.14.060 - Place of sale. 
    For the purposes of this chapter, all retail sales are consummated at the place of business of the retailer unless the tangible personal property sold is delivered by the retailer or his agent to an out-of-state destination or to a common carrier for delivery to an out-of-state destination. The gross receipts from such sales shall include delivery charges, when such charges are subject to the state sales and use tax, regardless of the place to which delivery is made. In the event a retailer has no permanent place of business in the city or has more than one place of business in the State of California, the place or places at which the retail sales are consummated shall be determined under rules and regulations to be prescribed and adopted by the California Department of Tax and Fee Administration. 
(Ord. No. 2018-002, § 6, 3-7-2018) 
3.14.070 - Use tax rate. 
    An excise tax is hereby imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in the city of tangible personal property purchased from any retailer on and after the operative date of this chapter for storage, use or other consumption in the incorporated territory of the city at the rate of one percent of the sales price of the property. The sales price shall include delivery charges when such charges are subject to state sales or use tax regardless of the place to which delivery is made. 
(Ord. No. 2018-002, § 7, 3-7-2018) 
3.14.080 - Adoption of provisions of state law. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this chapter and except insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions of Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, all of the provisions of Part 1 (commencing with Section 6001) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code are hereby adopted and made a part of this chapter as though fully set forth herein. 
(Ord. No. 2018-002, § 8, 3-7-2018) 
3.14.090 - Limitations on adoption of state law and collection of use taxes. 
    In adopting the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code: 
A.  Wherever the State of California is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the name of this city shall be substituted therefor. However, the substitution shall not be made when: 
1.  The word "state" is used as a part of the title of the state controller, state treasurer, state treasury, or the Constitution of the State of California; 
2.  The result of that substitution would require action to be taken by or against this city or any agency, officer, or employee thereof rather than by or against the California Department of Tax and Fee Administration, in performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of this chapter. 
3.  In those sections, including, but not necessarily limited to sections referring to the exterior boundaries of the State of California, where the result of the substitution would be to: 
a.  Provide an exemption from this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not otherwise be exempt from this tax while such sales, storage, use or other consumption remain subject to tax by the state under the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, or; 
b.  Impose this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not be subject to tax by the state under the said provision of that code. 
4.  In Sections 6701, 6702 (except in the last sentence thereof), 6711, 6715, 6737, 6797 or 6828 of the Revenue and Taxation Code. 
B.  The word "city" shall be substituted for the word "state" in the phrase "retailer engaged in business in this state" in Section 6203 and in the definition of that phrase in Section 6203. 
(Ord. No. 2018-002, § 9, 3-7-2018) 
3.14.100 - Permit not required. 
    If a seller's permit has been issued to a retailer under Section 6067 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, an additional transactor's permit shall not be required by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2018-002, § 10, 3-7-2018) 
3.14.110 - Exemptions and exclusions. 
A.  There shall be excluded from the measure of the transactions tax and the use tax the amount of any sales tax or use tax imposed by the State of California or by any city, city and county, or county pursuant to the Bradley-Burns Uniform Local Sales and Use Tax Law or the amount of any state-administered transactions or use tax. 
B.  There are exempted from the computation of the amount of transactions tax the gross receipts from: 
1.  Sales of tangible personal property, other than fuel or petroleum products, to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the county in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government. 
2.  Sales of property to be used outside the city which is shipped to a point outside the city, pursuant to the contract of sale, by delivery to such point by the retailer or his agent, or by delivery by the retailer to a carrier for shipment to a consignee at such point. For the purposes of this paragraph, delivery to a point outside the city shall be satisfied: 
a.  With respect to vehicles (other than commercial vehicles) subject to registration pursuant to Chapter 1 (commencing with Section 4000) of Division 3 of the Vehicle Code, aircraft licensed in compliance with Section 21411 of the Public Utilities Code, and undocumented vessels registered under Division 3.5 (commencing with Section 9840) of the Vehicle Code by registration to an out-of-city address and by a declaration under penalty of perjury, signed by the buyer, stating that such address is, in fact, his or her principal place of residence; and 
b.  With respect to commercial vehicles, by registration to a place of business out-of-city and declaration under penalty of perjury, signed by the buyer, that the vehicle will be operated from that address. 
3.  The sale of tangible personal property if the seller is obligated to furnish the property for a fixed price pursuant to a contract entered into prior to the operative date of this chapter. 
4.  A lease of tangible personal property which is a continuing sale of such property, for any period of time for which the lessor is obligated to lease the property for an amount fixed by the lease prior to the operative date of this chapter. 
5.  For the purposes of subparagraphs (3) and (4) of this section, the sale or lease of tangible personal property shall be deemed not to be obligated pursuant to a contract or lease for any period of time for which any party to the contract or lease has the unconditional right to terminate the contract or lease upon notice, whether or not such right is exercised. 
C.  There are exempted from the use tax imposed by this chapter, the storage, use or other consumption in this city of tangible personal property: 
1.  The gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to a transactions tax under any state-administered transactions and use tax ordinance. 
2.  Other than fuel or petroleum products purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government. This exemption is in addition to the exemptions provided in Sections 6366 and 6366.1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the State of California. 
3.  If the purchaser is obligated to purchase the property for a fixed price pursuant to a contract entered into prior to the operative date of this chapter. 
4.  If the possession of, or the exercise of any right or power over, the tangible personal property arises under a lease which is a continuing purchase of such property for any period of time for which the lessee is obligated to lease the property for an amount fixed by a lease prior to the operative date of this chapter. 
5.  For the purposes of subparagraphs (3) and (4) of this section, storage, use, or other consumption, or possession of, or exercise of any right or power over, tangible personal property shall be deemed not to be obligated pursuant to a contract or lease for any period of time for which any party to the contract or lease has the unconditional right to terminate the contract or lease upon notice, whether or not such right is exercised. 
6.  Except as provided in subparagraph (7) below, a retailer engaged in business in the city shall not be required to collect use tax from the purchaser of tangible personal property, unless the retailer ships or delivers the property into the city or participates within the city in making the sale of the property, including, but not limited to, soliciting or receiving the order, either directly or indirectly, at a place of business of the retailer in the city or through any representative, agent, canvasser, solicitor, subsidiary, or person in the city under the authority of the retailer. 
7.  "A retailer engaged in business in the city" shall also include any retailer of any of the following: vehicles subject to registration pursuant to Chapter 1 (commencing with Section 4000) of Division 3 of the Vehicle Code, aircraft licensed in compliance with Section 21411 of the Public Utilities Code, or undocumented vessels registered under Division 3.5 (commencing with Section 9840) of the Vehicle Code. That retailer shall be required to collect use tax from any purchaser who registers or licenses the vehicle, vessel, or aircraft at an address in the city. 
D.  Any person subject to use tax under this chapter may credit against that tax any transactions tax or reimbursement for transactions tax paid to a district imposing, or retailer liable for a transactions tax pursuant to Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code with respect to the sale to the person of the property the storage, use or other consumption of which is subject to the use tax. 
(Ord. No. 2018-002, § 11, 3-7-2018) 
3.14.120 - Amendments. 
    All amendments subsequent to the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived to Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code relating to sales and use taxes and which are not inconsistent with Part 1.6 and Part 1.7 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, and all amendments to Part 1.6 and Part 1.7 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, all amendments to the California Constitution or all amendments to other applicable provisions of California law shall automatically become a part of this chapter, provided however, that no such amendment shall operate so as to affect the rate of tax imposed by this chapter unless otherwise required by such amendment. 
(Ord. No. 2018-002, § 12, 3-7-2018) 
3.14.130 - Enjoining collection forbidden. 
    No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall issue in any suit, action or proceeding in any court against the state or the city, or against any officer of the state or the city, to prevent or enjoin the collection under this chapter, or Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected. 
(Ord. No. 2018-002, § 13, 3-7-2018) 
3.14.140 - Citizens' oversight committee. 
    Consistent with the city's ongoing commitment to citizen involvement as a fundamental principle of good government, specific citizen oversight and fiscal accountability provisions regarding the revenues collected as a result of the adoption of this chapter are hereby established as follows. In addition to the accountability measures required by state law, an independent community oversight committee shall be appointed by the city council of Kingsburg to advise the city council on the expenditures funded by Measure E in order to ensure that said funds are spent in accordance with city council public safety objectives. 
(Ord. No. 2018-002, § 14, 3-7-2018) 
3.14.150 - Annual reporting. 
    An annual report shall be prepared each year by the city identifying the amount of revenue generated by the chapter and how those funds were used for public safety. 
(Ord. No. 2018-002, § 15, 3-7-2018) 
Chapter 3.16 - TRANSIENT ROOM TAX 
Sections: 

3.16.010 - Title. 
    This chapter may be known and cited as the transient room tax law of the city. 
(Prior code § 38-0001) 
3.16.020 - Definitions. 
    Unless the particular provision or the context otherwise requires, the definitions and provisions shall govern the construction, meaning, and application of words and phrases used in this chapter, and, except to the extent that a particular word or phrase is otherwise specifically defined in this chapter, the definitions and provisions contained in Chapter 1.04 (commencing with Section 1.04.010) of Title 1 of this code shall also govern the construction, meaning, and application of the words and phrases used in this chapter. The definition of each word or phrase shall constitute, to the extent applicable, the definition of each word or phrase which is derivative from it, or from which it is a derivative, as the case may be. 
    "Hotel" means any structure, or any portion of any structure which is occupied or intended or designed for occupancy by transients for dwelling, lodging, or sleeping purposes, and includes any hotel, inn, tourist home or house, motel, studio hotel, bachelor hotel, lodging house, rooming house, apartment house, dormitory, public or private club, mobilehome or house trailer at a fixed location, or other similar structure or portion thereof. 
    "Legislative body" means the council. 
    "Occupancy" means the use or possession, or the right to the use or possession of any room or rooms or portions thereof, in any hotel for dwelling, lodging, or sleeping purposes. 
    "Operator" means the person who is proprietor of the hotel, whether in the capacity of owner, lessee, sub-lessee, mortgagee in possession, licensee, or any other capacity. Where the operator performs his/her functions through a managing agent of any type or character other than an employee, the managing agent shall also be deemed an operator for the purposes of this chapter and shall have the same duties and liabilities as his/her principal. Compliance with the provisions of this chapter by either the principal or the managing agent shall, however, be considered to be compliance by both. 
    "Rent" means the consideration charged, valued in money whether or not received, for the occupancy of space in a hotel, whether to be received in money, goods, labor, or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits, and property and services of any kind or nature, without any deduction whatsoever. 
    "Tax administrator" means the city clerk of the city. 
    "Transient" means any person who exercises occupancy or is entitled to occupancy in a hotel by reason of a lease, concession, permit, right of access, license, or other agreement for a period of thirty (30) consecutive calendar days or less, counting portions of calendar days as full days. Any such person so occupying space in a hotel shall be deemed to be a transient until the period of thirty (30) days has expired unless there is an agreement in writing between the operator and the occupant providing for a longer period of occupancy. In determining whether a person is a transient, uninterrupted periods of time extending both prior and subsequent to the effective date of this chapter may be considered. 
    "Transient occupancy tax review committee" means the council. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; prior code §§ 38-0002, 38-0002.10, 38-0002.20, 38-0002.30, 38-0002.35, 38-0002.45, 38-0002.55 and 38-0002.60) 
3.16.030 - Tax imposed. 
    For the privilege of occupancy in any hotel on or after January 1, 1968, each transient is subject to and shall pay a tax in the amount of twelve percent (12%) of the rent charged by the operator. Said tax constitutes a debt owed by the transient to the city which is extinguished only by payment to the operator or to the city. The transient shall pay the tax to the operator of the hotel at the time the rent is paid. If the rent is paid in installments, a proportionate share of the tax shall be paid with each installment. Any unpaid tax shall be due upon the transient's ceasing to occupy the space in the hotel. If for any reason the tax due is not paid to the operator of the hotel, the tax administrator may require that such tax shall be paid directly to him. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; prior code § 38-0003) 
(Ord. No. 2008-07, § 2, 2008) 
3.16.040 - Collection of tax. 
    Every operator maintaining a place of business and renting rooms in this city, the occupancy of which is not exempted under the terms of this chapter, shall collect the tax from the occupant. The tax required to be collected by the operator constitutes a debt owing by the operator to the city. In all cases of transactions upon credit or deferred payment, the payment of tax to the operator may be deferred in accordance therewith, and the operator shall be liable therefore at the time and to the extent that such credits are paid or deferred payments are made in accordance with the rate of tax owing on the amount thereof. 
    The tax administrator shall enforce the provisions of this chapter and shall have the power to adopt rules and regulations not inconsistent herewith as may be necessary or desirable to aid in the enforcement hereof. He/she shall provide schedules for payment of the tax and such schedules shall eliminate fractions of one cent. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; prior code § 38-0004) 
3.16.050 - Operator's duties. 
    Each operator shall collect the tax imposed by this chapter to the same extent and at the same time as the rent is collected from every transient. The amount of tax shall be separately stated from the amount of the rent charged, and each transient shall receive a receipt for payment from the operator. No operator of a hotel shall advertise or state in any manner, whether directly or indirectly, that the tax or any part thereof will be assumed or absorbed by the operator, or that it will not be added to the rent, or that, if added, any part will be refunded except in the manner hereinafter provided. 
(Prior code § 38-0005) 
3.16.060 - Exemptions. 
    No tax imposed under this chapter shall be imposed upon: 
A.  Any person as to whom, or any occupancy as to which, it is beyond the power of the city to impose the tax herein provided; 
B.  Any officer or employee of a foreign government who is exempt by reason of express provision of federal law or international treaty; 
C.  Any occupant for more than thirty (30) successive calendar days; 
D.  Any occupant whose rent is of a value less than two dollars a day; 
E.  Any person who rents a private home, vacation cabin, or like facility from any owner who is not regularly engaged in the business of renting such facilities but does so only occasionally and incidentally to his/her own use thereof; 
F.  Any occupant whose rent is paid for a hospital room or to a medical clinic, convalescent home or home for aged people. 
    No exemptions shall be granted under subsections A or B of this section except upon a claim therefore made at the time rent is collected and under penalty of perjury upon a form prescribed by the tax administrator. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; prior code § 38-0006) 
3.16.070 - Registration-Certificate. 
    Every person engaging or about to engage in business as an operator of a hotel in this city shall register with the tax administrator on a form provided by him/her. Persons engaged in such business must so register not later than July 15, 1964, or within fifteen (15) days after commencing business, whichever is later, but such privilege of registration after the date of imposition of such tax shall not relieve any person from the obligation of payment or collection of tax on and after the date of imposition thereof, regardless of registration. Such registration shall set forth the name under which such person transacts or intends to transact business, the location of his/her place or places of business and such other information to facilitate the collection of the tax as the tax administrator may require. The registration shall be signed by the owner if a natural person; in case of an association or partnership, by a member or partner; in the case of a corporation, by an executive officer or some person specifically authorized by the corporation to sign the registration. The tax administrator shall within ten (10) days after such registration issue without charge a certificate of authority to each registrant to collect the tax from the occupant, together with a duplicate thereof for each additional place of business of such registrant. Such certificates shall be non-assignable and non-transferable and shall be surrendered immediately to the tax administrator upon the cessation of business at the location named or upon its sale or transfer. Each certificate and duplicate shall state the place of business to which it is applicable and shall be prominently displayed therein so as to be seen and come to the notice readily of all occupants and persons seeking occupancy. 
    Said certificate shall, among other things, state the following: 
A.  The name of the operator; 
B.  The address of the hotel; 
C.  The date upon which the certificate was issued; 
D.  This transient occupancy registration certificate signifies that the person named on the face hereof has fulfilled the requirements of the transient room tax ordinance of the city by registration with the tax administrator for the purpose of collecting from transients the room tax imposed by said city and remitting said tax to the tax administrator. This certificate does not authorize any person to conduct any unlawful business or to conduct any lawful business in an unlawful manner, or to operate a hotel without strictly complying with all local applicable laws, including but not limited to those requiring a permit from any board, commission, department, or office of said city. This certificate does not constitute a permit. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; prior code § 38-0007) 
3.16.080 - Penalties and interest. 
A.  Original Delinquency. Any operator who fails to remit any tax imposed by this chapter within the time required shall pay a penalty of ten (10) percent of the amount of the tax in addition to the amount of the tax. 
B.  Continued Delinquency. Any operator who fails to remit any delinquent remittance on or before a period of thirty (30) days following the date on which the remittance first became delinquent shall pay a second delinquency penalty of ten (10) percent of the amount of the tax in addition to the amount of the tax and the ten (10) percent penalty first imposed. 
C.  Fraud. If the tax administrator determines that the nonpayment of any remittance due under this chapter is due to fraud or intent to evade the provisions thereof, a penalty of twenty-five (25) percent of the amount of the tax shall be added thereto in addition to the penalties stated in paragraphs A and B of this section. 
D.  Interest. In addition to the penalties imposed, any operator who fails to remit any tax imposed by this chapter shall pay interest at the rate of one-half of one percent per month or fraction thereof on the amount of the tax, exclusive of penalties, from the date on which the remittance first became delinquent until paid. 
E.  Penalties Merged With Tax. Every penalty imposed and such interest as accrues under the provisions of this section shall be merged with and become a part of the tax herein required to be paid. 
(Prior code § 38-0008) 
3.16.090 - Due date-Returns and payments. 
A.  The tax imposed by this chapter shall become due and payable from the occupant at the time of the occupancy. All amounts of such taxes collectible or collected by any operator are due and payable to the tax administrator quarterly on the first day of the months of April, July, October, and January next succeeding each respective quarterly period and are delinquent after the last day of such months. 
B.  On or before the last day of the month following each quarterly period of three months, a return for the preceding quarterly period shall be filed with the tax administrator. The return shall be filed in such form as the tax administrator may prescribe, by every operator and by every person liable to payment of tax hereunder during such quarterly period who has not paid such tax, and who has not made return in regard to the related occupancy which is the subject of tax. 
C.  Returns shall show the amount of tax collected or otherwise due for the related period and such other information as is required by the tax administrator. The tax administrator may require returns to show the total rentals upon which tax was collected or otherwise due, the gross receipts of a registered returnee for such period and the explanation in detail of any discrepancy between such amounts. 
D.  The person required to file the return shall deliver the return, together with the remittance of the amount of the tax due, to the tax administrator at his/her office. 
E.  For good cause the tax administrator may extend for not to exceed one month the time for making any return or payment of tax. No further extension shall be granted, except by the transient occupancy review committee. Any person to whom an extension is granted who makes return and pays the tax within the period of such extension shall pay, in addition to the tax, interest on the amount thereof at the rate of one-half of one percent per month, or fraction thereof, on the unpaid balance for the period of such extension to the time of return and payment, which interest shall become a part of the tax. 
F.  The tax administrator, if he/she deems it necessary in order to insure payment or facilitate collection by the city of the amount of taxes in any individual case, may require returns and payment of the amount of taxes for other than quarterly periods. 
(Prior code § 38-0009) 
3.16.100 - Deficiency determinations. 
A.  If the tax administrator is not satisfied with the return or returns of the tax or the amount of the tax is required to be paid to the city by any person, he/she may compute and determine the amount required to be paid upon the basis of the facts contained in the return or returns or upon the basis of any information within his/her possession or that may come into his/her possession. One or more deficiency determinations may be made of the amount due for one or more than one period. 
B.  In making a determination the tax administrator may offset overpayments, if any, which may have been previously made for a period or periods together with interest on the overpayments, against any underpayment for a subsequent period or periods, or against penalties, and interest, on the underpayments. The interest on underpayments and overpayments shall be computed in the manner set forth in Section 38-0008. 
C.  The tax administrator shall give to the operator or occupant written notice of his/her determination. The notice may be served personally or by mail; if by mail, the notice shall be enclosed in a sealed envelope postage prepaid and addressed to the operator at his/her address as it appears in the records of the tax administrator. In case of service by mail of any notice required by this chapter the service is complete at the time of deposit in the United States Post Office. 
D.  Except in the case of fraud, intent to evade this chapter or authorized rules and regulations, or failure to make a timely return, every deficiency determination shall be made and notice thereof mailed within three years after the last day of the month following the close of the quarterly period for which the amount is proposed to be determined or within three years after the return is filed, whichever period expires the later. 
E.  If any operator shall fail or refuse to collect said tax or to make, within the time provided in this chapter, any report or remittance of said tax or any portion thereof required by this chapter or makes a fraudulent return or otherwise willfully attempts to evade this chapter, the tax administrator shall proceed in such manner as he/she may deem best to obtain facts and information on which to base his/her estimate of the tax due. As soon as the tax administrator shall procure such facts and information as he/she is able to obtain upon which to base the assessment of any tax imposed by this chapter and payable by any operator who has failed or refused to collect the same and to make such report and remittance, he/she shall proceed to determine and assess against such operator the tax, interest, and penalties, provided for by this chapter. In case such determination is made, the tax administrator shall give a notice in the manner aforesaid of the amount so assessed. Such determination and notice shall be made and mailed within three years after discovery by the tax administrator of any fraud, intent to evade or failure to file return. Any determination shall become final within thirty (30) days after giving notice thereof as herein provided. 
F.  If the tax administrator believes that the collection of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected and paid to the city will be jeopardized by delay, or if any determination will be jeopardized by delay, he/she shall thereupon make a determination of the tax or amount of tax required to be collected, noting that fact upon the determination. The amount determined is immediately due and payable. If the amount specified in the determination is not paid within ten (10) days after service of notice thereof upon the person against whom the determination is made, the amount becomes final at the expiration of the ten (10) days, unless a petition for redetermination is filed with the ten (10) days and the delinquency penalty and the interest provided in Section 3.16.080 shall attach to the amount of the tax or the amount of the tax required to be collected. 
(Prior code § 38-0010) 
3.16.110 - Redeterminations. 
A.  Any person against whom a determination is made under Section 3.16.100 or any person directly interested may petition for a redetermination within thirty (30) days after service upon the person of notice thereof. If a petition for redetermination is not filed within the thirty (30) day period, the determination becomes final at the expiration of the period. Provided, however, a petition for redetermination under subsection F of Section 3.16.100 shall be filed within ten (10) days after notice. 
B.  If a petition for redetermination is filed within the allowable period, the tax administrator shall reconsider the determination, and, if the person has so requested in his/her petition, shall grant the person an oral hearing and shall give him/her ten (10) days' notice of the time and place of the hearing. The tax administrator may continue the hearing from time to time as may be necessary. 
C.  The tax administrator may decrease or increase the amount of the determination before it becomes final but the amount may be increased only if a claim for the increase is asserted by the tax administrator at or before the hearing. 
D.  The order or decision of the tax administrator upon a petition for redetermination becomes final fifteen (15) days after service upon the petitioner of notice thereof, unless appeal of such order or decision is filed with the transient occupancy tax review committee within fifteen (15) days after service of such notice. 
E.  No petition for redetermination or appeal therefrom shall be effective for any purpose unless at or before the filing thereof the amount found due in the original determination is paid or a bond or other security satisfactory to the tax administrator is filed with him/her guaranteeing payment of any amount finally determined to be due. 
(Prior code § 38-0011) 
3.16.120 - Security for collection of tax. 
A.  The tax administrator, whenever he/she deems it necessary to insure compliance with this chapter, may require any person subject thereto to deposit with him/her such security in the form of cash, bond, or other security as the tax administrator may determine. The amount of the security shall be fixed by the tax administrator but shall not be greater than twice the person's estimated average liability for the period for which he/she files returns, determined in such manner as the tax administrator deems proper, or ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), whichever amount is the lesser. The amount of the security may be increased or decreased by the tax administrator subject to the limitations herein provided. 
B.  If any person is delinquent in the payment of the amount required to be paid by him/her or in the event a determination has been made against him/her which remains unpaid, the tax administrator may, not later than three years after the payment became delinquent, give notice thereof by registered mail to all persons in the county having in their possession or under their control any credits or other personal property belonging to the delinquent, or owing any debts to the delinquent. After receiving the notice the persons so notified shall neither transfer nor make any other disposition of the credits, other personal property, or debts in their possession or under their control at the time they receive the notice until the tax administrator consents to a transfer or disposition or until twenty (20) days elapse after the receipt of the notice. All persons so notified shall within five days after the receipt of the notice advise the tax administrator of all such credits, other personal property, or debts in their possession, under their control, or owing by them. 
C.  At any time within three years after any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected becomes due and payable or at any time within three years after any determination becomes final, the tax administrator may bring an action in the courts of this state, or any other state, or of the United States in the name of the city to collect the amount delinquent together with penalties and interest. 
D.  If any operator liable for any amount under this chapter sells out his/her business or quits the business, his/her successors or assigns shall withhold sufficient of the purchase price to cover such amount until the former owner produces a receipt from the tax administrator showing that he/she has been paid or a certificate stating that no amount is due. If the purchaser of a business fails to withhold the tax from the purchase price as required, he/she becomes personally liable for the payment of the amount required to be withheld by him/her to the extent of the purchase price, valued in money. Within thirty (30) days after receiving a written request from the purchaser for a certificate, the tax administrator shall either issue the certificate or mail notice to the purchaser at his/her address as it appears on the records of the tax administrator of the amount that must be paid as a condition of issuing the certificate. Failure of the tax administrator to mail the notice will release the purchaser from any further obligation to withhold the purchase price as above provided. The time within which the obligation of a successor may be enforced shall start to run at the time the operator sells out his/her business or at the time that the determination against the operator becomes final, whichever event occurs the later. 
(Prior code § 38-0012) 
3.16.130 - Refunds. 
    Whenever the amount of any tax, penalty, or interest has been paid more than once or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the tax administrator, it may be refunded provided a verified claim in writing therefore, stating the specific ground upon which the claim is founded, is filed with the tax administrator within three years from the date of payment. The claim shall be made on forms provided by the tax administrator. If the claim is approved by the tax administrator the excess amount collected or paid may be refunded or may be credited on any amounts then due and payable from the person from whom it was collected or by whom paid and the balance may be refunded to such person, his/her administrators or executors. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; prior code § 38-0013) 
3.16.140 - Administration. 
A.  Fund. The tax administrator shall deposit all money collected pursuant to this chapter to the credit of the general fund. 
B.  Records Required from Operators, etc.-Form. Every operator renting guest rooms in this city shall keep such records, receipts, invoices, and other pertinent papers in such form as the tax administrator may require. All records shall be retained by the operator for a period of three years and six months after they come into being. 
C.  Examination of Records-Investigations. The tax administrator or any person authorized in writing by him/her may examine the books, papers, records and equipment of any person liable for the tax and may investigate the character of the business of the person in order to verify the accuracy of any return made, on if no return is made by the person, to ascertain and determine the amount required to be paid. 
D.  Authority to Require Reports-Contents. In administration of the tax the tax administrator may require the filing of reports by any person or class of persons having in his/her or their possession or custody information relating to rentals of guest rooms which are subject to the tax. The reports shall be filed when the tax administrator requires and shall set forth the rental charged for each occupancy, the date or dates of occupancy, and such other information as the tax administrator may require. 
E.  Confidential Character of Information Obtained-Disclosure Unlawful. It shall be unlawful for the tax administrator or any person having an administrative duty under the provisions of this chapter to make known in any manner whatever the business affairs, operations, or information obtained by an investigation of records and equipment of any person required to obtain a transient occupancy registration certificate, or pay a transient occupancy tax, or any other person visited or examined in the discharge of official duty, on the amount or source of income, profits, losses, expenditures, or any particular thereof, set forth in any statement or application, or to permit any statement or application, or copy of either, on any book containing any abstract or particulars thereof to be seen or examined by any person. Provided that nothing in this subsection shall be construed to prevent: 
1.  The disclosure to, or the examination of records and equipment by another city official, employee, or agent for collection of taxes for the sole purpose of administering or enforcing any provisions of this chapter or collecting taxes imposed hereunder; 
2.  The disclosure of information to, or the examination of records by, federal, or state officials, or the tax officials of another city, or county, or city and county, if a reciprocal arrangement exists; or to a grand jury or court of law, upon subpoena; 
3.  The disclosure of information and results of examination of records of particular taxpayers, or relating to particular taxpayers, to a court of law in a proceeding brought to determine the existence or amount of any business tax liability of the particular taxpayers to the city; 
4.  The disclosure after the filing of a written request to that effect, to the taxpayer him/herself, on to his/her successors, receivers, trustees, executors, administrators, assignees, and guarantors, if directly interested, of information as to the items included in the measure of any paid tax, any unpaid tax or amounts of tax required to be collected, interest, and penalties; further provided, however, that the city attorney approves each disclosure and that the tax administrator may refuse to make any disclosure referred to in this paragraph when in his/her opinion the public interest would suffer thereby; 
5.  The disclosure of the names and addresses of persons to whom transient occupancy registration certificates have been issued, the names and addresses of officers of corporations and members of partnerships to whom such certificates have been issued, and the general type or nature of their business; 
6.  The disclosure to the legislative body by way of public meeting or otherwise of such information as may be necessary in order to permit it to be fully advised as to the facts when a taxpayer files a claim for refund of business taxes, or submits an offer of compromise with regard to a claim asserted against him/her by the city for business taxes, or when acting upon any other matter; 
7.  The disclosure of general statistics regarding taxes collected or business done in the city. 
F.  Disclosure of Business of Operators, etc.-Limitation on Rule. Neither the tax administrator nor any person having an administrative duty under this chapter shall make known in any manner whatever the business affairs, operations, or information obtained by an investigation of records and equipment of any operator or any person visited or examined in the discharge of official duty on the amount or source of income, profits, losses, expenditures, or any particular thereof, set forth on disclosed in any return, or to permit any return on copy thereof or any book containing any abstract or particulars thereof to be seen or examined by any person. Successors, receivers, trustees, executors, administrators, assignees, and guarantors, if directly interested, and upon submitting written proof of their interest, may be given information as to the items included in the measure and amount of any unpaid tax or amounts of tax required to be collected, interest, and penalties. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; prior code § 38-0014) 
3.16.150 - Appeal. 
    Any person aggrieved by any decision of the tax administrator may appeal to the city by filing a notice of appeal with the tax administrator within fifteen (15) days of the serving or mailing of the notice of the decision. The tax administrator shall fix a time and place for hearing such appeal and shall give the appellant ten (10) days' written notice of the time and place of hearing. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; prior code § 38-0015) 
3.16.160 - Violations. 
    It is unlawful for any operator or other person so required, to fail or refuse to register as required herein, or to furnish any return required to be made, or fail or refuse to furnish a supplemental return or other data required by the tax administrator or to render a false or fraudulent return. No person required to make, render, sign, or verify any report shall make any false or fraudulent report, with intent to defeat or evade the determination of an amount due required by this chapter to be made. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; prior code § 38-0017) 
Chapter 3.18 - CITY LABOR CODE COMPLIANCE 
Sections: 

3.18.010 - Payment of prevailing wage. 
    No city contract shall require payment of the prevailing wage schedule unless: 
A.  The prevailing wage is legally required and constitutionally permitted to be imposed by federal or state grants pursuant to federal or state law; or 
B.  The project is considered by the city council not to be a municipal affair of the city; or 
C.  Payment of the prevailing wage schedule is authorized by resolution of the city council. 
Payment of the prevailing wage schedule, if authorized by this Section 3.18.010, shall use the pertinent rates published by the State of California. 
(Ord. No. 2012-06, § 1, 10-3-2012) 
3.18.020 - California Labor Code compliance. 
    Unless otherwise required by law or the provisions of the Kingsburg Municipal Code, the City of Kingsburg is not subject to the provisions of Articles 1, 1.5 and 2 of Chapter 1, Part 7, Division 2 of the California Labor Code or with any provisions of the California Administrative Code enacted pursuant to those articles. 
(Ord. No. 2012-06, § 1, 10-3-2012) 
3.18.030 - Volunteer services. 
    The provisions of Section 1720.4 of the California Labor Code, excluding Subsection 1720.4(1)(C), shall be applicable in the City of Kingsburg. 
(Ord. No. 2012-06, § 1, 10-3-2012) 
Title 5 - BUSINESS LICENSES AND REGULATIONS 
Chapters: 
Chapter 5.04 - BUSINESS LICENSES GENERALLY 
Sections: 

5.04.010 - Purposes-Scope. 
A.  The provisions of this chapter are for raising revenue for municipal purposes and is not intended for regulation. 
B.  The scope and construction of this chapter is subject to the exemptions and regulations defined herein. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; prior code § 37-1000) 
5.04.020 - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this chapter certain words and terms as used therein are defined as follows: 
    "Affidavit" includes a declaration made under penalty of perjury. 
    "Auctioneer, itinerant" means an auctioneer who is not the owner or who has no lease on a place of business in the city where he/she conducts his/her auction, or an auctioneer who has a lease on a place of business in the city for the conduct of his/her auction for a period of less than three months. 
    "Bankrupt sale" includes a sale for the benefit of creditors either directly or indirectly, or a sale advertised as a bankrupt sale or sale for the benefit of creditors. 
    "Business" includes professions, trades, and occupations and all and every kind of calling whether or not carried on for profit. 
    "City" means the city of Kingsburg, unless another city is indicated by the context. 
    "Close out sale" means a sale advertised as a close out sale where the person conducting said sale has not conducted such business at a fixed place of business in the city for at least one year. 
    "Contractor" means a person defined as a contractor by Section 7026 of the Business and Professions Code of the State of California, or as a contractor by the provisions of Article 2, Chapter 9, Division 3, of the Business and Professions Code of the State of California. 
    "Financing" means the business of loaning money, advancing credit, or loaning credit, whether security of any kind is taken for such loan or advance or not, or purchasing or discounting of any obligation of money due or to become due, or any evidence of any obligation of money due or to become due, whether such obligation is secured, guaranteed, or not; but does not include or apply to the conduct of a banking business under the laws of the state or of the United States, or to the business of a pawn broker or a business of a real estate broker when otherwise subject to other provisions of this chapter. 
    "Fire sale" means the sale of goods or merchandise salvaged, or claimed to have been salvaged, from a fire, wreck or other calamity, or a sale of goods or merchandise advertised as a fire or wreck sale. 
    "Fixed place of business" means a permanent store, office or other place where business is legally and regularly transacted from month to month in such manner as business of that nature is generally or customarily carried on and conducted and when the circumstances show an intention to become an established, fixed and continuous part of the regular and legitimate business life of the city. In all other cases such facts must be shown by the proof of a bona fide lease or rental agreement to the premises where such business is to be conducted, such lease or rental agreement to be for a minimum period of not less than six months. 
    "Gross receipts" means the total amount of the sale price of all sales of materials, goods, wares, or merchandise, and/or the total amount of commission or other remuneration charged or received for the performance of any act or service, of whatever nature it may be, for which charge is made or credit is allowed, whether or not such act or service is done as a part of or in connection with the sale of materials, goods, wares, or merchandise. Included in "gross receipts" shall be receipts, cash, credits, and property of any kind or nature, without any deduction therefrom on account of the cost of the property sold, the cost of the materials used, labor or service costs, interest paid or payable, or losses or other expenses whatsoever, receipts of agents, brokers, or trustees received as commissions or fees earned or charges of any nature made or compensation of any nature received for the performance of any services as agent, broker, or trustee, or profits received when such agent, broker, or trustee participates as a principal in any transaction. The following shall be excluded from gross receipts: 
A.  Cash discounts allowed and taken on sales; 
B.  Value of property accepted as part of the purchase price for subsequent resale; 
C.  Any fees collected which are separately stated and collected for and paid to a governmental agency; 
D.  Such part of the sale price of property returned by the purchaser upon rescission of the contract of sale as is refunded either in cash or by credit; 
E.  Receipts of refundable deposits, except that refundable deposits forfeited and taken into income of the business shall not be excluded; 
F.  Collection for others where the business is acting as an agent or trustee to the extent that payments are made to those for whom collected; 
G.  Sales of real estate by an agent or sales of commodities by a commission broker, except that portion of the sale which represents commissions of other income to the agent or broker; 
H.  The amount of gross receipts which has been the measure of a license fee paid to any other city. 
    "Itinerant vendor" or "itinerant merchant" means any person, whether principal or agent, who engages in a temporary or transient business in the city, selling or offering to sell, goods, wares, or merchandise or any other thing of value, with the intention of conducting such business for a period of less than six months and who for the purposes of such business hires, leases or occupies any room, doorway, vacant lot, building or other place, for the exhibition for sale of goods, wares, merchandise or other thing of value. If any such place, occupied or used for such business, is rented or leased for a period of less than six months, such fact shall be presumptive evidence that the business carried on there is a transient business; and any person so engaged shall not be relieved from the provisions of this chapter or from payment of the license fees herein provided for such business by reason of any temporary association with any local dealer, trader, merchant or auctioneer. 
    "Peddler" means any person who, at any place in the city other than a fixed place of business, sells or takes orders or offers to sell or takes orders, sells and makes immediate delivery or offers for sale and immediate delivery or for future delivery not for resale, any goods, wares, merchandise or other thing or service to be performed. 
    "Person" means and includes all domestic and foreign corporations, associations, syndicates, joint stock corporations, partnerships of every kind, clubs, Massachusetts, business or common law trusts, societies, and individuals transacting and carrying on any business in the city other than as an employee. 
    "Public utility" means any person furnishing the public with communication, water, light, gas, heat, power or other public utility or service subject to regulation by the Public Utilities Commission of the state. 
    "Retail business" means every business conducted for the purpose of selling or offering for sale any goods, wares, or merchandise other than as part of a "wholesale business," as elsewhere defined herein. 
    "Solicitor" means a person taking orders for any photographs, goods, wares, or merchandise or taking pictures and not having a regular place of business in the city or who is not an agent or representative of a person having a regularly established place of business in the city. 
    "Wholesaler" means every person conducting business exclusively for the purpose of selling or offering for sale goods, wares, or merchandise in wholesale lots to retailers for resale at retail. 
    "Wreck sale" means the same as "fire sale." 
    "Year" means a calendar year, beginning on the first day of January. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; prior code § 37-4000) 
5.04.030 - License required-Relationship to permits. 
A.  There are hereby imposed upon the businesses, trades, professions, callings and occupations specified in this chapter license fees in the amounts hereinafter prescribed. It shall be unlawful for any person to transact and carry on any business, trade, profession, calling or occupation in the city without first having a license from said city so to do or without complying with any and all applicable provisions of this chapter. 
B.  This section shall not be construed to require any person to obtain a license prior to doing business within the city if such requirement conflicts with applicable statutes of the United States or of the state. 
C.  Persons not required to obtain a license prior to doing business within the city because of conflict with applicable statutes of the United States or of the state shall, notwithstanding, be liable for payment of the fee imposed by this chapter. 
D.  The business license issued pursuant to this chapter constitutes a receipt for the license fee paid and shall have no other legal effect. 
E.  Persons required to pay a license fee for transacting or carrying on any business under this chapter shall not be relieved from the payment of any fee or charge in connection with any license to do business as may be required by any other chapter of this code or other ordinance of this city, and shall remain subject to the regulatory provisions of such other chapter or ordinance. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; prior code § 37-1001) 
5.04.040 - Application-Contents of license. 
A.  Every person required to have a license under the provisions of this chapter shall make application of the same to the city clerk, and upon payment of the prescribed license fee the city clerk shall issue to such person a license which shall contain: (1) the name of the person to whom the license is issued and the date of issuance; (2) kind or kinds of the business licensed; (3) the place where such business is to be transacted and carried on, if any; (4) the date of the expiration of such license; and (5) such other information as may be necessary or convenient for the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; prior code § 37-1007) 
5.04.050 - Revocation of licenses. 
A.  All licenses granted under the provisions of this chapter, or any Section hereof, or any amendment hereto, are granted and accepted by all parties receiving said licenses, with the express understanding that the city council may revoke the same at any time if any of the conditions of said license or any of the terms of this chapter have been violated, or if the said license was obtained by fraudulent representations; provided, however, that before revoking any license the holder of such license shall be served with a written notice of intent to revoke in the manner provided in Section 1.12.010 of this code, which notice shall notify said holder to appear before the city council at a meeting thereof to be held no earlier than five days after the day of service of such notice, at which time said holder may show cause, if any he/she may have, why said license should not be revoked. Upon the failure of such holder of a license to appear before the city council, or, if, after such hearing the city council finds there is good and sufficient cause for revoking such license, the said license shall be revoked and the findings of the council thereupon shall be conclusive. It shall be unlawful for the holder of such license to continue the business, trade or occupation for which such license was issued after the same has been revoked, and upon ratification of the revocation of any license, no part of the money paid for such revoked license shall be returned, but such license fee shall be forfeited to the city and the license returned to the city clerk. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; prior code § 37-1017) 
5.04.060 - Appeal. 
    Any person aggrieved by any decision of the city clerk with respect to the issuance or refusal to issue a license may appeal to the city council by filing a notice of appeal with the business license clerk of the city. The business license clerk shall thereupon fix a time and place for hearing such appeal. The business license clerk shall give notice to such person of the time and place of hearing by serving it personally or by depositing it in the United States Post Office at Kingsburg, California, postage prepaid, addressed to such person at his/her last known address. The city council shall have authority to determine all questions raised on such appeal. No such determination shall conflict with any substantive provisions of this chapter. Such notice of appeal by any person so aggrieved shall be made within thirty (30) days from the date of issuance of such license, or within thirty (30) days from the date of refusal to issue such license. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; prior code § 37-1012) 
5.04.070 - License inspectors. 
A.  The business license clerk, his/her deputies or designee, and all police officers of the city are hereby appointed inspectors of the licenses and are authorized to examine all places of business and persons liable to pay any license fee, and to see that such licenses are taken out, and shall have the power: (1) to make arrest for violation of any of the provisions of this chapter; (2) to enter free of charge, at any time, any place of business for which a license is required by this chapter and to demand the exhibition of such license for the current term by any person engaged or employed in the transaction of such business, and if such person shall then and there fail to exhibit such license, such person shall be liable to the penalty provided for violation of this chapter. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; prior code § 37-1018) 
5.04.080 - Additional power of city clerk. 
    In addition to all other powers conferred upon him/her, the business license clerk shall have the power, for good cause shown, to extend the time for filing any required sworn statement for a period not exceeding thirty (30) days, and in such case to waive any penalty that would otherwise have accrued; and shall have the further power, with the consent of the council, to compromise any claims as to amount of license fee due. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; prior code § 37-1013) 
5.04.090 - Duplicate license. 
    A duplicate license may be issued by the city clerk to replace any license previously issued hereunder which has been lost or destroyed upon the licensee filing a statement of such fact, and at the time of filing such statement paying to the city clerk a duplicate license fee established by resolution. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; prior code § 37-1015) 
5.04.100 - Posting and keeping licenses. 
    All licenses must be kept and posted in the following manner: 
A.  Any licensee transacting and carrying on business at a fixed place of business in the city shall keep the license posted in a conspicuous place upon the premises where such business is carried on. 
B.  Any licensee transacting and carrying on business, but not operating at a fixed place of business in the city, shall keep the license upon his/her person at all times while transacting and carrying on such business, or in the case where a license fee is imposed in connection with individual vehicles, such license shall be kept in such vehicle. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; prior code § 37-1016) 
5.04.110 - Affidavit-First license. 
A.  Upon a person making application and payment of a first time application fee as established by resolution for the first license to be issued hereunder, or for a newly established business, in all cases where the amount of license fee to be paid is measured by gross receipts, such person shall furnish to the city clerk, for his/her guidance in ascertaining the amount of license fee to be paid by the applicant, a written statement upon a form provided by the city clerk under penalty of perjury setting forth such information as may be required therein, and as may be necessary to determine the amount of the license fee to be paid by the applicant. 
B.  If the amount of the license to be paid by the applicant is measured by gross receipts, he/she shall estimate the gross receipts for the period to be covered by the license to be issued. Such estimate, if accepted by the city clerk as reasonable, shall be used in determining the amount of license fee to be paid by the applicant; provided, however, the amount of the license fee so determined shall be tentative only, and such person shall, within thirty (30) days after the expiration of the period for which such license was issued, furnish the city clerk with a written statement under penalty of perjury upon a form furnished by the city clerk, showing the gross receipts during the period of such license, and the license fee for such period shall be finally ascertained and paid in the manner provided by this chapter for the ascertaining and paying of renewal license fees for other businesses, after deducting from the amount found to be due, the amount paid at the time such first license was issued. 
C.  The city clerk shall not issue to any such person another license for the same or any other business until such person shall have furnished to him/her the written statement provided in subsection (B) above and paid the license fee as herein required. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; prior code § 37-1008) 
5.04.120 - Expiration of business license. 
    Every license as provided herein shall become null and void at the expiration of the term for which it is issued. When a license for revenue purposes has been issued to any business by the city and the fee paid therefor under the provisions of this chapter heretofore enacted, and the term of such license has not expired, then the license fee prescribed for said business by this chapter shall not be payable until the expiration of the term of such unexpired license. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; prior code § 37-1005) 
5.04.130 - Affidavit-Renewal license. 
    In all cases the applicant for the renewal of a license shall submit to the city clerk for his/her guidance in ascertaining the amount of the license fee to be paid by the applicant a written statement under penalty of perjury upon a form to be provided by the city clerk setting forth such information concerning the applicant's business during the preceding year as may be required by the said city clerk to enable him/her to ascertain the amount of the license fee to be paid by said applicant pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; prior code § 37-1009) 
5.04.140 - No license transferable-Amended license for changed location. 
    No license issued pursuant to this chapter shall be transferable; provided, that where a license is issued authorizing a person to transact and carry on a business at a particular place, such licensee may upon application therefor and paying a fee as established by resolution, have a license amended to authorize the transacting and carrying on of such business under said license at some other location to which the business is, or is to be, moved. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; prior code § 37-1014) 
5.04.150 - Branch establishments-Multiple businesses at one location-Retail-wholesale combined. 
A.  Each license shall authorize the licensee to transact and carry on only the business licensed thereby at the location or in the manner designated in such license. 
B.  A separate license must be obtained for each branch establishment or separate location of a business, provided that warehouses and distributing plants used in connection with and incidental to a business licensed under the provisions of this chapter shall not be deemed to be separate places of business or branch establishments. 
C.  Where a person conducts several types of business under identical ownership, business name, and management at a single location, he/she may elect to conduct all transactions under a single license for that business so transacted by him/her which has the highest classification and fee rate; but if he/she does not so elect, he/she shall obtain a separate license for each separate type of business conducted by him/her at such location, in which case he/she shall segregate and report separately the gross receipts from each type of business, in those instances where a business fee for such type of business is determined by gross receipts. 
D.  Where a person conducts both retail and wholesale transactions in a particular business, he/she may elect to conduct all such transactions under the appropriate retail license and at retail fee rates; but if he/she does not so elect, he/she shall obtain separate licenses for the retail and wholesale portions of his/her business, in which case he/she shall segregate and report separately the gross receipts from retail and wholesale transactions. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; prior code § 37-1002) 
5.04.160 - License fee-How payable. 
    All business license fees are due and payable on the first day of January of each year and shall be delinquent on the first day of April of each year. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; Ord. 463 (part), 1987: Ord. 428 § 2, 1984: prior code § 37-1003) 
5.04.170 - License fee a debt. 
A.  The amount of any license fee imposed by this chapter and any and all penalties for non-payment thereof as herein provided shall be deemed a debt to the city, and any person commencing or conducting any business in the city for which a license is required by this chapter without having a license hereunder so to do, shall be liable to an action in the name of said city in any court of competent jurisdiction for the recovery of the amount of the license fee imposed by this chapter for such business, together with all penalties then due thereon as in this chapter provided, and for the additional sum equal to the actual attorney fees and legal costs to be included and assessed in any cause of action and any judgment recovered in such action. 
B.  All license fees imposed by this chapter shall be paid in advance at the office of the city clerk. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; prior code § 37-1006) 
5.04.180 - Delinquency-Penalty. 
    All business licenses fees which are not paid prior to the delinquent date shall have a fifteen percent (15%) penalty added. An additional fifteen percent (15%) penalty shall be added on the last day of each succeeding month until the fee is paid, penalty not to exceed ninety percent (90%) of the license fee due. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; Ord. 463 (part), 1987: prior code § 37-1004) 
5.04.190 - Charitable and nonprofit organizations. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall not be deemed or construed to require the payment of a license fee to conduct, manage, or carry on any business, occupation, or activity from any institution or organization which is conducted, managed or carried on wholly for the benefit of charitable purposes and from which profit is not derived, either directly or indirectly, by any individual, nor shall any license fee be required for the conducting of any entertainment, concert, exhibition or lecture on scientific, historical, literary, religious, or moral subjects within the city whenever the receipts of any such entertainment, concert, exhibition, or lecture are to be appropriated to any church or school or to any religious or benevolent or charitable purpose; nor shall any license fee be required for the conducting of any entertainment, dance, concert, exhibition, or lecture by any religious, charitable, fraternal, educational, military, state, county or municipal organization or association whenever the receipts of any such entertainment, dance, concert, exhibition, or lecture are to be appropriated for the purpose and objects for which such organization or association was formed and from which profit is not derived, either directly or indirectly, by any individual; provided, however, that nothing in this section shall be deemed to exempt any such organization or association from complying with any of the provisions of this code or any other ordinance of the city requiring a permit to conduct, manage, or carry on any profession, trade, calling, occupation or activity. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; prior code § 37-3001) 
5.04.200 - Disabled veterans. 
    No license fee payable hereunder shall be payable by any person who has received an honorable discharge or release from active duty in one of the United States armed services, and who is physically unable to obtain a livelihood by manual labor, who is a voter of this state, in connection with the distribution of circulars, or the hawking, peddling, or vending of any goods, wares or merchandise owned by him, except spirituous, malt, vinous, or other intoxicating liquor. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; prior code § 37-3002) 
5.04.210 - Public utilities under franchise. 
    Any public utility, possessing a franchise granted by the city and making payments under said franchise to the city, shall not be subject to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 37-3004) 
5.04.220 - Interstate commerce. 
A.  None of the license fees provided for by this chapter shall be so applied so as to occasion an undue burden upon interstate commerce. 
B.  In any case where a license fee is believed by a licensee or applicant for license to place an undue burden upon interstate commerce, he/she may file with the city clerk a petition for an adjustment of the fee so that it shall not be discriminatory or unreasonable as to such interstate commerce. 
C.  Such petition shall be filed at, or within six months after payment of the prescribed license fee. The petitioner shall, by affidavit and supporting testimony, show his/her method of doing business and the gross volume or estimated gross volume of his/her business and such other information as the city clerk may deem necessary in order to determine the extent, if any, of such undue burden on such interstate commerce. 
D.  The city clerk shall conduct an investigation, and, after having first obtained the written approval of the city attorney, shall fix as the license fee for the petitioner an amount that is reasonable and non-discriminatory, or if the license fee has already been paid, shall order a refund of the amount over and above the license fee so fixed. 
E.  Within ten (10) days after his/her decision, the city clerk shall give such petitioner notice thereof and shall file a copy of such decision with the city council. 
F.  The petitioner may appeal such decision, according to the procedure provided for appeals, by filing notice of appeal with the city clerk within six months from the service of such notice of such decision upon him. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; prior code § 37-3003) 
5.04.230 - Constitutional or statutory exemptions. 
    Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed or construed to apply to any person transacting and carrying on any business exempt by virtue of the constitution or applicable statutes of the United States or of the state from the payment of such fees as are herein prescribed. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; prior code § 37-3000) 
5.04.240 - Claim of exemption. 
A.  Any person claiming an exemption pursuant to this article shall file a verified statement with the city clerk stating the facts upon which exemption is claimed. 
B.  The city clerk shall, upon a proper showing contained in the verified statement, issue a license to such person without payment to the city of the license fee required by this chapter. 
C.  The city clerk shall file a report of his/her decision with the city council; and if his/her decision is adverse, shall within ten (10) days thereafter give the claimant notice of his/her decision. 
D.  The city council may at any time conduct a hearing on and consider whether the licensee has ceased to be entitled to the exemption provided in this article by reason of change of circumstances, or whether such licensee was not entitled to the exemption because of facts not stated in the claim for exemption, and for such purpose shall fix a time and place for hearing such matter. Notice of hearing shall be given, and said hearing shall be conducted and said matter determined substantially in the manner provided in the case of appeals. The decision of the council in such case shall be immediately effective. 
E.  The provisions of Section 5.04.060 relating to review of decisions of the city clerk shall also apply to exemptions. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; prior code § 37-3005) 
5.04.250 - Failure to file statement or corrected statement. 
A.  If any person fails to file any required statement within the time prescribed, or, if after demand therefor made by the city clerk, he/she fails to file a corrected statement, the city clerk may determine the amount of license fee due by such person by means of such information as he/she may be able to obtain. 
B.  If such determination is made, the city clerk shall give notice of the amount so assessed by serving it personally, or by depositing it in the United States Post Office at Kingsburg, California, postage prepaid, addressed to the person so assessed at his/her last known address. Such person may, within fifteen (15) days after the mailing or serving of such notice, make application in writing to the city clerk for a hearing on the amount of the license fee. If such application is made, the city clerk shall cause the matter to be set for hearing no less than fifteen (15) days or more than thirty (30) days thereafter before the city council. The city clerk shall give at least ten (10) days' notice to such person of the time and place of the hearing in the manner prescribed above for serving notices of assessment. The city council shall consider all evidence produced, and shall make findings thereon, which shall be final. Notice of such findings shall be served upon the applicant in the manner prescribed above for serving notices of assessment. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; prior code § 37-1011) 
5.04.260 - Statements not conclusive. 
A.  No statement shall be conclusive as to the matters set forth therein, nor shall the filing of the same preclude the city from collecting by appropriate action such sum as is actually due and payable hereunder. Such statement and each of the items therein contained shall be subject to audit and verification by the city clerk, his/her deputies or authorized employees of the city, who are hereby authorized to examine, audit and inspect such books and records of any licensee or applicant for license, as may be necessary in their judgment to verify or ascertain the amount of license fee due. 
B.  All licensees, applicants for licenses and persons engaged in business in the city are hereby required to permit an examination of such books and records for the purposes aforesaid. 
C.  The information furnished or secured pursuant to this section, or Sections 5.04.110 and 5.04.130 of this chapter, shall be confidential. Any unauthorized disclosure or use of such information by any officer or employee of the city shall constitute a misdemeanor and such officer or employee shall be subject to the penalty provisions of this chapter, in addition to any other penalties provided by law. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; prior code § 37-1010) 
Chapter 5.08 - BUSINESS LICENSE FEES* 
Sections: 

5.08.010 - Establishment of license fee. 
    The amount or rates of license fees to be paid by any person engaged or carrying on in the city any profession, trade, calling or occupation hereinafter designated is hereby affixed and established as hereinafter in this chapter provided, and such license fee shall be paid by every person engaged in carrying on any such profession, trade, occupation or calling. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; prior code § 37-2000) 
5.08.020 - License fee based upon gross receipts. 
    Every person who carries on one or more of the professions or vocations in Section 5.08.030 shall pay an annual license fee on the total annual gross receipts of said business or businesses conducted within the city at the rate and in the minimum or maximum amounts as set forth by resolution. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; Ord. 457 § 1, 1986: prior code § 37-2001) 
5.08.030 - Businesses required to pay license fee based upon gross receipts. 
    All retail and wholesale businesses shall pay a license fee on gross receipts as set forth in the North American Industries Classification System (NAICS), as may be amended from time to time. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; prior code § 37-2002) 
5.08.040 - Flat rate license fees-Professions and vocations. 
    Every person who conducts or carries on one or more of the professions or vocations as set forth in the North American Industries Classification System (NAICS) at a fixed place of business within the city shall pay an annual, flat rate license fee as established by resolution. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; Ord. 457 § 2 (part), 1986: prior code § 37-2004) 
5.08.050 - Flat rate license fee-Fixed place of business within city. 
    Every person transacting or carrying on at a fixed place of business within the city any business or businesses as set forth in the North American Industries Classification System (NAICS) shall pay an annual license fee as established by resolution. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; prior code § 37-2005) 
5.08.060 - Contractors. 
    Every person transacting or carrying on any business in the city in this section enumerated shall pay an annual license fee as established by resolution. 
    General building contractor and engineering contractor-Class A and B. 
    All other subcontractors (Class C). 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; Ord. 457 § 2 (part), 1986: prior code § 37-2006) 
5.08.070 - Flat rate license fee-No fixed place of business within city. 
A.  Every person transacting and carrying on the business herein enumerated, or set forth in the North American Industries Classification System (NAICS), without a fixed place of business within the city shall pay a license fee as established by resolution. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; Ord. 457 § 2 (part), 1986; prior code § 37-2008) 
5.08.080 - Sales or service by vehicle. 
    Every person not having a fixed place of business within the city who sells, at wholesale or retail, goods, wares or merchandise of any kind from a vehicle, or who provides any service by the use of vehicles in the city, shall pay a license fee as established by resolution. Such charge shall not be imposed provided such person makes less than three deliveries per year within the city. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; prior code § 37-2009) 
5.08.090 - License fee-Fortunetellers, etc. 
    Every person who shall carry on or engage in the business, occupation or vocation of palmistry, clairvoyance, fortuneteller or any method or process of astrology or phrenology, shall pay a license fee as established by resolution. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; prior code § 37-2010) 
Chapter 5.12 - BINGO 
Sections: 

5.12.010 - Purpose. 
    It is the purpose of this chapter to authorize the playing of the game of chance generally known as "bingo" subject to and pursuant to the restrictions contained in Article IV, Section 19c of the Constitution of the state of California, and Section 326.5 of the Penal Code of the state. Definitions, conditions and restrictions set forth in this chapter are intended to comply with and implement the constitutional and Penal Code provisions. To the extent that any provision of this chapter is substantially the same as that contained in Section 326.5 of the Penal Code and violation thereof is deemed a violation of the Penal Code and punishable thereunder, such provisions of this chapter shall be deemed explanatory only. 
(Prior code § 57-0000) 
5.12.020 - Definitions. 
    "Bingo" means a game of chance in which prizes are awarded on the basis of designated numbers or symbols on a card which conform to numbers or symbols selected at random. 
    "Church" means any organized religious group of any denomination with an organized governing body, ministry, membership and a fixed place of worship at which regular meetings of religious services are held. 
    "License collector" means the city clerk of the city of Kingsburg, California. 
    "Nonprofitable charitable organization" means any church or other nonprofit charitable organization exempted from the payment of bank and corporation taxes by Section 231(d) of the Revenue and Taxation Code and a contribution or gift to which would be a charitable contribution under Section 170(c)(2) of the Internal Revenue Code (1954). 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; prior code § 57-0001) 
5.12.030 - Bingo permitted. 
    A nonprofit charitable organization having in effect a license therefor from the license collector pursuant to the provisions of this chapter may conduct a bingo game for charitable purposes subject to all conditions and restrictions contained in Section 326.5 of the Penal Code of the state, and this chapter. 
(Prior code § 57-0002) 
5.12.040 - License application. 
    A nonprofit charitable organization may apply to the license collector for a license to conduct a bingo game. The application shall be upon forms provided therefor by the license collector, or in writing containing all the information called for in Section 5.12.050 and satisfactory to the license collector, and shall be accompanied by a nonreturnable fee as may be determined from time to time by the city council and established by resolution thereof. If the applicant is a church, it shall provide proof to the satisfaction of the license collector that it comes within the definition of a church, as defined in Section 5.24.020. If the applicant is other than a church, it shall accompany the application with a certificate or letter from the State Franchise Tax Board stating that the applicant is exempt from the payment of the bank and franchise tax, and from the Internal Revenue Service stating that it is a charitable organization to which a gift would be a charitable contribution under Section 170(c)(2) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954. 
(Prior code § 57-0003) 
5.12.050 - Content of application. 
A.  The application for a license for conducting bingo games shall contain the following: 
1.  The name of the organization, together with the names, signatures and addresses of all the officers of the organization and that the applicant is an eligible organization pursuant to the provisions of this chapter; 
2.  The address of the premises where the bingo game is proposed to be conducted; 
3.  A statement of the ownership or lessor and lessee of the premises; 
4.  Principal purpose for which the premises are used by the organization, together with the length of time for which the premises have been so used; 
5.  Name and address of the person responsible for the operation of the bingo game and those persons assisting therein; 
6.  Days and hours of proposed operation of bingo games; 
7.  Such further information as may be required by the license collector. 
B.  Said application shall be signed by the principal officer of the applicant under penalty of perjury. 
(Prior code § 57-0004) 
5.12.060 - Consent to investigation. 
    The filing of an application for a license shall be deemed a consent by the applicant for the chief of police to make an investigation to determine if all the statements on the application are true and to investigate the officers of the applicant and the person who will be responsible for the operation of the bingo game and those persons assisting therein as to any criminal record which they may have, and to disclose the same to the license collector and the city council upon an appropriate hearing. The application shall also be deemed consent for the planning and development department, the fire chief and the public works department of the city to inspect the premises and report thereon of any violations of law or other conditions which might endanger the public health, safety and well-being. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; prior code § 57-0005) 
5.12.070 - Denial of license. 
    In the event the chief of police, planning and development director, director of public works or fire chief recommend against the issuance of the license, due to being out of conformance with state law/city ordinance, or determined to be in the best interest of the city, the license collector shall refuse to issue such license. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; prior code § 57-0006) 
5.12.080 - Appeal. 
    In the event the license collector refuses to issue such license or attaches conditions thereto recommended by the chief of police, the planning and development director, director of public works or fire chief, the applicant may, within ten (10) days after the notice is given of such refusal or such conditions, appeal the same to the city council, who shall hold a hearing thereon and whose decision shall be final. The city council may attach additional conditions to the license found by it to be necessary to protect the public health, safety and well-being. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; prior code § 57-0007) 
5.12.090 - Issuance of license. 
    In the event the license collector does not receive a recommendation against the issuance of the license, he/she shall issue the same for a period of one year, which license shall contain the following information: 
A.  The name and nature of the organization to whom the license is issued; 
B.  The address where the bingo games are authorized to be conducted; 
C.  The maximum occupancy of the room in which the bingo games are to be conducted; 
D.  The date of the expiration of the license; 
E.  The days and hours during which bingo may be conducted; 
F.  Such conditions as may have been recommended by the chief of police, planning and development director, director of public works or fire official. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; prior code § 57-0008) 
5.12.100 - Posting of license. 
    A licensee shall keep the license posted in a conspicuous place within the room in which bingo is being played during the conduct of any such game. The licensee shall produce and exhibit the same whenever requested to do so by any peace officer, director of public works or fire official. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; prior code § 57-0009) 
5.12.110 - Conditions of operation. 
    It is unlawful for any bingo game to be operated in violation of any of the following conditions: 
A.  No minors shall be allowed to participate in any bingo game; 
B.  All bingo games shall be open to the public, not just to the members of the nonprofit charitable organization except as otherwise provided in this chapter; 
C.  No person shall be allowed to participate in a bingo game unless the person is physically present at the time and place in which the bingo game is being conducted; 
D.  The total value of prizes awarded during the conduct of any bingo games shall not exceed two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) in cash or kind, or both, for each separate game which is held; 
E.  Attendance at any bingo game shall be limited to the occupancy capacity of the room as set forth in the license; 
F.  No licensee shall issue chips or money to a patron on credit or a loan, including but not limited to IOU's and checks to be held, nor shall patrons be allowed to play on credit; 
G.  No person who is obviously intoxicated shall be allowed to participate in a bingo game; 
H.  Any condition attached to the license; 
I.  The licensee shall post and keep posted in a conspicuous place within the room in which bingo is being played the rules and regulations of the game; 
J.  Conduct any bingo game after the license therefor has expired or during any period which it is suspended. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; prior code § 57-0010) 
5.12.120 - Records. 
    Each licensee conducting a bingo game shall maintain detailed records of all profits, expenditures, prizes and other expenses relating to the operation of the bingo game. Such records shall be retained for a period of three years and as long thereafter as may be required by any state or federal law. Such records, including related bank accounts, shall be open for inspection at any time by the chief of police, city clerk of the city, or any state or federal official in the performance of his/her duties. 
(Prior code § 57-0011) 
5.12.130 - Changes in conditions. 
    Any change during the license period in the organization of the licensee, its principal officers, or the condition of the premises shall be immediately reported to the license collector who shall refer such changes to the appropriate official who shall make an investigation thereof and, if he/she deems appropriate, recommend the suspension and revocation of the license or the imposition of additional conditions thereto, which suspension, revocation or additional conditions shall be appealable to the city council as in the instance of an original application. 
(Prior code § 57-0012) 
5.12.140 - License nontransferable. 
    Any license granted under this chapter shall not be transferable either as to the licensee or the location. Any attempt to transfer shall render the license invalid. 
(Prior code § 57-0013) 
5.12.150 - Suspension or revocation. 
    Any license issued under this chapter shall be immediately suspended by the license collector upon the recommendation of either the chief of police, the health officer, the director of public works or the fire official, which recommendation must be based upon either violation of this chapter by the licensee or the discovery of some condition which would have caused a recommendation to have been made against the issuance of the license. Such suspension shall result in the automatic revocation of the license fifteen (15) days after the notice thereof unless within ten (10) days after the receipt of such notice the licensee appeals the suspension and revocation to the city council. In the event of such appeal, the city council shall hold a public hearing thereon and its decision shall be final. The suspension shall remain in effect pending decision by the city council. 
(Prior code § 57-0014) 
5.12.160 - Renewal. 
    A licensee desiring to continue the conducting of a bingo game shall, at least thirty (30) days before the expiration of the license, make application to the license collector for a renewal. The application for renewal shall be accompanied by the fee, proofs, and be processed in all respects as an original application. 
(Prior code § 57-0015) 
5.12.170 - Exceptions. 
    Provisions of this chapter, including the requirement to obtain a license, shall not be applicable to those bingo games limited to members only. 
(Added during 5-08 supplement) 
Chapter 5.16 - CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE 
Sections: 

5.16.010 - Intent. 
A.  The city of Kingsburg, pursuant to applicable Federal and State law, is authorized to grant one or more non-exclusive franchises to construct, operate, maintain and reconstruct cable television systems within the city limits. 
B.  The city council finds that the development of cable television and communications systems has the potential of having great benefit and impact upon the residents of Kingsburg. Because of the complex and rapidly changing technology associated with cable television, the city council further finds that the public convenience, safety and general welfare can best be served by establishing regulatory powers which should be vested in the city or such persons as the city may designate. It is the intent of this chapter and subsequent amendments to provide for and specify the means to attain the best possible cable television service to the public, and any franchises issued pursuant to this chapter shall be deemed to include this as an integral finding thereof. 
(Ord. 95-03 § 1 (part), 1995: prior code § 59-0001) 
5.16.020 - Short title. 
    This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "cable television ordinance." 
(Ord. 95-03 § 1 (part), 1995: prior code § 59-1002) 
5.16.030 - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. Words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural number. Words not defined shall be given their common and ordinary meaning. 
    "Basic cable service" means any service tier which includes the retransmission of local television broadcast signals. 
    "Cable television system" or "system," also referred to as "cable communications system" or "cable system," means a facility within the city consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception, and control equipment, that is designed to provide cable service which includes video programming and which is provided to multiple subscribers within a community, but such term does not include: 
A.  A facility that serves only to transmit television signals of one or more television broadcast stations; 
B.  A facility that serves only subscribers in one or more multiple unit dwellings under common ownership, control, or management, unless such facility uses any public rights-of-way; 
C.  A facility of a common carrier, except that such facility shall be considered a cable system to the extent such facility is used in the transmission of video programming directly to subscribers; or 
D.  Any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating its electric utility system. 
    "Cable service" means the total of the following: 
A.  The one-way transmission to subscribers of video programming or other programming service; and 
B.  Subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection of such video programming or other programming service. 
    "Channel" or "cable channel" means a portion of the electromagnetic frequency spectrum which is used in a cable system which is capable of delivering a television channel as defined by the Federal Communications Commission. 
    "Council" means the city council of the city of Kingsburg. 
    "Franchise" means an initial authorization, or renewal thereof, issued by the city council, whether such authorization is designated as a franchise, permit, license, resolution, contract, certificate, agreement, or otherwise, which authorizes the construction or operation of a cable system. 
    "Franchise agreement" means a franchise grant ordinance or a contractual agreement, containing the specific provisions of the franchise granted, including references, specifications, requirements and other related matters. 
    "Franchise fee" means any fee or assessment of any kind imposed by a franchising authority on a grantee as compensation for the grantee's use of the public rights-of-way. The term "franchise fee" does not include: 
A.  Any tax, fee or assessment of general applicability (including any such tax, fee, or assessment imposed on both utilities and cable operators or their services, but not including a tax, fee or assessment which is unduly discriminatory against cable operators or cable subscribers); 
B.  Capital costs which are required by the franchise to be incurred by grantee for public, educational, or governmental access facilities; 
C.  Requirements or charges incidental to the awarding, including payments for bonds, security funds, letters of credit, insurance, indemnification, penalties, or liquidated damages; or 
D.  Any fee imposed under Title 17, United States Code. 
    "Grantee" means any "person" receiving a franchise pursuant to this chapter and under the granting franchise ordinance or agreement, and its lawful successor, transferee or assignee. 
    "Grantor" or "city" means the city of Kingsburg as represented by the Council or any delegate acting within the scope of its jurisdiction. 
    "Gross annual revenues" means the annual gross revenues received by a grantee from all sources of operations of the cable television system within the city utilizing the public streets and rights-of-way for which a franchise is required in order to deliver such cable service, excluding refundable deposits, rebates or credits, except that any sales, excise or other taxes or charges collected for direct pass-through to local, state or federal government, other than the franchise fee, shall not be included. 
    "Initial service area" means the area of the city which will receive service initially, as set forth in any franchise agreement. 
    "Installation" means the connection of the system to subscribers' terminals, and the provision of service. 
    "Person" means an individual, partnership, association, joint stock company, trust, corporation or governmental entity. 
    "Public, educational or government access facilities" or "PEG access facilities" means the total of the following: 
A.  Channel capacity designated for noncommercial public, educational, or government use; and 
B.  Facilities and equipment for the use of such channel capacity. 
    "Section" means any section, subsection or provision of this chapter. 
    "Service area" or "franchise area" means the entire geographic area within the city as it is now constituted or may in the future be constituted, unless otherwise specified in the franchise granting ordinance or agreement. 
    "Service tier" means a category of cable service or other services provided by a grantee and for which a separate rate is charged by the grantee. 
    "State" means the state of California. 
    "Street" means each of the following, which have been dedicated to the public or are hereafter dedicated to the public and maintained under public authority or by others and located within the city limits: streets, roadways, highways, avenues, lanes, alleys, sidewalks, easements, rights-of-way and similar public property and areas that the grantor shall permit to be included within the definition of street from time to time. 
    "Subscriber" means any person who or which elects to subscribe to, for any purpose, a service provided by the grantee by means of or in connection with the cable system, and who pays the charges therefor. 
(Ord. 95-03 § 1 (part), 1995: prior code § 59-1003) 
5.16.040 - Grant of franchise. 
A.  Grant. A franchise granted by the city under the provisions of this chapter shall encompass the following purposes: 
1.  To engage in the business of providing cable television service, and such other services as may be permitted by law, which grantee chooses to provide, to subscribers within the designated service area. 
2.  To erect, install, construct, repair, rebuild, reconstruct, replace, maintain, and retain, cable lines, related electronic equipment, supporting structures, appurtenances, and other property in connection with the operation of the cable system in, on, over, under, upon, along and across streets or other public places within the designated service area. 
3.  To maintain and operate said franchise properties for the origination, reception, transmission, amplification, and distribution of television and radio signals and for the delivery of cable services, and such other services as may be permitted by law. 
4.  To set forth the obligations of a grantee under the franchise. 
B.  Franchise Required. It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, install or operate a cable television system in the city within any public street without a properly granted franchise awarded pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
C.  Term of Franchise. A franchise granted hereunder shall be for a term established in the franchise agreement, commencing on the grantor's adoption of an ordinance or resolution authorizing the franchise. 
D.  Franchise Renewal. A franchise granted hereunder may be renewed upon application by the grantee pursuant to the provisions of applicable state and federal law and of this chapter. 
E.  Franchise Territory. Any franchise shall be valid within all the territorial limits of the city, and within any area added to the city during the term of the franchise, unless otherwise specified in the franchise granting ordinance or agreement. 
F.  Federal or State Jurisdiction. This chapter shall be construed in a manner consistent with all applicable federal and state laws, and shall apply to all franchises granted or renewed after the effective date of this chapter to the extent permitted by applicable law. 
G.  Franchise Non-Transferable. 
1.  Grantee shall not sell, transfer, lease, assign, sublet or dispose of, in whole or in part, either by forced or involuntary sale, or by ordinary sale, contract, consolidation or otherwise, the franchise or any of the rights or privileges therein granted, without the prior consent of the council and then only upon such terms and conditions as may be prescribed by the council, which consent shall not be unreasonably denied or delayed; provided that such consent shall not be required for transactions between any parent, subsidiary or commonly owned entities. Any attempt to sell, transfer, lease, assign or otherwise dispose of the franchise without the consent of the council shall be null and void. The granting of a security interest in any grantee assets, or any mortgage or other hypothecation, shall not be considered a transfer for the purposes of this section. 
2.  The requirements of subsection (1) shall apply to any change of control of grantee. The word "control" as used herein is not limited to major stockholder or partnership interests, but includes actual working control in whatever manner exercised. The acquisition or accumulation by any person or group of persons holding forty percent (40%) of the voting shares or interests in grantee or any person which controls grantee shall be presumed to constitute a change of control of grantee, but grantee shall be entitled to rebut such presumption. 
3.  Grantee shall notify grantor in writing of any foreclosure or any other judicial sale of all or a substantial part of the franchise property of the grantee. Such notification shall be considered by grantor as notice that a change in control of ownership of the franchise has taken place and the provisions under this section governing the consent of grantor to such change in control of ownership shall apply. 
4.  For the purpose of determining whether it shall consent to such change, transfer, or acquisition of control, grantor may inquire into the qualifications of the prospective transferee or controlling party, and grantee shall assist grantor in such inquiry. In seeking grantor's consent to any change of ownership or control, grantee shall have the responsibility of insuring that the transferee completes any required application identical or substantially similar to FCC Form 394 "Application for Franchise Authority Consent to Assignment of Control of Cable Television Franchise", or any successor form. An application shall be submitted to grantor not less than sixty (60) days prior to the date of transfer. The transferee shall be required to establish that it possesses the qualifications and financial and technical capability to operate and maintain the system and comply with all franchise requirements for the remainder of the term of the franchise. If the legal, financial, character, and technical qualifications of the applicant are satisfactory, the grantor shall consent to the transfer of the franchise. The consent of the grantor to such transfer shall not be unreasonably denied or delayed. 
5.  Any financial institution having a pledge of the grantee or its assets for the advancement of money for the construction and/or operation of the franchise shall have the right to notify the grantor that it or its designee satisfactory to the grantor shall take control of and operate the cable television system, in the event of a grantee default of its financial obligations. Further, said financial institution shall also submit a plan for such operation within thirty (30) days of assuming such control that will insure continued service and compliance with all franchise requirements during the term the financial institution exercises control over the system. The financial institution shall not exercise control over the system for a period exceeding one year unless extended by the grantor in its discretion, and during said period of time it shall have the right to petition the grantor to transfer the franchise to another grantee. 
6.  At the time of application, grantee shall pay grantor an application fee to cover grantor's reasonable out-of-pocket processing and review expenses in connection with the transfer of the franchise or of control of the franchise, not to exceed one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00). Any such application fee shall not be charged against any franchise fee due to grantor during the term of the franchise. 
H.  Geographical Coverage. 
1.  Grantee shall design, construct and maintain the cable television system to have the capability to pass every dwelling unit within the public streets and rights-of-way in the city, subject to any service area and line extension requirements of the franchise agreement. 
2.  After service has been established by activating trunk and/or distribution cables for any service area, grantee shall provide service to any requesting subscriber within that service area within thirty (30) days from the date of request, provided that the grantee is able to secure all rights-of-way necessary to extend service to such subscriber within such thirty (30) day period on reasonable terms and conditions. 
I.  Nonexclusive Franchise. 
    Any franchise granted shall be nonexclusive. The grantor specifically reserves the right to grant, at any time, such additional franchises for a cable television system or any component thereof, as it deems appropriate, subject to applicable state and federal law, provided that if the grantor grants an additional franchise on terms more favorable to the second grantee (whether by the grant of greater benefits or the imposition of lesser obligations), then the initial grantee shall have the right to renegotiate its franchise to incorporate the more favorable terms. 
J.  Multiple Franchises. 
1.  Grantor may grant any number of franchises subject to applicable state or federal law. Grantor may limit the number of franchises granted, based upon, but not necessarily limited to, the requirements of applicable law and specific local considerations, such as: 
a.  The capacity of the public rights-of-way to accommodate multiple cables in addition to the cables, conduits and pipes of the utility systems, such as electrical power, telephone, gas and sewerage. 
b.  The benefits that may accrue to cable subscribers as a result of cable system competition, such as lower rates and improved service. 
c.  The disadvantages that may result from cable system competition, such as the requirement for multiple pedestals on residents' property, and the disruption arising from numerous excavations of the rights-of-way. 
2.  Each grantee awarded a franchise to serve the entire city shall offer service to all residences in the city, in accordance with construction and service schedules mutually agreed upon between grantor and grantee, line extension policies, and applicable law. 
3.  Developers of new residential housing with underground utilities shall provide conduit to accommodate cables for at least two cable systems. 
4.  Grantor may require that any new grantee be responsible for its own underground trenching and the costs associated therewith, if, in grantor's opinion, the rights-of-way in any particular area cannot feasibly and reasonably accommodate additional cables. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; Ord. 95-03 § 1 (part), 1995: prior code § 59-1004) 
5.16.050 - Regulation of franchise. 
A.  Franchise Application. Any person desiring an initial franchise for a cable television system shall file an application with the city. A reasonable nonrefundable application fee established by the city shall accompany the application to cover all costs associated with processing and reviewing the application, including without limitation costs of administrative review, financial, legal and technical evaluation of the applicant, consultants (including technical and legal experts and all costs incurred by such experts), notice and publication requirements with respect to the consideration of the application and document preparation expenses. In the event such costs exceed the application fee, the selected applicant(s) shall pay the difference to the city within thirty (30) days following receipt of an itemized statement of such costs. 
B.  Applications Contents. An application for an initial franchise for a cable television system shall contain, where applicable: 
1.  A statement as to the proposed franchise and service area; 
2.  A resume of prior history of the applicant, including the expertise of applicant in the cable television field; 
3.  A list of the partners, general and limited, of the applicant, if a partnership, or of those owning or controlling over five percent of the stock, if a corporation; 
4.  A list of officers, directors and managing employees of the applicant, together with a description of the background of each such person; 
5.  The names and addresses of any parent or subsidiary of the applicant or any other business entity owning or controlling the applicant in whole or in part, or owned or controlled in whole or in part by the applicant; 
6.  A current financial statement of the applicant verified by a certified public accountant audit or otherwise certified to be true, complete and correct to the reasonable satisfaction of the city; 
7.  A proposed construction and service schedule; and 
8.  Any reasonable additional information that the city deems applicable. 
C.  Consideration of Applications. 
1.  Upon receipt of any application for an initial franchise, the city manager shall prepare a report and make recommendations respecting such application to the city council. 
2.  A public hearing shall be set prior to any initial franchise grant, at a time and date approved by the council. Within thirty (30) days after the close of the hearing, the council shall make a decision based upon the evidence received at the hearing as to whether or not the franchise(s) should be granted, and, if granted, subject to what conditions. The council may grant one or more franchises, or may decline to grant any franchise. 
D.  Franchise Renewal. Franchise renewals shall be in accordance with applicable law. Grantor and grantee, by mutual consent, may enter into renewal negotiations at any time during the term of the franchise. If mutually agreed to in a franchise renewal agreement, grantee shall reimburse grantor for costs incidental to the franchise renewal award, not to exceed any maximum specified in the agreement. Any such reimbursement shall not be charged against any franchise fee due to the grantor during the term of the franchise. 
E.  Minimum Consumer Protection and Service Standards. 
1.  Except as otherwise provided in the franchise agreement, grantee shall maintain a local area office (not necessarily within the city limits) to provide the necessary facilities, equipment and personnel to comply with the following consumer protection and service standards under normal conditions of operation: 
a.  Knowledgeable, qualified company representatives will be available to respond to customer telephone inquiries Monday through Friday during normal business hours. 
b.  Sufficient toll-free telephone line capacity during normal business hours to assure, on average, that a minimum of ninety (90) percent of all calls, measured on a quarterly basis, will be answered within thirty (30) seconds, including wait time and time required to transfer the call; emergency telephone line capacity on a twenty-four (24) hour basis, including weekends and holidays. 
c.  Under normal operating conditions, the customer will receive a busy signal less than three percent of the total time that the cable office is open for business. 
d.  If grantee utilizes an automated answering and distributing equipment, such equipment will limit the number of routine rings to four or fewer. If grantee does not utilize automated equipment, grantee shall make every effort to answer incoming calls as promptly as the automated systems. 
e.  A local area bill payment location open during normal business hours nine a.m. to five p.m., Monday to Friday, excluding holidays and at least three weekend hours each week which is adequately staffed to accept subscriber payments. 
f.  Consumer Information. At the time service is initiated, each new customer will be provided written information covering: 
i.  Products and cable service offered. 
ii.  Prices and options for programming services and conditions of subscription to programming and other cable service. 
iii.  Installation and service maintenance policies. 
iv.  Instructions on how to use the cable service. 
v.  A channel lineup card. 
vi.  The time allowed to pay outstanding bills. 
vii.  Grounds for termination of service. 
viii.  The steps grantee must take before terminating service. 
ix.  How the customer can resolve billing disputes. 
x.  The steps necessary to have service reconnected after involuntary termination. 
xi.  The fact that customers shall have the right to speak with a supervisor, and if none is available, the supervisor shall return the customer's call within one working day. 
xii.  The appropriate regulatory authority with whom to register a complaint and how to contact such authority. 
g.  Requests for cable service and repairs. 
i.  Grantee shall render efficient service, make repairs promptly, and interrupt service only for good cause and for the shortest time possible. Scheduled interruptions exceeding four hours between midnight and six a.m. and exceeding one hour between six a.m. and midnight shall be preceded by notice over the cable system to customers in the affected area. To the extent that grantee can control them, scheduled interruptions shall occur during a period of minimum system use, preferably between midnight and six a.m. 
ii.  Grantee shall maintain a repair force of technicians capable of responding to subscriber requests for service within the following time frames under normal operating conditions no less than ninety-five (95) percent of the time measured on a quarterly basis: 
(A)  Installation. An installation staff capable of installing service to any residential subscriber within seven business days after receipt of a request, in all areas where coaxial feeder cable has been activated within one-hundred fifty (150) feet of the residence, provided that grantee is able to secure all rights-of-way necessary to extend service to such subscriber on reasonable terms and conditions within such seven-day period. 
(B)  Outages. Grantee will respond to service interruptions promptly and in no event later than twenty-four (24) consecutive hours after becoming aware of such interruption. Other service problems will be responded to within thirty-six (36) consecutive hours during the normal work week. 
(C)  Inferior Reception Quality. Grantee will respond within thirty-six (36) consecutive hours during the normal work week of receiving a request for service identifying a problem concerning picture or sound quality. 
iii.  Grantee shall schedule, within a specified four-hour time period, appointments with subscribers for installation or service. Specifying appointments as either "morning" or "afternoon" shall be deemed to comply with this requirement. The obligation of grantee to specify installation or service appointments within a designated four-hour time period shall be consistent with grantee's scheduling calendar, such that when available morning and afternoon appointments have been scheduled, additional subscribers requesting installation or service on such days may be advised that grantee's service personnel may arrive at any point during the business day, the subscriber may request grantee to make an appointment for morning or afternoon service on the next business day in which such appointments are available. 
iv.  Grantee shall be deemed to have responded to a request for service under provisions of this subsection when a service representative arrives at the service location and begins work on the problem. If an appointment was scheduled per subsection (g)(iii), or an appointment was not scheduled, and a subscriber is not home when a service representative arrives (within the appointment window if one was scheduled), response shall be deemed to have taken place if the representative leaves written notification of arrival. 
v.  The term "normal operating conditions" as used in this chapter means those service conditions which are within the control of grantee. Those conditions which are not within grantee's control include, but are not limited to, natural disasters, civil disturbances, power outages, telephone network outages, and severe or unusual weather conditions. Those conditions which are within grantee's control include, but are not limited to, special promotions, pay-per-view events, rate increases, regular peak or seasonal demand periods, and maintenance or upgrade of the cable system. 
F.  Complaint Procedures. 
1.  Grantee shall establish written procedures for receiving, acting upon and resolving subscriber complaints without intervention by the grantor. The written procedures shall prescribe the manner in which a subscriber may submit a complaint either orally or in writing specifying the subscriber's grounds for dissatisfaction. Grantee shall file a copy of these procedures with grantor. 
2.  Grantor shall have the right to review grantee's response to subscriber complaints in order to determine grantee's compliance with the franchise requirements, subject to the subscriber's right to privacy. 
G.  Continuity of Service. 
1.  It shall be the right of all subscribers to continue receiving service insofar as their financial and other obligations to the grantee are honored. In the event that the grantee elects to rebuild, modify, or sell the system, or the grantor gives notice of intent to terminate or not to renew the franchise, the grantee shall act so as to ensure that all subscribers receive service so long as the franchise remains in force. 
2.  In the event of a change of control of grantee, or in the event a new operator acquires the system, the original grantee shall cooperate with the grantor, new grantee or operator in maintaining continuity of service to all subscribers. During such period, grantee shall be entitled to the revenues for any period during which it operates the system. 
3.  Except as reasonably necessary for system maintenance, construction, rebuild, or upgrade activity, grantee shall not intentionally terminate the ongoing operation of the cable system so as to deny cable service to its subscribers. Because the provision of cable service to subscribers is a unique service, money damages would not be a sufficient remedy for violation of this subsection (G). Grantor shall be entitled to equitable relief, including injunctive relief and specific performance, as a remedy for violation of this subsection (G). Such remedy shall not be deemed to be the exclusive remedy, but shall be in addition to any other remedy provided for in this chapter or the franchise agreement or at law or in equity. 
H.  Identification. All officers, agents or employees of grantee or its contractors or subcontractors who, in the normal course of work come into contact with members of the public or who require entry onto subscribers' premises shall carry a photo-identification card in a form reasonably approved by grantor. Grantee shall account for all identification cards at all times. Every vehicle of the grantee or its major subcontractors shall be clearly identified as working for grantee. 
I.  Additional Service Standards. Additional service standards and standards governing consumer protection and response by grantee to subscriber complaints not otherwise provided for in this chapter may be established in the franchise agreement, and grantee shall comply with such standards in the operations of the cable television system. A verified and continuing pattern of noncompliance may be deemed a material breach of the franchise, provided that grantee shall receive due process, including written notification and an opportunity to cure, prior to any sanction being imposed. 
J.  Franchise Fee. 
1.  Following the issuance and acceptance of the franchise, the grantee shall pay to the grantor a franchise fee in the amount set forth in the franchise agreement. 
2.  The grantor, on an annual basis, shall be furnished a statement within sixty (60) days of the close of the calendar year, either audited and certified by an independent certified public accountant or certified by an officer of the grantee, reflecting the total amounts of gross receipts and all payments, deductions and computations for the period covered by the payment. Upon thirty (30) days prior written notice, grantor shall have the right to conduct an independent audit of grantee's records, in accordance with Generally Accepted Accounting Procedures, and if such audit indicates a franchise fee underpayment of two percent or more, grantee shall pay such underpayment to grantor within fifteen (15) calendar days and shall assume all reasonable costs of such an audit. 
3.  Except as otherwise provided by law, no acceptance of any payment by the grantor shall be construed as a release or as an accord and satisfaction of any claim the grantor may have for further or additional sums payable as a franchise fee under this chapter or for the performance of any other obligation of the grantee. 
4.  In the event that any franchise payment or recomputed amount is not made on or before the dates specified in the franchise agreement, grantee shall pay as additional compensation: 
a.  An interest charge, computed from such due date, at an annual rate equal to the prime lending rate of First Interstate Bank or any other bank as adopted by resolution of the city council, plus one percent during the period for which payment was due; and 
b.  If the payment is late by forty-five (45) days or more, a sum of money equal to five percent of the amount due in order to defray those additional expenses and costs incurred by the grantor by reason of delinquent payment. 
5.  Franchise fee payments shall be made in accordance with the schedule indicated in the franchise agreement. 
K.  Security Fund. 
1.  Grantor may require grantee to provide a security fund in an amount and form established in the franchise agreement or a guarantee by a corporate parent. The amount of any security fund shall be established based on the extent of the grantee's obligations under the terms of the franchise. 
2.  The security fund or guarantee shall be available to grantor to satisfy all claims, liens and/or fees due grantor from grantee which arise by reason of construction, operation, or maintenance of the system, and to satisfy any actual or liquidated damages arising out of a franchise breach, subject to the procedures and amounts designated in the franchise agreement. 
3.  If the security fund is drawn upon by grantor in accordance with the procedures established in this chapter and the franchise agreement, grantee shall cause the security fund to be replenished to the original amount no later than thirty (30) days after each withdrawal by grantor. Failure to replenish the security fund shall be deemed a material breach of the franchise. 
L.  Hold Harmless. Grantee shall indemnify, defend and hold grantor, its officers, agents and employees harmless from any liability, claims, damages, costs or expenses, and as provided in the franchise agreement. 
M.  Insurance. On or before commencement of franchise operations, the grantee shall obtain policies of liability, workers' compensation and property insurance from appropriately qualified insurance companies. The nature and extent of the grantee's minimum obligations shall be specified in the franchise agreement. 
N.  Records Required and Grantor's Right to Inspect. 
1.  Grantee shall at all times maintain: 
a.  A record of all service calls and interruptions or degradation of service experienced for the preceding two years, provided that such complaints result in or require a service call, subject to the subscriber's right of privacy. 
b.  A full and complete set of plans, records and "as-built" maps showing the locations of the cable television system installed or in use in the city, exclusive of subscriber service drops and equipment provided in subscriber's homes. 
c.  If requested by grantor, a summary of service calls, identifying the number, general nature and disposition of such calls, on a quarterly basis. A summary of such service calls shall be submitted to the grantor within thirty (30) days following any grantor request, in a form reasonably acceptable to the grantor. 
2.  The grantor may impose reasonable requests for additional information, records and documents from time to time, provided they reasonably relate to the scope of the city's rights under this chapter or the grantee's franchise agreement. 
3.  Upon reasonable notice, and during normal business hours, grantee shall permit examination by any duly authorized representative of the grantor of all franchise property and facilities, together with any appurtenant property and facilities of grantee situated within or without the city, and all records relating to the franchise, provided they are necessary to enable the grantor to carry out its regulatory responsibilities under this chapter or the franchise agreement. Grantee shall have the right to be present at any such examination. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; Ord. 95-03 § 1 (part), 1995) 
5.16.060 - Design and construction requirements. 
A.  Grantee shall not construct any cable system facilities until grantee has secured the necessary permits from grantor, or other cognizant public agencies. 
B.  In those areas of the city where transmission lines or distribution facilities of the public utilities providing telephone and electric power service are underground, the grantee likewise shall construct, operate and maintain its transmission and distribution facilities therein underground. 
C.  In those areas of the city where the grantee's cables are located on the above-ground transmission or distribution facilities of the public utility providing telephone or electric power service, and in the event that the facilities of both such public utilities subsequently are placed underground, then the grantee likewise shall reconstruct, operate and maintain its transmission and distribution facilities underground, at grantee's cost. Certain of grantee's equipment, such as pedestals, amplifiers and power supplies, which normally are placed above ground, may continue to remain in above-ground enclosures, unless otherwise provided in the franchise agreement. 
D.  Any changes in or extensions of any poles, anchors, wires, cables, conduits, vaults, laterals or other fixtures and equipment (herein referred to as "structures"), or the construction of any additional structures, in, upon, along, across, under or over the streets, alleys and public ways shall be made under the direction of grantor's city engineer or a designee, who shall, if the proposed change, extension or construction conforms to the provisions hereof, issue written permits therefor. The height above public thoroughfares of all aerial wires shall conform to the requirements of the California Public Utilities Commission or other regulatory body having jurisdiction thereof. 
1.  All transmission and distribution structures, lines and equipment erected by the grantee shall be located so as not to interfere with the proper use of streets, alleys and other public ways and places, and to cause minimum interference with the rights or reasonable convenience of property owners who adjoin any of the said streets, alleys or other public ways and places, and not to interfere with existing public utility installations. 
2.  In the event that any property or improvement of the grantor in the public rights-of-way is disturbed or damaged by the grantee or any of its contractors, agents or employees in connection with undertaking any and all work pursuant to the right granted to the grantee pursuant to this chapter, the grantee shall promptly, at the grantee's sole cost and expense, restore as nearly as practicable to their former condition said property or improvement which was so disturbed or damaged, and in the event that any such property or improvement shall at any later time become uneven, unsettled or otherwise require restoration, repair or replacement because of such disturbance or damage by the grantee, then the grantee, as soon as reasonably possible, shall, promptly upon receipt of notice from the grantor and at the grantee's sole cost and expense, restore as nearly as practicable to their former condition said property or improvement which was disturbed or damaged. Any such restoration by the grantee shall be made in accordance with such materials and specifications as may, from time to time, be then provided for by grantor ordinance. 
3.  Prior to commencing any work in the public rights-of-way, the grantee shall obtain any and all permits lawfully required by such grantor codes and ordinances of general application for such work. In the event that emergency work may be required by the grantee, however, the grantee shall obtain any and all such permits within three working days after the beginning of such emergency work. 
4.  There shall be no unreasonable or unnecessary obstruction of the public rights-of-way by the grantee in connection with any of the work herein provided for, and the grantee shall maintain such barriers, signs and warning signals during any such work performed on or about the public rights-of-way or adjacent thereto as may be necessary to reasonably avoid injury or damage to life and property. 
5.  If at any time during the period of this franchise the grantor shall lawfully elect to alter or change the grade or location of any street, alley or other public rights-of-way, the grantee shall, upon reasonable notice by the grantor, remove, relay and relocate its poles, wires, cables, underground conduits, manholes and other fixtures at its own expense, and in each instance comply with the requirements of the grantor. 
6.  The grantee shall not place poles, conduits or other fixtures above or below ground where the same will interfere with any gas, electric, telephone fixtures, water hydrants or other utility, and all such poles, conduits or other fixtures placed in any street shall be so placed as to comply with all ordinances of the grantor. 
7.  The grantee may be required by the grantor to permit joint use of its poles, conduits and appurtenances located in the streets, alleys or other public rights-of-way, by utilities insofar as such joint use may be reasonably practicable and upon payment of reasonable rental therefore; provided that in the absence of agreement regarding such joint use, the city council shall provide for arbitration of the terms and conditions of such joint use and the compensation to be paid therefrom, which award shall be final. 
8.  The grantee shall, on request of any person holding a moving permit issued by the grantor, temporarily move its wires or fixtures to permit the moving of buildings, the expense of such temporary removal to be paid by the person requesting the same. The grantee shall be given not less than forty-eight (48) hours advance notice to arrange for such temporary changes, and may require payment in advance. 
9.  The grantee shall have the authority, except when in conflict with existing grantor ordinances, to trim any trees upon and overhanging the streets, alleys, sidewalks and public places so as to prevent the branches of such trees from coming in contact with the wires and cables of the grantee, except that at the option of the grantor, such trimming may be done by grantor, or under grantor's supervision and direction. 
E.  In new residential developments in which the electric power and telephone utilities are underground, the following procedure shall apply with respect to access to and utilization of underground easements. 
1.  The developer shall be responsible for contacting and surveying all franchised cable operators to ascertain which operators desire to provide cable television service to that development. The developer may establish a reasonable deadline to receive cable operator responses. The final development map shall indicate the cable operators that have agreed to serve the development. 
2.  If one or two cable operators wish to provide service, they shall be accommodated in the joint utilities trench on a nondiscriminatory shared cost basis. If fewer than two operators indicate interest, the developer shall provide conduit to accommodate two sets of cable television cables and dedicate to the city any initially unoccupied conduit. The developer shall be entitled to recover the costs of such initially unoccupied conduit in the event that grantor subsequently leases or sells occupancy or use rights to any grantee. 
3.  The developer shall provide at least ten (10) working days notice of the date that utility trenches will be open to the cable operators that have agreed to serve the development. When the trenches are open, cable operators shall have two working days to begin the installation of their cables, and five working days after beginning installation to complete installation. 
4.  The final development map shall not be approved until the developer submits evidence that: 
a.  It has notified each grantee that underground utility trenches are to be open as of an estimated date, and that each grantee will be allowed access to such trenches, including trenches from proposed streets to individual homes or home sites, on specified nondiscriminatory terms and conditions; and 
b.  It has received a written notification from each grantee that the grantee intends to install its facilities during the open trench period on the specified terms and conditions, or such other terms and conditions as are mutually agreeable to the developer and the grantee, or has received no reply from a grantee within ten (10) days after its notification to such grantee, in which case the grantee will be deemed to have waived its opportunity to install its facilities during the open trench period. 
5.  Sharing the joint utilities trench shall be subject to compliance with state regulatory agency and utility standards. If such compliance is not possible, the developer shall provide a separate trench for the cable television cables, with the entire cost shared among the developer and participating operators. With the concurrence of the developer, the affected utilities and the cable operators, alternative installation procedures, such as the use of deeper trenches, may be utilized, subject to applicable law. 
6.  Any cable operator wishing to serve an area where the trenches have been closed shall be responsible for its own trenching and associated costs. 
7.  In the event that more than one franchise is awarded, the city reserves the right to limit the number of drop cables per residence, or to require that the drop cable(s) be utilized only by the cable operator selected by the resident to provide service. 
8.  The city reserves the right to grant an encroachment permit to a cable franchisee applicant to install conduit and/or cable in anticipation of the granting of a franchise. Such installations shall be at the applicant's risk, with no recourse against the city in the event the pending franchise application is not granted. The city may require an applicant to provide a separate trench for its conduit and/or cable, at the applicant's cost. The construction of such separate trench, if provided, shall be coordinated with, and subject to, the developer's overall construction schedule. 
F.  Technical Standards. 
1.  The grantee shall construct, install, operate and maintain its system in a manner consistent with all applicable laws, ordinances, construction standards, governmental requirements, FCC technical standards, and any detailed standards set forth in its franchise agreement. In addition, the grantee shall provide to the grantor, upon request, a written report of the results of the grantee's periodic proof of performance tests conducted pursuant to FCC and franchise standards and guidelines. The written report shall be provided to grantor at the same time that grantee files the report with the FCC. 
2.  Repeated and verified failure to maintain specified technical standards shall constitute a material breach of the franchise. For purposes of this paragraph (2), the term "repeated" shall mean failure to maintain any specified technical standard(s) three or more times in any consecutive twelve (12) month period where such failure causes a substantial adverse effect on the provision of cable service through grantee's cable system. Also for purposes of this paragraph (2), the term "verified" shall mean verified by the council or its designated representative. 
(Ord. 95-03 § 1 (part), 1995) 
5.16.070 - Reports. 
A.  Annual Reports. Within ninety (90) days after the end of the calendar year, unless grantor agrees that submission only upon request will be satisfactory, grantee shall submit a written annual report to grantor, with respect to the preceding calendar year in a form reasonably approved by grantor, including, but not limited to, the following information: 
1.  A summary of the previous year's (or in the case of the initial reporting year, the initial year's) activities in development of the cable system, including but not limited to, services begun or discontinued during the reporting year; 
2.  A list of grantee's officers, members of its board of directors, and other principals of grantee; 
3.  A list of stockholders of record or other equity investors holding ten (10) percent or more of the voting interest in grantee; 
4.  An indication of any residences in grantee's service area where service is not available, and a schedule for providing service; 
5.  Information as to the number of homes passed, subscribers, additional television outlets, and the number of basic and pay subscribers; and 
6.  Any other information relevant to franchise regulation which the grantor shall reasonably request, and which is relevant to its regulatory responsibilities. 
B.  Copies of Federal and State Communications. 
1.  Upon specific request, grantee shall submit to grantor copies of all pleadings, applications and reports submitted by grantee to, as well as copies of all decisions, correspondence and actions by, any federal, state or local court or regulatory agency, which are non-routine in nature and which will materially affect its cable television operations within the franchise area. Information otherwise confidential by law and so designated by grantee, which is submitted to grantor, shall be retained in confidence by grantor and its authorized agents and shall not be made available for public inspection. In the event of legal challenge to grantor's withholding of any such information, grantee shall be responsible for defending against such challenge and shall indemnify grantor against any cost, expenses (including attorney's fees), losses, judgments or liabilities in connection therewith. 
2.  Notwithstanding the foregoing, grantee shall have no obligation to provide copies of documents to grantor which contain trade secrets of grantee or which are otherwise of a confidential or proprietary nature to grantee unless it receives satisfactory assurances from grantor that such information can and will be held in strictest confidence by the grantor. To the extent possible, grantee will provide grantor with summaries of any required documents or copies thereof with trade secrets and proprietary matters deleted therefrom. The burden of proof shall be on grantee to establish the confidential nature of any information submitted, to the reasonable satisfaction of the grantor. 
C.  Public Reports. If grantee is publicly held, a copy of each grantee's annual and other periodic reports and those of its parent, shall be submitted to grantor within forty-five (45) days of its issuance. 
D.  Complaint Report and Opinion Survey. Upon request of the grantor, but not more than once annually, the grantee shall conduct a subscriber satisfaction survey pertaining to quality of service, which may be transmitted to subscribers in grantee's invoice for cable services. The results of such survey shall be provided to the grantor on a timely basis. The cost of such survey shall be borne by the grantee. 
E.  Privacy Report. Upon grantor's request, but no more than annually, grantee shall submit to grantor a report indicating the degree of compliance with the provisions contained in this section herein and all steps taken to assure that the privacy rights of individuals have been protected. 
F.  Reports-General. 
1.  All reports required under this chapter, except those required by law to be kept confidential, shall be available for public inspection in the grantor's offices during normal business hours. 
2.  All reports and records required under this chapter shall be furnished at the sole expense of grantee, except as otherwise provided in this chapter or the franchise agreement. 
3.  The willful refusal, failure, or neglect of grantee to file any of the reports required as and when due under this chapter, may be deemed a material breach of the franchise agreement if such reports are not provided to grantor within thirty (30) days after written request therefore, and may subject the grantee to all remedies, legal or equitable, which are available to grantor under the franchise or otherwise. 
4.  Any materially false or misleading statement or representation made knowingly and willfully by the grantee in any report required under this chapter or under the franchise agreement may be deemed a material breach of the franchise and may subject grantee to all remedies, legal or equitable, which are available to grantor under the franchise or otherwise. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; Ord. 95-03 § 1 (part), 1995: prior code § 59-1007) 
5.16.080 - System evaluation. 
A.  Annual Review of System Performance. Each year throughout the term of the franchise, if requested by the grantor, grantor and grantee shall meet publicly to review system performance and quality of service. The various reports required pursuant to this chapter, results of technical performance tests, the record of subscriber complaints and grantee's response to complaints, and the information acquired in any subscriber surveys, shall be utilized as the basis for review. In addition, any subscriber may submit comments or complaints during the review meetings, either orally or in writing, and these shall be considered. Within thirty (30) days after the conclusion of a system performance review meeting, grantor may issue findings with respect to the cable system's franchise compliance and quality of service. If grantor determines that grantee is not in compliance with the requirements of this chapter or the grantee's franchise, grantor may direct grantee to correct the areas of noncompliance within a reasonable period of time. Failure of grantee, after due notice, to correct the areas of noncompliance within the period specified therefore or to commence compliance within such period and diligently achieve compliance thereafter, shall be considered a material breach of the franchise, and grantor may exercise any remedy within the scope of this chapter and the franchise agreement. 
B.  Special Review of System Performance. When grantor determines that there has been a pattern of complaints made or where there exists other evidence which, in the judgment of the grantor, casts reasonable doubt on the reliability or quality of cable service to the effect that the grantee is not in compliance with the requirements of this chapter or its franchise, the grantor shall have the right to compel the grantee to test, analyze and report on the performance of the system in order to protect the public against substandard cable service. Grantor may not compel grantee to provide such tests or reports unless and until grantor has provided grantee with at least thirty (30) days notice of its intention to exercise its rights under this section and has provided grantee with an opportunity to be heard prior to its exercise of such rights. Such test or tests shall be made and the report shall be delivered to the grantor no later than thirty (30) days after the grantor notifies the grantee that it is exercising such right, and shall be made at grantee's sole cost. Such report shall include the following information: The nature of the complaints which precipitated the special tests, what system component was tested, the equipment used and procedures employed in said testing, the results of such tests, and the method by which such complaints were resolved. Any other information pertinent to the special test shall be recorded. 
C.  Special Evaluation Sessions. The grantor may hold special evaluation sessions at any time during the term of a franchise, provided such sessions are held no more often than once every three years. The grantee shall be notified of the place, time and date thereof and the topics to be discussed. Such sessions may be open to the public and advertised in a newspaper of general circulation at least thirty (30) days before each session. The sessions may include an evaluation of any items considered relevant to the cable system, the subscribers and the city. Either the grantor or the grantee may propose items for discussion or evaluation. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; Ord. 95-03 § 1 (part), 1995: prior code § 59-1008) 
5.16.090 - Franchise breaches. 
    Franchise breaches and the respective rights and remedies in connection therewith shall be as specified in the franchise agreement or as otherwise provided by law. 
(Ord. 95-03 § 1 (part), 1995) 
5.16.100 - Miscellaneous provisions. 
A.  Abandonment or Removal of Franchise Property. 
1.  In the event that the use of any property of grantee within the public rights-of-way is discontinued for a continuous period of twelve (12) months, grantee shall be deemed to have abandoned that franchise property. Any part of the cable system that is parallel or redundant to other parts of the system and is intended for use only when needed as a backup for the system or a part thereof, shall not be deemed to have been abandoned because of its lack of use. 
2.  Grantor, upon such terms as grantor may impose, may give grantee permission to abandon, without removing, any system facility or equipment laid, directly constructed, operated or maintained under the franchise. Unless such permission is granted or unless otherwise provided in this chapter, the grantee shall remove all abandoned above-ground facilities and equipment upon receipt of written notice from grantor and shall restore any affected street to its former state at the time such facilities and equipment were removed, so as not to impair its usefulness. In removing its plant, structures and equipment, grantee shall refill, at its own expense, any excavation that shall be made by it and shall leave all public ways and places in as good condition as that prevailing prior to such removal without materially interfering with any electrical or telephone cable or other utility wires, poles, or attachments. Grantor shall have the right to inspect and approve the condition of the public ways, public places, cables, wires, attachments and poles prior to and after removal. The liability, indemnity and insurance provisions of this chapter and the security fund as provided herein shall continue in full force and effect during the period of removal and until full compliance by grantee with the terms and conditions of this section. 
3.  Upon abandonment of any franchise property in place, the grantee, if required by the grantor, shall submit to the grantor an instrument, satisfactory in form to the grantor, transferring to the grantor the ownership of the franchise property abandoned. 
4.  At the expiration of the term for which the franchise is granted, or upon its revocation or earlier expiration, as provided herein, in any such case without renewal, extension or transfer, the grantor shall have the right to require grantee to remove, at its own expense, all above-ground portions of the cable television system from all streets and public ways within the city within a reasonable period of time, which shall not be less than one hundred eighty (180) days. 
5.  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary set forth in this chapter, the grantee may abandon any underground franchise property in place so long as it does not materially interfere with the use of the street or public rights-of-way in which such property is located or with the use thereof by any public utility or other cable grantee. 
B.  Restoration by Grantor-Reimburse-ment of Costs. In the event of a failure by grantee to complete any work required herein or by any other law or ordinance, and if such work is not completed within thirty (30) days after receipt of written notice thereof from grantor or, if more than thirty (30) days are reasonably required therefor, if grantee does not commence such work within such thirty (30) days period and diligently complete the work thereafter (except in cases of emergency constituting a threat to public health, safety or welfare), grantor may cause such work to be done and grantee shall reimburse grantor the costs thereof within thirty (30) days after receipt of an itemized list of such costs, or grantor may recover such costs through the security fund provided by grantee. 
C.  Extended Operation and Continuity of Services. Upon expiration or revocation of the franchise, the grantor shall have the discretion to grant a short-term license in lieu of a franchise, to permit grantee to continue to operate the cable television system for a specific period of time, not to exceed twelve (12) months. Grantee shall continue to operate the system under the terms and conditions of this chapter and the license and to provide the regular subscriber service and any and all of the services that may be provided at that time. It shall be the right of all subscribers to continue to receive all available services provided that financial and other obligations to grantee are honored. The grantee shall use reasonable efforts to provide continuous, uninterrupted service to its subscribers, including operation of the system during transition periods following franchise expiration or termination. 
D.  Receivership and Foreclosure. 
1.  A franchise granted hereunder shall, at the option of grantor, cease and terminate one hundred twenty (120) days after appointment of a receiver or receivers, or trustee or trustees, to take over and conduct the business of grantee, whether in a receivership, reorganization, bankruptcy or other action or proceeding, unless such receivership or trusteeship shall have been vacated prior to the expiration of said one hundred twenty (120) days, or unless: (1) such receivers or trustees shall have, within one hundred twenty (120) days after their election or appointment, fully complied with all the terms and provisions of this chapter and the franchise granted pursuant hereto, and the receivership or trustees within said one hundred twenty (120) days shall have remedied all the faults under the franchise or provided a plan for the remedy of such faults which is satisfactory to the grantor; and (2) such receivers or trustees shall, within said one hundred twenty (120) days, execute an agreement duly approved by the court having jurisdiction in the premises whereby such receivers or trustees assume and agree to be bound by each and every term, provision and limitation of the franchise granted. 
2.  In the case of a foreclosure or other judicial sale of the franchise property, or any material part thereof, grantor may serve notice of termination upon grantee and the successful bidder at such sale, in which event the franchise granted and all rights and privileges of the grantee hereunder shall cease and terminate thirty (30) days after service of such notice, unless: (1) grantor shall have approved the transfer of the franchise, as and in the manner that this chapter provides; and (2) such successful bidder shall have covenanted and agreed with grantor to assume and be bound by all terms and conditions of the franchise. 
E.  Rights Reserved to Grantor. 
1.  In addition to any rights specifically reserved to the grantor by this chapter, the grantor reserves to itself every right and power which is required to be reserved by a provision of any ordinance or under the franchise. 
2.  The grantor shall have the right to waive any provision of the franchise, except those required by federal or state regulation, if the grantor determines: (1) that it is in the public interest to do so; and (2) that the enforcement of such provision will impose an undue hardship on the grantee or the subscribers. To be effective, such waiver shall be evidenced by a statement in writing signed by a duly authorized representative of the grantor. Waiver of any provision in one instance shall not be deemed a waiver of such provision subsequent to such instance nor be deemed a waiver of any other provision of the franchise unless the statement so recites. 
F.  Rights of Individuals. 
1.  Grantee shall not deny service, deny access, or otherwise discriminate against subscribers, channel users, or general citizens on the basis of race, color, religion, national origin, age, sex or sexual orientation. Grantee shall comply at all times with all other applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations relating to nondiscrimination. 
2.  Grantee shall adhere to the applicable equal employment opportunity requirements of federal, state and local regulations, as now written or as amended from time to time. 
3.  Neither grantee, nor any person, agency, or entity shall, without the subscriber's consent, tap, or arrange for the tapping, of any cable, line, signal input device, or subscriber outlet or receiver for any purpose except routine maintenance of the system, detection or investigation of unauthorized service, polling with audience participation, or audience viewing surveys to support advertising research regarding viewers where individual viewing behavior cannot be identified. 
4.  In the conduct of providing its services or in pursuit of any collateral commercial enterprise resulting therefrom, grantee shall take reasonable steps to prevent the invasion of a subscriber's or general citizen's right of privacy or other personal rights through the use of the system as such rights are delineated or defined by applicable law. Grantee shall not without lawful court order or other applicable valid legal authority utilize the system's interactive two-way equipment or capability for unauthorized personal surveillance of any subscriber or general citizen. 
5.  No cable line, wire amplifier, converter, or other piece of equipment owned by grantee shall be installed by grantee in the subscriber's premises, other than in appropriate easements, without first securing any required consent. If a subscriber requests service, permission to install upon subscriber's property shall be presumed. 
6.  The grantee, or any of its agents or employees, shall not sell, or otherwise make available to any party without consent of the subscriber pursuant to state and federal privacy laws: 
a.  Any list of the names and addresses of subscribers containing the names and addresses of subscribers who request in writing to be removed from such list; and 
b.  Any list which identifies the viewing habits of individual subscribers, without the prior written consent of such subscribers. This does not prohibit the grantee from providing composite ratings of subscriber viewing to any party. 
G.  Separability. If any provision of this chapter is held by any court or by any federal or state agency of competent jurisdiction, to be invalid as conflicting with any federal or state law, rule or regulation now or hereafter in effect, or is held by such court or agency to be modified in any way in order to conform to the requirements of any such law, rule or regulation, such provision shall be considered a separate, distinct, and independent part of this chapter, and such holding shall not affect the validity and enforceability of all other provisions hereof. In the event that such law, rule or regulation is subsequently repealed, rescinded, amended or otherwise changed, so that the provision thereof which had been held invalid or modified is no longer in conflict with such law, rule or regulation, said provision shall thereupon return to full force and effect and shall thereafter be binding on grantor and grantee, provided that grantor shall give grantee thirty (30) days' written notice of such change before requiring compliance with said provision or such longer period of time as may be reasonably required for grantee to comply with such provision. 
H.  Notices. Grantee shall maintain throughout the term of the franchise, a local address for service of notices by mail. 
I.  Captions. The captions to sections throughout this chapter are intended solely to facilitate reading and reference. Such captions shall not affect the meaning or interpretation of this chapter. 
J.  No Recourse Against the Grantor. The grantee shall have no recourse whatsoever against the grantor or its officials, boards, commissions, agents, or employees for any loss, costs, expenses, or damage arising out of any provision of the franchise or because of the enforcement of the franchise. 
K.  Non-enforcement by the Grantor. The grantee shall not be relieved of its obligation to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter by reason of any failure of the grantor to enforce prompt compliance. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; Ord. 95-03 § 1 (part), 1995) 
Chapter 5.24 - PUBLIC DANCES AS SPECIAL EVENTS* 
Sections: 

5.24.010 - Definitions. 
    Unless the particular provision or the context otherwise requires, the definitions and provisions contained in the following terms shall govern the construction, meaning, and application of words and phrases used in this chapter, and, except to the extent that a particular word or phrase is otherwise specifically defined in this chapter, the definitions and provisions contained in Chapter 1.04 (commencing with Section 1.04.010) of Title 1 of this code shall also govern the construction, meaning, and application of the words and phrases used in this chapter. The definition of each word or phrase shall constitute, to the extent applicable, the definition of each word or phrase which is derivative from it, or from which it is a derivative, as the case may be. 
    "Alcoholic beverage" means alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer, and every liquor or solid containing alcohol, spirits, wine, or beer, and which contains one-half percent or more of alcohol by volume and which is fit for beverage purposes, either alone or when diluted, mixed, or combined with other substances. 
    "Public dance" means any dance other than a public eating establishment dance to which the public may gain admission or is entitled to attend. 
    "Public eating establishment dance" means any dance incidentally conducted upon the premises of a bona fide hotel, restaurant, cafe, cafeteria, or similar public place when it is equipped and maintained in good faith for sales to and consumption by the public of meals upon the premises and which in fact regularly serves meals thereon not less than six days per week and which dance patrons thereof may attend without the paying of an admission charge. 
    "Special event dance" means any dance that is held in an eating establishment to commemorate a particular event (such as Fourth of July or New Year's Eve) and is not incidental to the day-to-day operation of the establishment. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; prior code § 52-0000) 
5.24.020 - License required. 
    No person shall conduct a public dance or public eating establishment dance, or permit such dance to be conducted on premises under his/her control, without first having obtained a license therefor pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; prior code § 52-0001) 
5.24.030 - Application. 
    Application for a license shall be made to the city clerk upon a form prescribed by him/her, and accompanied with an application fee as set by resolution. Such application shall contain the following information: 
A.  The name of the applicant, and in the case of a partnership, the names of the individual parties, and in the case of a corporation, the principal officers and directors. 
B.  The location of the premises upon which the license is sought to be exercised. 
C.  Such other information as the city clerk may require. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; prior code § 52-0002) 
5.24.040 - Action upon application. 
    Upon receipt of an application for a license and the required fee, the city clerk or his/her designee shall immediately provide the chief of police with a copy of the application. The chief of police shall within seven days from the receipt of a copy of the application make an investigation to ascertain the moral standing of the applicant and to inspect the premises to ascertain whether or not a dance conducted thereon would be a menace to the public welfare or morals or likely to constitute a public nuisance and report in writing his/her findings to the city clerk with his/her recommendation for granting or denying the application. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; prior code § 52-0003) 
5.24.050 - Issuance of license. 
    Within ten (10) days from the filing of an application for a license, and providing that the chief of police has recommended that such license be granted, the city clerk shall, upon receipt of the required license fee, issue such license. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; prior code § 52-0004) 
5.24.060 - License fee. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the license fee for either a public dance or public eating establishment dance shall be as established by resolution per quarter year payable upon the issuance of such license. When a license is issued during any quarter, the city clerk may prorate the fee as of the first of the month nearest to the date of issuance. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; prior code § 52-0005) 
5.24.070 - No fee license. 
    A public dance license or public cafe dance license may be issued by the city clerk without the payment of a license fee upon the application of any religious, charitable, benevolent, social, fraternal, or other wholly non-profit organizations when it is made to appear to the city clerk by affidavit of any officer of such organization that the character of the organization is wholly non-profit in purpose and that no person other than applicant is to receive any pecuniary profit or benefit therefrom. Such application must be made at least twenty-four (24) hours before such public dance or public cafe dance is to be held and be approved by the chief of police before being issued; provided, however, that where the application is made for the purpose of holding a dance upon premises which are already licensed under this chapter, no application fee shall be required nor shall the approval of the chief of police be required. 
(Prior code § 52-0006) 
5.24.080 - License period. 
    All licenses hereunder shall be issued to expire either on March 31, June 30, September 30, or December 31, at the option of the applicant, provided that no license shall be issued to expire more than one year from the date of issuance. 
(Prior code § 52-0007) 
5.24.090 - Appeal to the council. 
    When any application has been denied by reason of an adverse report and recommendation of the health officer or chief of police, the applicant may request a hearing before the council, who shall set a date for such hearing, giving notice thereof to the health officer, the chief of police, and to any other person whom said council may deem entitled to notice. At said hearing the council shall take evidence and thereupon determine whether or not such application should be granted, and the city clerk shall issue or deny such application accordingly. 
(Prior code § 52-0008) 
5.24.100 - Renewals. 
    Before the expiration of an existing license, the city clerk may issue a renewal thereof upon the filing of an application therefor upon the form prescribed by him/her, accompanied by the required fee. No license is to be deemed renewed until the renewal license has been actually issued and delivered by the city clerk. After expiration, a license may be renewed only by following the procedure and paying the fees as provided for in this chapter for the issuance of an original license. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; prior code § 52-0009) 
5.24.110 - Transfer. 
    Each license issued hereunder shall be issued to a specific person and for a specific location and shall in no event be transferable from one person to another. The location may be changed upon application made to the city clerk accompanied with an application fee of ten dollars ($10.00) and upon the recommendation of the health officer and chief of police acting in the same manner as upon application for original licenses. 
(Prior code § 52-0010) 
5.24.120 - Alcoholic beverages. 
    No public dance may be held or conducted, or any licenses issued therefor, where any alcoholic beverages other than beer is sold or dispensed upon any part of the premises. Beer may be sold upon the premises where a public dance is conducted, provided that the place of sale is separated from the dance floor by a solid partition with access thereto only through a door or doors, and provided further, that no person under the age of twenty-one (21) years is permitted to enter that portion of the premises where beer is sold, and no person is permitted to carry or otherwise remove beer from the place where it is sold to any other portion of the premises. Except as provided in this chapter, no person shall possess or consume any alcoholic beverages upon the premises where a public dance is being conducted. 
(Prior code § 52-0011) 
5.24.130 - Time for holding dance. 
    No public dance or public cafe dance may be conducted between the hours of two o'clock a.m. and eight o'clock a.m. of any day, provided that it shall be lawful for such dances to remain open until the hour of five o'clock a.m. on New Year's Day. 
(Prior code § 52-0012) 
5.24.140 - Minors. 
    No person shall allow or permit any minor under the age of eighteen (18) years not accompanied by a parent or responsible person over the age of eighteen (18) years to attend a public dance or public eating establishment dance. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; prior code § 52-0013) 
5.24.150 - Admission to public dance. 
    Except upon special occasions when a free dance has been advertised as such and is held without any charge or admission fee therefor, a regular admission charge shall be made to any public dance which shall entitle any person paying the same to participate in all dancing, and no cover charge shall be made or collected or any fee or charge made or collected for participation in any individual or group of dances. 
(Prior code § 52-0014) 
5.24.160 - Pass outs. 
    No person conducting a public dance shall permit the issuance of any pass out check or other return privilege to any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years, and such persons leaving the dance hall and its anterooms, unless accompanied by a peace officer, the public chaperon, or the operator of the dance or one of his/her employees, shall not be re-admitted thereto except upon the payment of regular admission. 
(Prior code § 52-0015) 
5.24.170 - Resort dance. 
    Every dance conducted in connection with a resort containing other entertainment facilities with an admission charge being made to the resort, but not specifically to the dance pavilion therein, shall be deemed a public dance subject to all the provisions of this chapter relating to the conducting of a public dance, except that the provisions relating to admission charges and pass out checks shall be deemed to refer and apply to admission to the resort and not to the dance pavilion itself. 
(Prior code § 52-0016) 
5.24.180 - Conduct. 
    No person conducting a public dance or public eating establishment dance shall allow or permit any indecent, vulgar, or suggestive dancing or conduct upon the premises where such dance is being conducted, or permit any person under the influence of alcoholic beverages to remain at such dance. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; prior code § 52-0018) 
5.24.190 - Revocation. 
    Any license issued hereunder may be revoked by the council, either upon its own initiative or upon complaint being made to it by affidavit setting forth the grounds upon which the license is sought to be revoked and the facts constituting the cause for complaint, where, after hearing (of which the licensee shall be given at least five days written notice), it appears from testimony and evidence adduced thereat, that the conduct of any dance under such license has been, or in the future is likely to be, a menace to the public health, safety, or morals, or a public misrepresentation of any material fact, that the licensee is a person of bad moral character, or that the licensee has violated any of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 52-0020) 
Chapter 5.32 - STREET VENDING 
Sections: 

5.32.010 - Street vending vehicle restrictions. 
    The following regulations shall be complied with by each person using a vehicle for street vending: 
A.  It is unlawful for any street vendor to sell or attempt to sell any commodity: 
1.  By means of any outcry, sound, speaker or amplifier, or any instrument or device which can be heard for a distance greater than five hundred (500) feet, or when passing a hospital, or a church or other place of worship during the hours when services are being held; 
2.  Within five hundred (500) feet of any school during the school year when students are present for normal classroom activities. 
B.  It is unlawful for any such vendor to use, play or employ the use of, any sound, outcry, amplifier, loudspeaker, radio, phonograph with a loudspeaker or amplifier, or any other instrument or device when the vehicle such vendor is using is stopped for the purpose of making a sale. 
C.  The use by any such vendor of any outcry, sound, amplifier, loudspeaker, radio, phonograph with a loudspeaker or amplifier or any instrument or device which emits a sound which can be heard more than five hundred (500) feet away shall be prohibited before the hours of nine o'clock a.m. on weekdays and ten o'clock (10:00) a.m. on Sundays, or after nine o'clock p.m. or one-half hour before sunset, whichever is earlier, on any day. 
D.  It is unlawful for any such vendor to: 
1.  Exceed a speed of twelve (12) miles an hour when cruising neighborhoods seeking sales or when attempting to make a sale; 
2.  Make more than two stops in any one block to make any sale; 
3.  Stop anywhere within twenty-five (25) feet of an intersection when making a sale or attempting to make a sale; 
4.  Double-park, or park in any manner contrary to any ordinance relating to parking when attempting a sale or when making a sale; 
5.  Drive his/her vehicle backwards to make or attempt any sale; 
6.  Sell to any person who is standing in the street; 
7.  Permit any person to stand on the vehicle or permit any person to ride in or on the vehicle except a bona fide assistant or assistants; 
8.  Remain standing or stopped at any place for a period of time longer than necessary to transact business, but in no case longer than ten (10) minutes; 
9.  Sell or attempt to sell along any particular route more than one time during a twenty-four (24) hour period; 
10.  Sell or attempt to make a sale between nine o'clock p.m. or one-half hour before sunset, whichever is earlier, and nine o'clock a.m. weekdays and ten o'clock (10:00) a.m. Sundays. 
(Ord. 372 § 1, 1979) 
Chapter 5.36 - TAXICABS 
Sections: 

5.36.010 - Definitions. 
    Whenever the following words or terms are used in this chapter they shall have the meanings herein ascribed to them: 
    "Automobile for hire" means every automobile or motor propelled vehicle by means of which passengers are transported for hire upon any public street in the city and not over a regular or defined route and irrespective of whether the operation extends beyond the limits of the city or not, except vehicles embraced in the term taxicab and except vehicles and transportation companies as herein defined. 
    "Taxicab" means every automobile or motor propelled vehicle by means of which passengers are transported for hire upon any public street in the city and not over a particular or defined route, and irrespective of whether the operations extend beyond the boundary limits of the city or not, where charge for the transportation is measured by the distance traveled or by the time required for such transportation, or both, excepting vehicles or transportation companies as herein defined. 
    "Transportation companies" means and shall be synonymous with the phrase "transportation company," as defined in that certain act of the legislature of the state, approved May 10, 1917, providing for the supervision of transportation of persons and property for compensation over public highways by automobiles, jitney buses, auto trucks, stages and auto stages, and all amendments to the Act. 
(Prior code § 56-0001) 
5.36.020 - Vehicle permit required. 
    It is unlawful to operate automobile for hire or a taxicab upon any public street within the city without first having obtained a permit to so do in accordance with the provisions hereof, and without complying with all the provisions of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 56-0002) 
5.36.030 - Application for permit-Fee. 
    Any person desiring to obtain a permit required by Section 5.36.020 of this chapter shall pay a fee as set forth by council resolution to the clerk, and shall make application for the permit to the council, which application shall set forth: 
A.  The name and address of the applicant, and if the same is a corporation, the names of its principal officers, or if the same is a partnership, association or fictitious company, the names of the partners or persons comprising the association or company, with the addresses of each; 
B.  A statement as to whether the permit is desired for an automobile for hire or taxicab; 
C.  A description of every motor vehicle which the applicant proposes to use, giving: 
1.  Trade name, year and model; 
2.  Motor and serial number; 
3.  State license number; 
4.  Seating capacity; 
5.  Body style; and 
6.  The street number and exact location of the place where the applicant proposes to stand each such automobile. 
D.  Proposed schedule of rates or fares to be charged for carrying passengers in such automobile; 
E.  The distinctive color scheme, name, monogram or insignia which shall be used on the automobile; 
F.  If any proposed stand is in the public street, the application shall be accompanied by a written consent thereto of all the occupants of the ground floor of any building in front of which the automobile is to be located and for twenty (20) feet each way therefrom, or if there is no such occupant, by the written consent of the owner or lessee of the building or lot; 
G.  The applicant shall maintain a place of business within the limits of the city, and maintain a telephone at such place of business and that taxicabs shall be available for patrons on a twenty-four (24) hour basis; 
H.  The past experience of the applicant in the matter to which the requested permit pertains; and the name, address, and past experience of the person to be in charge of the premises or business; 
I.  A verified financial statement of the applicant; 
J.  Whether or not any permit has been revoked, and if so, the circumstances of the revocation; 
K.  Such further information as the council, or such official of the city to whom the application may be referred, may require. 
(Prior code § 56-0003) 
5.36.040 - Application hearing-Notice. 
A.  Upon receipt of any application referred to in Section 5.36.030 hereof, the clerk shall set a time, not less than ten (10) or more than thirty (30) days thereafter, for the hearing of the application before the council, and shall give notice of the time so set at least seven days before the date of the hearing to the applicant by mail at the address set forth in the application and by mail to all other permit holders. 
B.  At the time set for the hearing of the application, the mayor and council may examine the applicant and all persons interested in the matter set forth in the application, and shall determine whether or not the public interest, convenience and necessity require the issuance of the permit, subject to the filing and approval of an undertaking as hereinafter provided in Section 5.36.190 and any conditions imposed by the council thereon. 
(Prior code § 56-0004) 
5.36.050 - Denial of permit. 
    The following reasons shall be sufficient for denial of the permit: 
A.  That the application is not in the form and does not contain the information required to be contained therein by this chapter. 
B.  That the vehicles described therein are inadequate or unsafe for the purposes for which they are to be used. 
C.  That the color scheme, name, monogram or insignia to be used upon the vehicles is in conflict with or imitates any color scheme, name, monogram or insignia used by any other person in such a manner as to be misleading or tend to deceive or defraud the public. 
D.  That the location of the stand, as herein stated, is such as to congest or interfere with travel on any public street or that the proposed stand is within one hundred (100) feet of any other stand heretofore fixed by the council on the same street. 
E.  That the applicant has, at some time prior, had a permit for the operation of automobiles for hire or taxicabs revoked for reason, or that the applicant is not financially responsible. 
F.  That it appears to the council that there are a sufficient number of taxicabs and automobiles for hire in the city to fully serve the public, and that the granting of more permits would unduly congest traffic and interfere with the free use of the public streets by the public, and that the public interest, convenience and necessity do not require the issuance of the permit. 
G.  That the persons holding permits for the operation of taxicabs or automobiles for hire are under efficient management and are adequately serving the public under normal conditions. 
(Prior code § 56-0005) 
5.36.060 - Unlawful service prohibited. 
    It is unlawful for any owner granted a permit under this chapter to conduct any operation or give any service other than the service authorized by his/her permit granted by the council in accordance with provisions of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 56-0006) 
5.36.070 - Revocation of permit-Hearing. 
A.  The council shall have the power to suspend or revoke any or all of the owner's permits granted under the provisions of this chapter when it shall have determined that any of the provisions hereof have been violated or that any holder of a permit has failed to comply with the terms and conditions of the permit or the rules and regulations of the council pertaining to the operation of and to the extent, character and quality of the service of any such vehicles. Before revocation of the permit, the owner shall be entitled to a hearing thereon before the council, and shall be notified thereof. 
B.  Notice of hearing on such suspension or revocation shall be in writing, and shall be served at least ten (10) days prior to the date of the hearing thereon, such service to be upon the holder of the permit, or its manager or agent, and the notice shall state the grounds of the complaint against the holder of the permit, and shall also state the time when and the place where the hearing will be held. In the event the holder of the permit cannot be found, or service of the notice cannot be made upon him/her in the manner herein provided, then a copy of the notice shall be mailed, postage fully prepaid, addressed to the owner at his/her last known address, at least ten (10) days prior to the date of the hearing. 
C.  The council shall have power to determine after hearing all issues relative to granting or denying the owner's permits for taxicabs, automobiles for hire or stands. 
(Prior code § 56-0007) 
5.36.080 - License issuance-Fee. 
    The permits herein mentioned shall entitle the holder thereof to obtain a license to engage in the business described in the permit from the clerk upon payment of a license fee as set by council resolution, which fee shall be payable to the clerk semiannually in advance. Upon receipt of payment, the clerk shall issue to the holder of the permit a license which shall set forth the kind of transportation for which the license is issued and the date of issuance and expiration date of the license. 
(Prior code § 56-0008) 
5.36.090 - Taxicabs to be numbered. 
    Each taxicab operated pursuant to the terms of this chapter shall be numbered to correspond with the number appearing on the license. The number shall be printed upon the body of the taxicab in numbers not less than four inches nor more than six inches in height, in a position approved from time to time by the council. 
(Prior code § 56-0009) 
5.36.100 - Driver's permit required. 
    It is unlawful for any person to operate any vehicle required by this chapter to obtain a permit, without first obtaining a driver's permit or temporary driver's permit issued pursuant to this chapter, so to do. 
A.  No driver's permit or temporary driver's permit shall be issued to any applicant who is under the age of eighteen (18) years, or who has, to the knowledge of the chief of police, been convicted of a felony, or of a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude, or of serious California Vehicle Code violations, such as negligent manslaughter and driving while under the influence of drugs and/or alcohol, or found to be a negligent driver by the California State Department of Motor Vehicles. 
B.  The license inspector shall keep a copy of the driver's permit on file in his/her office. The driver's permit shall constitute evidence of compliance with the terms of this chapter, but shall be subject to all other applicable laws or orders of the city. The driver's permit shall be effective until the expiration date printed thereon, which shall not be later than the thirtieth day of June next following the date of issuance, unless suspended or revoked as herein provided. 
C.  A renewal driver's permit for a period of one year shall be issued to any permittee without further information upon payment of a renewal fee as set by resolution. No such driver's permit issued hereunder shall be transferable. 
(Prior code § 56-0011) 
5.36.110 - Revocation of driver's permit. 
    The council, the chief of police or the license inspector shall have the power to revoke or suspend any driver's permit issued hereinunder in the event the holder thereof is found guilty of a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, or is found guilty of reckless driving, or for the violation of any other law, which violation, in the sound discretion of the officials, shall be deemed sufficient evidence of the fact that the driver is not a competent person to operate the motor vehicle for which the driver's permit was issued. In the event of such revocation or suspension, the driver's permit and such certificate as may be issued in connection therewith shall be, by the holder thereof, immediately surrendered to the chief of police. Such revocation shall not be effective until notice and hearing are had as in owner's permit provisions herein. 
(Prior code § 56-0012) 
5.36.120 - Taxicab stands. 
    The council shall designate, in any stand permit granted by it, the exact location of the stand in which the taxicab may park. No stand shall be wider than twenty (20) feet on streets where parallel parking is required. Upon the granting of a permit under this chapter, every stand as designated by the council shall be designated by red paint or other red material upon the entire curb surface, with the word "Taxicabs Only" in white letters thereon. It is unlawful for any vehicle to occupy any regularly established taxi stand unless the vehicle is one being operated by the owner to which the taxi stand has been assigned. 
(Prior code § 56-0013) 
5.36.130 - Taxicab stand permit fee. 
    An application fee as set by resolution shall be required to be paid for each stand or change of location thereof for which a permit is applied. All application fees shall accompany the application. All permits granted pursuant to this section shall be nontransferable. When any permit is granted hereunder, the clerk shall issue to the grantee thereof a certificate, giving the name and address of the grantee, the nature of the permit granted, and the date when same was granted. 
(Prior code § 56-0014) 
5.36.140 - Changes in rates of vehicles to be reported. 
    In the event that any permit holder desires to change his/her schedule of rates and charges or the color scheme, monogram or insignia used on automobiles for hire or taxicabs, or to substitute any vehicle in place of the vehicle described in the application for permit, or to increase or decrease the number of vehicles used by him/her as automobiles for hire or taxicabs, he/she shall make application for permission to do so from the license inspector, which permission shall be granted by the council in its discretion if the council deems the public interest, necessity and convenience will be subserved by the change, and if the permit holder has complied with all provisions of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 56-0015) 
5.36.150 - Vehicles to be operated by owner. 
    Any motor vehicle for which a permit has been issued hereunder shall be operated by the owner, personally, or his/her employee, on his/her behalf, and it is unlawful for any owners or drivers to enter into any contract, agreement or understanding between themselves by the terms of which the driver pays to, or for the account of, the owner a fixed or determinable sum for the use of the vehicles. 
(Prior code § 56-0016) 
5.36.160 - Trip records to be kept. 
    The driver of every vehicle covered by this chapter shall keep a complete and accurate record of each trip upon a daily sheet, showing the time and place of origin and destination of the trip, the number of passengers carried and the amount of fare collected. This record shall be filed daily by the driver with the company by whom he/she is employed, and the record shall be kept on a file available for inspection by the police department for a period of not less than six months. 
(Prior code § 56-0017) 
5.36.170 - Taxicab to display rate schedule. 
A.  Every taxicab shall have displayed in a conspicuous place in the passenger compartment thereof at all times a sign stating in clear, legible characters the rates of fares charged for carrying passengers therein, the owner's name or the fictitious name under which he/she operates, the business address and telephone number of the owner, and the license number furnished by the clerk. 
B.  The driver of every chauffeured limousine shall have in his/her possession at all times rate cards upon which shall be printed the name and address of the owner of the vehicle and the rates authorized to be charged for the chauffeured limousine service. Every person making inquiry regarding the rates charged by the operator of the chauffeured limousine service shall be furnished with a copy of the printed rates. 
(Prior code § 56-0018) 
5.36.180 - Schedule of fares to be furnished city. 
    All owners or operators of taxicabs and automobiles for hire shall file with the clerk reasonable and uniform tariffs or schedules of fares. It is unlawful to charge, collect or receive any different compensation for the use of the taxicab or automobile for hire than that specified in the tariff or schedule of fares on file and at the time in effect. The tariffs and schedules of fares shall not be amended except with the consent of the council. 
(Prior code § 56-0019) 
5.36.190 - Liability insurance required. 
    It is unlawful for any owner or driver to drive or operate any taxicab or automobile for hire, unless there is on file with the clerk and in full force and effect at all times while the taxicab or automobile for hire is being operated, a true copy of a policy of insurance or certificate, approved by the council, in a solvent and responsible company, insuring the owner of the taxicab or automobile for hire, giving the manufacturer's motor number and serial number thereof, against loss by reason of injury or damage that may result to persons or property from the negligent operation or defective construction of the taxicab or automobile for hire, or from the violation of this chapter or the laws of the state. The policy shall provide coverage for bodily injury and property damages with not less than five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) combined single limit. The policy of insurance shall guarantee the payment to any and all persons suffering injury or damage to person or property, of any final judgment rendered against the owner, within the limits herein mentioned, irrespective of the financial condition or any acts or omissions of the owner, and shall insure to the benefit of the persons; if at any time the policy of insurance is cancelled by the company issuing the same, the council shall require the owner to replace the policy with another policy or bond as herein provided, satisfactory to the council, and in default thereof may revoke the owner's permit and license. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; prior code § 56-0020) 
5.36.200 - Vehicles must comply with safety standards. 
    All taxicabs or vehicles for hire shall, before being placed into service in the city, be inspected at a California Highway Patrol office or authorized testing station, and secure a certificate for said vehicle indicating it meets all the requirements of the California Vehicle Code as to safety standards. 
(Prior code § 56-0021) 
5.36.210 - Duties of drivers. 
A.  Every driver of a taxicab who is engaged to carry passengers shall take the most direct route possible that will carry the passengers safely and expeditiously to their destination, unless otherwise directed by a passenger. 
B.  When a taxicab is engaged, the persons engaging the taxicab shall have the exclusive right to the full and complete use of the passenger compartment, and it is unlawful for the driver of the taxicab to solicit or carry additional passengers therein; provided, however, that where the council finds that public necessity requires the grouping of passengers in taxicabs, the council may issue, after application, special written permit, which permit shall specifically set forth the rules and regulations under which passenger grouping is permitted. It is unlawful for any driver to operate any taxicab in violation of any of the rules and regulations set forth in the special permit. 
C.  The number of passengers which may be carried in any vehicle covered by this chapter shall be limited to the seating capacity of the vehicle as specified by the manufacturer. No person shall be carried in the vehicle who is required to share in any way the seating space occupied by another, nor shall any person be carried who is required to occupy any space in or on the vehicle which does not provide a seat. 
(Prior code § 56-0022) 
5.36.220 - Operation of vehicle without proper insignia prohibited. 
    It is unlawful for any person to drive or operate any taxicab other than one bearing the color scheme, name, monogram or insignia set forth in the application for the permit as provided in this chapter. It is unlawful for any person to change the color scheme, name monogram or insignia without first having obtained the consent of the council. 
(Prior code § 56-0023) 
5.36.230 - Permit holders subject to applicable laws. 
    Every person holding a permit issued under the terms of this chapter shall at all times be subject to the laws of the state and all provisions of this code not in conflict with this chapter. 
(Prior code § 56-0024) 
5.36.240 - Enforcement of provisions. 
    It shall be the duty of the license inspector to enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 56-0025) 
5.36.250 - Refusal to pay fare. 
    It is unlawful for any person to refuse to pay the legal fare for the hire of any automobile for hire or taxicab with the intent to defraud the person from whom it is hired. 
(Prior code § 56-0026) 
Title 6 - ANIMALS 
Chapter 6.04 - DOGS AND OTHER ANIMALS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2016-004, § 1, adopted Sept. 21, 2016, amended Ch. 6.04 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 6.04, §§ 6.04.010-6.04.160, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from prior code §§ 47-1000-47-1008, 47-1011, 47-1012; Ord. 443 (part), 1986; Ord. 2005-06 §§ 1, 2, 2005; Ord. No. 2015-03, § 1, 4-15-2015; and as amended in 5-08 supplement. 

6.04.010 - Definitions. 
    Unless the particular provision or the context otherwise requires, the definitions and provisions contained in the following subsections of this section shall govern the construction, meaning and application of the words and phrases used in this Chapter 6.04; and except to the extent a particular word or phrase is otherwise specifically defined herein, the definitions contained in Chapter 1.04 of Title 1 of this code, shall also govern the construction, meaning and application of the words and phrases used in this chapter. The definition of each word or phrase shall constitute, to the extent applicable, the definition of each word or phrase which is derivative from it, or from which it is a derivative, as the case may be. 
    "Animal" means any living vertebrate member of the animal kingdom. 
    "Animal control officer." Unless otherwise designated by the State of California, City of Kingsburg, or Fresno County, the chief of police shall designate a police employee as the animal control officer. In addition, all police officers of the city are required to perform the duties of the animal control officer as may be required by the chief of police. 
    "At large" means an animal off the premises of the person owning or having the possession, charge, custody, or control of the animal and not under the immediate control of a person by means of an enclosure, leash, rope, or other means of immediate effective physical control. 
    "Bird" means any member of the bird family, including, but not limited to, parakeets, cockatiels, macaws, parrots, finches, conures and swans, domesticated to serve as a pet. 
    "Breeder" means any person or entity which breeds two (2) or more litters of dogs in one year for sale or profit. 
    "Cat" means any member of the feline family, male or female, domesticated to serve as a pet. 
    "Dog" means any member of the canine family, male or female, domesticated to serve as a pet. 
    "Domesticated animals" means dogs, cats, small mammals, reptiles, amphibians and birds kept and maintained as household pets. 
    "Fowl" means any chicken, duck, goose, turkey, guinea, pigeon, peacock or other fowl. 
    "Hearing officer" means the chief of police or any designee of the chief of police. 
    "Impoundment" means the taking up and confinement of any animal in the pound or an animal shelter, veterinary hospital, or other facility. 
    "Litter" means two (2) or more offspring from one or more female dogs or cats located at the same premises. 
    "Livestock" means any horse, pony, mule, burro, jack or jennie, cow, bull, calf, heifer, sheep, goat, swine, hog, pig, and all other domestic or domesticated animals other than household pets. 
    "Owner" means any individual, partnership, limited liability company, corporation or other entity owning, having an interest in, having custody or possession of, keeping or harboring one or more animals. An animal shall be deemed to be harbored if it is fed or sheltered for three (3) consecutive days or more. 
    "Person" means any individual, partnership, limited liability company, corporation or other entity. 
    "Potentially dangerous dog" means any of the following: 
1.  Any dog which, when unprovoked, engages in any behavior that requires a defensive action by any person to prevent bodily injury when the person and the dog are off the property of the owner or keeper of the dog. 
2.  Any dog which, when unprovoked, bites a person causing a less severe injury than as defined in Food and Agriculture Code Section 31604. 
3.  Any dog which, when unprovoked, has killed, seriously bitten, inflicted injury, or otherwise caused injury attacking a domestic animal off the property of the owner or keeper of the dog. 
    "Pound" means the place provided by the city for the impounding of animals, whether maintained directly by the city, or person pursuant to an agreement or contract with the city or in conjunction with another city or county. 
    "Premises" means a house, other dwelling, a yard or other area so enclosed as to prevent an animal from escaping. 
    "Private property" means all property not defined as a "public place". 
    "Public event" means any event or festival permitted by the city that results in the gathering of people in areas closed to vehicular traffic. 
    "Public place" means any park, public building, playground, street, road, alleyway, or other place open to the general public. 
    "Restraint" means a leash not in excess of eight (8) feet, a tethered lead, or a fenced enclosure which keeps the animal under the control of a person or within the premises of the owner of the animal or the person who has possession, charge, custody or control of the animal. 
    "Unlicensed dog" means any dog for which the city dog license for the current year has not been paid. 
    "Vaccination" or "vaccination against rabies" means the inoculation of a dog with a vaccine approved by the city or the United States Public Health Service for use in the prevention of rabies in dogs. 
    "Veterinary hospital" means any establishment maintained and operated by a licensed veterinarian for surgery, diagnosis and treatment of diseases and injuries of animals. 
    "Vicious dog" means any of the following: 
1.  Any dog seized under Section 599aa of the Penal Code and upon the sustaining of a conviction of the owner or keeper under subdivision (a) of Section 597.5 of the Penal Code. 
2.  Any dog which, when unprovoked, in an aggressive manner, inflicts severe injury on or kills a human being. 
3.  Any dog previously determined to be and currently listed as a potentially dangerous dog which, after its owner or keeper has been notified of this determination, continues such behavior. 
(Ord. No. 2016-004, § 1, 9-21-2016) 
6.04.020 - Licenses generally. 
A.  All dogs over four (4) months of age, kept, harbored or maintained by their owners in the city shall be licensed and registered. Within thirty (30) days after acquiring a dog, the owner of the dog must file: (i) an application for licensing and registration with the city clerk together with a vaccination certificate, as required by Section 6.04.040 of this chapter; (ii) proof the dog has been micro-chipped as required by Section 6.04.125 of this chapter; and payment of a license fee as set by city council resolution. Licenses shall be valid for the fiscal year July 1 to June 30, and shall be purchased annually. The provisions of this section are not intended to apply to dogs whose owners are nonresidents temporarily within the city or to dogs brought into the city for the purpose of participating in any dog show. 
B.  Every person owning or keeping a dog that has been specifically trained and certified as an aid to a person with a physical or mental disability, including, without limitation, seeing eye dogs, must be licensed and registered, obtain a vaccination certificate and must be micro-chipped but shall be exempt from payment of license fees. 
C.  All dog licenses shall be issued for a period terminating on the thirtieth (30th) day of June of each year. For a license issued prior to January 1 of any year, a full year license fee shall be paid. For a license issued after the first day of January of any year, only one-half of the annual license fee shall be paid. Any penalty payments associated with dog licenses shall be paid in the same fashion as the dog license fee. 
D.  No dog license shall be issued for any dog unless the owner of the dog shall present to the city clerk a certificate by a licensed veterinarian (vaccination certificate) that the dog has been vaccinated in accordance with Section 6.04.040. 
E.  Any dog which is unlicensed or which the license fee is unpaid, or upon which the owner refuses to obtain a license or pay the license fee, or refuses to have the dog vaccinated and micro-chipped as required by this chapter, may be lawfully taken up and impounded by an animal control officer and it shall be lawful for an animal control officer to enter upon the property of any person for the purpose of taking up and impounding the dog. Any dog taken up and impounded as provided herein shall be held at the pound for ten (10) days. If the requirements of this section are not met within said ten (10) days, the animal control officer shall cause the dog to be disposed of in accordance with the provisions of subsections F and G of Section 6.04.050. In addition to payment of license fees, the owner shall also pay redemption and impoundment fees. 
(Ord. No. 2016-004, § 1, 9-21-2016) 
6.04.030 - License tags. 
    Upon payment of the license fee set by resolution of the city council, the city clerk shall issue to the owner a license certificate and a metallic tag for each dog so licensed. The shape of the tag shall be changed every year and shall have stamped thereon the year for which it was issued and the number corresponding with the number on the certificate. Every owner shall be required to provide each dog with a collar to which the license tag must be affixed, and shall see that the collar and tag are constantly worn by the dog. In case a dog tag is lost or destroyed, a duplicate will be issued by the city clerk upon presentation of a receipt showing the payment of the license fee for the current year, and the payment of a fee, as set by city council resolution, for such duplicate dog tag. Dog tags shall not be transferable from one dog to another, and no refunds shall be made of any dog license fee because of death of the dog or the owner's leaving the city before expiration of the license period. 
(Ord. No. 2016-004, § 1, 9-21-2016) 
6.04.040 - Rabies vaccination. 
A.  Every person who keeps or harbors any dog or other animal requiring rabies vaccination shall have same vaccinated with a vaccine approved by the California Department of Health by a duly licensed veterinarian. Said vaccination against rabies shall commence with dogs over four (4) months of age ("initial vaccination") and all other animals as required by standards of veterinary medicine practices. Dogs and cats shall be re-vaccinated one year after the initial vaccination and at least every three (3) years thereafter. 
B.  Upon demand of any animal control officer, every person keeping or harboring any animal that requires vaccination against rabies shall produce a current certificate of vaccination for said animal. 
C.  The animal control officer shall impound any animal which has not been vaccinated as required by this section. 
D.  Every person practicing veterinarian medicine in the city who vaccinates dogs or other animals with rabies vaccine shall issue to the owner thereof a certificate signed by such veterinarian which states: 
1.  The name and address of the owner of the vaccinated animal; 
2  The kind of vaccine used, the name of the manufacturer, the manufacturer's serial or lot number and the date of vaccine; 
3.  The breed, age, color and sex of the vaccinated dog; 
4.  Year and number of the license tag of the vaccinated dog. 
E.  The animal control officer shall take up and place in isolation any dog, cat or other animal which in the opinion of the owner of the animal, a licensed veterinarian or the animal control officer displays symptoms suggestive of rabies. Such isolation shall be at the pound unless the owner of the dog or cat, with the approval of the animal control officer, arranges with a licensed veterinarian for such isolation in a private animal hospital or clinic. Any dog or cat placed in such isolation shall be kept strictly confined and under such observation as may be required by the animal control officer. Isolation shall continue for at least ten (10) days from the date the symptoms suggestive of rabies were first observed. The isolation may be continued for a period longer than ten (10) days if, in the opinion of any licensed veterinarian or the animal control officer, a longer period is necessary. At the expiration of the isolation period, any dog or cat confined at the pound shall be released upon payment of the fees set by resolution of the city council. 
F.  It shall be the duty of every licensed veterinarian in the city to report immediately to the animal control officer any animal observed by him/her as having rabies or is suspected of having rabies. 
G.  It shall be the duty of every physician, or other person, to report to the animal control officer the name and address of any person treated for a bite inflicted by an animal of a species subject to rabies infections, and any other information as required by the animal control officer. 
H.  The animal control officer shall take up, impound, and isolate for at least ten (10) days following the date of the alleged bite, any animal of a type subject to rabies that is reported to have bitten any person, whether or not such animal displays any symptoms suggestive of rabies. The animal shall be impounded and isolated in the manner provided in subsection E above. 
I.  Any person who is eighteen (18) years of age or older may, however, make written request to the animal control officer for the isolation of such biting animal either in facilities provided by a licensed veterinarian or in a licensed boarding kennel or upon the private premises of the person making such request. If such request is approved by the animal control officer, such biting animal shall not be taken up and impounded buy shall instead be kept strictly confined and isolated in such veterinarian's facilities or on such private premises for the isolation period. 
J.  Every person who, after requesting and obtaining approval for the keeping of a biting animal confined and isolated upon his/her private premises, fails for any reason whatsoever to keep such animal continuously confined and isolated upon his/her premises, either indoors or inside an enclosure, for a period of ten (10) days after the day such written approval of such confinement and isolation by the animal control officer, is guilty of an infraction. Any such animal, whether licensed or unlicensed, not continuously confined and isolated as required shall be taken up forthwith by the animal control officer and isolated as provided in subsection E of this Section 6.04.040. 
K.  No person shall bring an animal or permit an animal to enter the city in which rabies exists, or has existed within the previous six (6) months unless the animal has been vaccinated with anti-rabies vaccine, and the owner of the animal has an official tag or other receipt showing that the animal has been vaccinated by a duly licensed veterinarian. 
(Ord. No. 2016-004, § 1, 9-21-2016) 
6.04.050 - Redeeming impounded animals. 
A.  The animal control officer upon the impounding of any animal, shall notify the owner, if known, in accordance with the provisions of subsection F of this Section 6.04.050, or if unknown by posting a notice of impound containing a description of the animal and the time and place of apprehension for five (5) days on the city website. After the expiration of this period, any unredeemed animal may be disposed of as provided for in subsection G of this Section 6.04.050. 
B.  Except as otherwise provided in Sections 6.04.040, 6.04.117, and 6.04.118, the owner of any animal impounded in accordance with the provisions of this chapter may at any time before the disposition of the animal redeem the animal. Upon proof satisfactory to the animal control officer that such person is the owner and is entitled to redeem such animal and upon payment of the redemption and maintenance charges as established by city council resolution and upon obtaining a city dog license, if the dog is unlicensed and required to have such license, such animal may be redeemed by such person. The animal control officer shall issue a redemption receipt to the person redeeming the animal. The redemption receipt shall identify the amount of fees paid by the person redeeming the animal and contain a description of the animal redeemed, the date of redemption and the name and address of the person redeeming the animal. 
C.  Redemption fees and maintenance charges shall be set by city council resolution and based upon the number of times an animal is impounded, as follows: 
1.  First time within six (6) months: Basic redemption fee. 
2.  Second time within six (6) months: Double the basic redemption fee. 
3.  Third time within six (6) months: Triple the basic redemption fee. 
4.  Each time after the third time within six (6) months: One thousand dollars ($1,000.00). 
D.  The city is authorized at its discretion to hold for a period of ten (10) days any impounded dog in heat prior to redemption or disposal. 
E.  If any unlicensed animal or any dog bearing no license tag, is impounded under the provisions of this chapter and is not redeemed within ten (10) days after the date the animal is impounded, the animal control officer may at any time thereafter dispose of the animal as provided in subsection G of this Section 6.04.050. 
F.  If a dog licensed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter is impounded under the provisions of this chapter, the dog shall not be disposed of until after written notice has been given by the animal control officer to the owner of said dog at the address set forth in the city licensing records. The notice shall contain a description of the dog impounded, the breed, sex, the date the dog was impounded and identifying the amount necessary to redeem the dog. The notice shall be served by mailing by United States mail to the owner of the dog at the last address of the owner as shown on the city's licensing records. If no person appears and redeems the dog within ten (10) days after the date of mailing of the notice or within ten (10) days after the dog was impounded, whichever is later, the animal control officer shall cause the dog to be disposed of as provided in subsection G of this Section 6.04.050. 
G.  If the animal impounded is not redeemed within the redemption period or if the owner fails or refuses to comply with any of the requirements of redemption, the animal control officer shall dispose of the animal according to the provisions of this subsection G. In disposing of an impounded animal, the animal control officer may, in his/her discretion: 
1.  Release the animal to an animal adoption organization; 
2.  Release the animal to an animal rescue organization; or 
3.  Euthanize the animal in a humane manner and as provided by applicable law. 
H.  All animals impounded by the animal control officer shall be kept at the risk of the owner, and neither the city not its officials, officers, agents or employees shall be liable to the owner for the delivery in good faith of any such animal to a person claiming to be, but not in fact being, entitled to reclaim the animal. Neither the city nor its officials, officers, agents or employees shall be liable for injury or disease to any animal incurred while the animal is being captured, transported, impounded, or liable for the disposition of any animal. 
(Ord. No. 2016-004, § 1, 9-21-2016) 
6.04.060 - Duties of animal control officer. 
A.  The duties of the animal control officer shall be as follows: 
1.  To take up and impound any dog or other animal as required by this chapter, including, without limitation, dogs or other animals found to be running at large, staked or tied or in any public place within the city or upon the premises of any person other than the owner of such animal or as otherwise required by this chapter. 
2.  To make a complete registry of impounded animals, identifying as to each animal, the date of receipt, the breed, color, and sex of such animal, and if licensed, the number of such license and the name and address of the owners, if any, the date and manner of disposal and such additional records as may be required by the city from time to time. 
3.  To operate and maintain the pound. 
(Ord. No. 2016-004, § 1, 9-21-2016) 
6.04.070 - Authority of animal control officer. 
A.  Each animal control officer shall have, and is hereby vested with the authority in the performance of their duties, to enter upon any property pursuant to law, to ascertain if any of the provisions of this chapter or any laws, regulations or ordinances including, without limitation, the provisions of this chapter or any law, regulations or ordinances relating to disease, care, treatment, or cruelty to animals is being violated. Each animal control officer may issue citations for the violation of the provisions of this chapter, any law, regulation or ordinance in the manner prescribed by said law, regulation or ordinance, and remove animals from said premises as the animal control officer deems necessary. The authority to issue citations in the manner prescribed by the city shall be in addition to any other authority provided by law. 
B.  In the performance of duties for the control of animals, the animal control officer shall have the authority to employ the use of the tranquilizer gun or other animal control devices in common use within the State of California. 
C.  In addition to other authority provided by law for making arrests, the animal control officer is authorized to make arrests according to California Penal Code Section 836.5 for the purpose of enforcing and carrying out provisions of this chapter. 
D.  Every person who willfully resists, delays, or obstructs the animal control officer in the discharge of or attempt to discharge, any duty of his/her office is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
E.  For the purpose of enforcing or discharging the duties of the animal control officer, imposed by this chapter, Health and Safety Code Section 121625, Government Code Section 53074, or other applicable laws, the animal control officer or any police officer may enter upon private property, except dwellings, as follows: 
1.  When in pursuit of any animal which the officer has reasonable or probable cause to believe is subject to impoundment. 
2.  To impound or place in isolation or quarantine any animal which the officer has any cause whatsoever to believe or suspect has rabies, is a biting animal, is a potentially dangerous or vicious dog. 
3.  To inspect or examine animals isolated on the property. 
F.  Except when time does not permit, such as in an emergency or when in fresh pursuit, before entering upon private property reasonable effort shall be made to locate the property owner or possessor to request permission to enter upon the property and to explain the purpose for entry. 
(Ord. No. 2016-004, § 1, 9-21-2016) 
6.04.080 - Animal care. 
    It shall be unlawful for the owners or persons having custody of any animal to permit, either willfully or through failure to exercise due care or control, any cruel acts upon any animal. "Cruel acts" are defined as follows: 
A.  To place, leave or expose, making accessible to animals, any poisonous substance. 
B.  To have, keep, or harbor any animal which is infected with any dangerous or incurable or painfully crippling condition. This section shall not apply to animals within veterinary hospitals or under the care of a veterinarian, or having been diagnosed with any common, incurable disease where impoundment or quarantine is not recommended by a doctor of veterinary medicine. 
C.  To fail, refuse, or neglect to provide any animal in their charge or custody as owner or otherwise, with food, drink, shade or weatherproof housing facilities, or to carry any animal in or upon any vehicle in a cruel or inhumane manner. 
D.  To willfully, or maliciously kill, maim, disfigure, tease, torture, beat with a stick, chain, club, or other object, mutilate, burn, scald with any substance, overdrive or other cruelty set upon any animal, except that a reasonable force may be employed to drive off vicious or trespassing animals. 
E.  To promote, stage, hold, manage, conduct, carry on, or attend any game, exhibition, contest, or fight in which one or more animals are engaged for the purpose of injuring, killing, maiming, or destroying themselves or any other animal or person. 
F.  No person shall keep upon any premises, any animals in a foul, offensive, obnoxious, filthy or unsanitary condition. 
(Ord. No. 2016-004, § 1, 9-21-2016) 
6.04.090 - Limits on the number of animals. 
    No person shall keep, harbor or maintain upon the person's premises within the city more than a total of four (4) dogs over the age of four (4) months of age, and no more than a total of six (6) animals including dogs. 
(Ord. No. 2016-004, § 1, 9-21-2016) 
6.04.110 - Excessive noise, nuisance. 
    It shall be unlawful for any dog to be kept in the city, which, in a loud manner, excessively barks, howls, whines or makes any other noises which disturb the comfort or quiet enjoyment of any neighborhood or any person; provided the owner of the dog has been made aware of the disturbance created by the dog by the animal control officer. A dog cited for loud and excessive noises three (3) or more times within a twelve-month period shall be deemed a public nuisance and the owner shall remove the dog from the city's incorporated limits. The failure of the owner to remove the dog in violation of this section is a misdemeanor as provided in Section 6.04.122 B of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2016-004, § 1, 9-21-2016) 
6.04.111 - At large, prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person having the ownership, care or possession of a dog or any other animal to allow or permit the dog or other animal (except a cat which has been spayed or neutered) to run at large within the city. A dog or other animal (except a cat which has been spayed and neutered) that is at large three (3) or more times within a twelve-month period shall be deemed a public nuisance and the owner shall remove the dog or other animal from the city's incorporated limits. The failure of the owner to remove the dog in violation of this section is a misdemeanor as provided in Section 6.04.122 B of this chapter. Except that, subject to the rules and regulations issued by the city regarding the use of the city dog park, an owner of a dog or any person having custody or control of a dog, may allow the dog to go upon and run at large within that portion of the city identified as the Laurel Street Ponding Basin which is specifically designated by the city as a dog park area. 
(Ord. No. 2016-004, § 1, 9-21-2016) 
6.04.112 - Animal bites. 
    Whenever it is shown that any animal has bitten any person, the owner of the animal shall, upon the order of the animal control officer, quarantine the animal and keep it tied up and confined for a period of ten (10) days, and shall allow the animal control or other authorized official to make an examination of the animal at any time during the period of quarantine. 
(Ord. No. 2016-004, § 1, 9-21-2016) 
6.04.113 - Prohibited animals. 
    No animal, whether domesticated, undomesticated or exotic, other than common household pets such as a dog, cat, bird (domestic or exotic), rodent (including a rabbit), fish (domestic or exotic), turtle or small reptile traditionally kept at a personal residence for pleasure rather than for commercial purposes, shall be kept within the city limits of the city unless specifically allowed to be kept in the city limits of the city by the applicable provisions of the Kingsburg Municipal Code. As used herein, domesticated animal means livestock, poultry and similar animals. Exotic animal means any animal that is native to a foreign country or of foreign origin or character, is not native to the United States, or was introduced from abroad. The provisions of this Section 6.04.118 A shall not include animals that are used to assist persons with disabilities as the term disability is defined in the Americans with Disabilities Act. 
(Ord. No. 2016-004, § 1, 9-21-2016) 
6.04.114 - Breeder permit. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any person to breed two (2) or more litters of dogs or cats in one calendar year without first obtaining a breeder permit. A person seeking a breeder permit must complete a breeder permit application in the form established by the city. The fees for a breeder permit shall be set by resolution of the city council and must be submitted to the city clerk along with the breeder permit application. 
B.  Breeding permit requirements are as follows: 
1.  No offspring can be sold/adopted until the offspring is eight (8) weeks of age; 
2.  No offspring can be sold/adopted until vaccinated against common diseases; 
3.  The breeder permit holder must display the breeder permit number when advertising the animals for sale or adoption. 
C.  It shall be unlawful for any breeder to advertise for the sale or adoption of a litter of dogs or cats in the city without including in the advertisement a city breeder permit number. 
(Ord. No. 2016-004, § 1, 9-21-2016) 
6.04.115 - Prohibition of potentially dangerous or vicious dog. 
    It shall be unlawful for a person to own, keep or harbor a potentially dangerous or vicious dog. Any dog which has been found to be potentially dangerous or vicious pursuant to the chapter, any county or ordinance or any state statute, shall be conclusively presumed to be potentially dangerous or vicious. 
(Ord. No. 2016-004, § 1, 9-21-2016) 
6.04.116 - Procedure to determine if a dog is dangerous or vicious. 
A.  The animal control officer shall determine whether a dog is potentially dangerous or vicious whenever it has attacked, bitten or caused injury to any human or other animal. Within five (5) days after a dog which is wearing a license tag is impounded pursuant to this chapter, an animal control officer shall mail a written notice, to the person identified as the owner of the dog as identified in the city licensing documents for the dog, of the animal control officer's determination that the dog is potentially dangerous or vicious and of the owner's right to a hearing on the issue of whether the dog is potentially dangerous or vicious. If the dog is not wearing a license tag the animal control officer shall make a reasonable effort to locate the owner of the unlicensed dog. If the animal control officer does not locate the owner of the unlicensed dog, the animal control officer shall dispose of the dog in accordance with the provisions of Section 6.04.119 C of this chapter. 
B.  The owner of a dog impounded pursuant to this section may, within ten (10) days after the date of the written notice from the animal control officer request a hearing on whether the dog is potentially dangerous or vicious by providing the animal control officer with a written request for a hearing within said ten-day period. Failure of the owner to request, in writing, a hearing within said ten-day period, shall constitute the owner's waiver of the hearing and the determination by the animal control officer that the dog is potentially dangerous or vicious shall be binding on the owner of the dog. 
C.  If an owner properly requests a hearing, the animal control officer shall retain the services of a veterinarian or other person licensed to perform a behavioral study of the dog to determine whether the dog can be rehabilitated or retrained to eliminate the dangerous and vicious character of the dog. If the hearing officer finds the dog to be potentially dangerous or vicious, the owner of the dog shall reimburse the city the cost of the behavioral study. 
D.  When a hearing is requested pursuant to subsection B of this section, the animal control officer shall set a date and time for such a hearing and send a notice thereof by regular mail at least ten (10) days before the hearing date to the owner at the address set forth on his or her request and shall also notify the victim and the hearing officer. 
(Ord. No. 2016-004, § 1, 9-21-2016) 
6.04.117 - Conduct of hearing. 
A.  A hearing requested in accordance with Section 6.04.116 B of this chapter shall be conducted before the hearing officer. The hearing officer shall be the chief of police or his designee. 
B.  The hearing shall be open to the public. The owner may be represented by legal counsel. The hearing officer shall hear all pertinent evidence offered by all interested persons. The technical rules of evidence shall not be applicable to the hearing, except that the hearing officer's decision may not be based wholly on hearsay evidence. Each side shall have the right to call and examine witnesses; to introduce exhibits; to cross-examine opposing witnesses on any matter relevant to the issues at the hearing even though the matter was not covered in the direct examination; and to rebut the evidence against him or her. 
C.  If the owner does not testify on his or her behalf, he or she may be called and examined as if under cross-examination, except where criminal charges under Sections 6.04.121 and 6.04.122 of this chapter are pending against the owner or if it is possible that such charges may be brought against the owner. All persons giving evidence shall be sworn before testifying. The owner may employ a shorthand reporter to record the hearing. 
D.  Any dog which has attacked, bitten or caused injury to a human being or other animal is presumed to be potentially dangerous or vicious and the burden is on the owner to present evidence that the dog is not potentially dangerous or vicious. 
E.  In making a determination that a dog is or is not potentially dangerous or vicious, evidence of the following shall be considered: 
1.  Any previous history of the dog attacking, biting or causing injury to a human being or other animal; 
2.  The nature and extent of injuries inflicted and the number of victims involved; 
3.  The place where the bite, attack or injury occurred; 
4.  The presence or absence of any provocation for the bite, attack or injury; 
5.  The extent to which property has been damaged or destroyed; 
6.  Whether the dog exhibits any characteristics of being trained for fighting or attack or other evidence to show such training or fighting; 
7.  Whether the dog exhibits characteristics or aggressive or unpredictable temperament or behavior in the presence of human beings, other dogs or other animals; 
8.  Whether the dog can be effectively trained to change its temperament or behavior; 
9.  The manner in which the dog has been maintained by its owner; 
10.  The results of the behavioral study of the dog; 
11.  Any other relevant evidence concerning the characteristics or maintenance of the dog; and 
12.  Any other relevant evidence regarding the ability of the owner to protect the public safety in the future if the dog is permitted to remain in the city. 
(Ord. No. 2016-004, § 1, 9-21-2016) 
6.04.118 - Hearing decision. 
A.  At the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer may determine: 
1.  That the dog is not a potentially dangerous or vicious dog and should be returned to its owner; 
2.  That the dog is not potentially dangerous or vicious, but the attack, bite or injury was the result of improper or negligent training, handling or maintenance and that the dog's license should be revoked and proper training of the owner and the dog be required pursuant to Section 6.04.122 of this chapter. 
3.  That the dog is a potentially dangerous or vicious dog and shall be disposed of in accordance with Section 6.04.119 C, no sooner than thirty-five (35) days following the date or mailing of written notice of the hearing officer's decision, pursuant to this section. 
B.  The decision of the hearing officer shall be in writing and shall be delivered personally to the owner or mailed to the owner by regular mailing at the address appearing on the request for hearing. A copy of the decision shall be mailed to the animal control officer. 
C.  If the owner of the dog disagrees with the decision of the hearing officer, the owner may, within ten (10) days after the date of mailing of the hearing officer's decision to the owner of the dog, file an appeal of the decision of the hearing officer with the Fresno County Superior Court as provided in California Food and Agricultural Code Section 31622(a). The owner's appeal of the hearing officer's decision will be conducted pursuant to the provisions of California Food and Agricultural Code Section 31622(b). 
(Ord. No. 2016-004, § 1, 9-21-2016) 
6.04.119 - Disposition of a potentially dangerous or vicious dog. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any person to own, possess, harbor or keep any dog declared to be potentially dangerous or vicious pursuant to this chapter. 
B.  Any dog declared to be potentially dangerous or vicious, if not already impounded, shall be immediately surrendered to the animal control officer and it is the duty of the animal control officer to take up and impound any such animal. 
C.  Any dog declared to be potentially dangerous or vicious shall be humanely destroyed. The animal control officer shall sign an order authorizing the destruction of the animal thirty-five (35) days after the date of the mailing of the hearing officer's decision to the owner of the dog. 
(Ord. No. 2016-004, § 1, 9-21-2016) 
6.04.120 - Procedure if dog is not found potentially dangerous or vicious. 
A.  If it is determined that the dog is not potentially dangerous or vicious, but that the bite, attack or injury was the result of improper or negligent training, handling, maintenance or provocation, then the following conditions will be enforced: 
1.  Training will be required of the owner and the dog as determined by the hearing officer and monitored by the animal control officer. 
2.  The current license will be revoked and a "provisional" dog license will be issued during a training period. 
3.  After successful completion of the training of the dog, as determined by the animal control officer, the dog shall be issued a current city dog license and the owner will pay all license fees and penalties as may be required. 
4.  Any violation of the training terms set forth by the hearing officer will result in immediate impoundment. The dog will be declared to be potentially dangerous or vicious and humanely destroyed no sooner than ten (10) days after mailing a notice of violation of training and impoundment. 
(Ord. No. 2016-004, § 1, 9-21-2016) 
6.04.121 - Penalties for dog bites and attacks. 
A.  In any case where a dog attacks a human being or another animal, such act shall constitute a separate and distinct violation, and shall be punishable as follows: 
1.  Any person whose dog attacks a human being without causing bodily injury, or attacks another animal, shall be guilty of an infraction and shall be punished upon a first conviction by a fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00) and for a second conviction within a period of twelve (12) months by a fine of two hundred dollars ($200.00) and for a third or subsequent conviction within twelve (12) months, by a fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
2.  Any person whose dog attacks a human being causing bodily injury shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment in the county jail for not more than six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
3.  After each attack or bite, the animal control officer shall determine whether a dog is potentially dangerous or vicious pursuant to Section 6.04.118 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2016-004, § 1, 9-21-2016) 
6.04.122 - Penalties generally. 
A.  Except as otherwise provided in Section 6.04.121 of this chapter, any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of an infraction and shall be subject to the following fines: 
1.  One hundred dollars ($100.00) upon the first offense. 
2.  Two hundred dollars ($200.00) upon the second offense in a twelve-month period. 
3.  Five hundred dollars ($500.00) upon the third offense in a twelve-month period. 
B.  If any violation is continued, each day's violation shall be deemed a separate violation. Any person found guilty of more than three (3) violations of this chapter within a twelve-month period shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and fined up to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisoned in the county jail for not more than six (6) months for each misdemeanor conviction. The person shall also pay any and all expenses, including shelter, food, veterinarian expenses for identification or certification or boarding associated with the seizure of their dog. 
(Ord. No. 2016-004, § 1, 9-21-2016) 
6.04.123 - Protection of police canine units. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully or maliciously torture, tease, torment, beat, kick, strike, mutilate, injure, disable or kill any dog used by the City of Kingsburg Police Department, or any other law enforcement agency while engaged in mutual aid assistance to this city, or the designated handlers of such animals, while any such dog is in the performance of the functions or duties of the police department or other law enforcement agency, or to willfully interfere with or obstruct any such dog while it is being used in the performance of any of the duties or functions of the department or other law enforcement agency. 
B.  No provision of this section shall be constructed to prohibit any act made unlawful by any general law of the State of California, but said section is intended to be supplemental thereto. 
(Ord. No. 2016-004, § 1, 9-21-2016) 
6.04.124 - Public events or assemblies. 
    The city council may, by resolution, prohibit dogs whether or not confined by leash, from attendance at any public event as that term is defined in Section 6.04.010 and any assembly as that term is defined in Section 12.16.010 of this code. The prohibition of dogs shall not apply to guide dogs and other service dogs to assist disabled persons attending the public event or assembly. 
(Ord. No. 2016-004, § 1, 9-21-2016) 
6.04.125 - Mandatory microchipping of dogs. 
    Any dogs in the city shall be implanted with an identifying microchip. The owner is required to provide the microchip number to the city clerk and shall notify the city clerk and the national registry applicable to the implanted chip of any change of ownership of the dog or any change in the owner's contact information. Upon redemption of a dog from the pound, the owner shall comply with this section and have the dog implanted with a microchip and provide microchip number to the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 2016-004, § 1, 9-21-2016) 
Title 8 - HEALTH AND SAFETY 
Chapters: 
Chapter 8.04 - TRASH AND RUBBISH 

8.04.010 - Definition of trash and rubbish. 
    The words "trash" and rubbish" mean any trash, rubbish, leaves, tree trimmings, grass, foliage, or other debris. 
(Ord. 94-01 § 1 (part), 1994: prior code § 42-3000) 
8.04.020 - Burning prohibited. 
    No person shall burn any trash or rubbish within the city limits. Open burning of wood or wood products produced and sold for use in commercially manufactured wood-burning appliances shall be permitted inside the city limits as long as the burning is kept within an approved commercially manufactured wood-burning appliance. The commercially manufactured wood-burning appliance must be located in an area with proper fire clearance and a water source within twenty (20) feet of its location. A person eighteen (18) years of age or older must be present at all times during burning. Open campfires and burn barrels are prohibited within the city limits. (SJVAPCD, Regulation IV, Rule 4103.) All open burning must comply with the San Joaquin Valley Air Pollution Control District, (SJVAPCD), and may be subject to change dependent on SJVAPCD rules and regulations. (District Rules and regulation, entire document, notably Rules 4103 and 4903.) Open barbeques/fire pits used to cook food for human consumption are not prohibited per SJVAPCD Regulation IV. Rule 4103, Open Burning, 4.0 Exceptions, 4.1.1. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; Ord. 94-01 § 1 (part), 1994: prior code § 42-3001) 
8.04.030 - Burning permitted for agricultural purposes. 
    Agricultural burning is permitted on farmland that has been annexed to the city limits and remains in active production, in compliance with San Joaquin Valley Air Pollution Control District regulations. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; Ord. 94-01 § 1 (part), 1994: prior code § 42-3002) 
8.04.040 - Trash and rubbish in city street prohibited. 
    No person shall place or cause to be placed any trash or rubbish upon any street, sidewalk, alley, or right-of-way within the City of Kingsburg. 
(Ord. No. 2012-01, § 2, 2-1-2012) 
Chapter 8.08 - FIREWORKS* 
Sections: 

8.08.010 - Fireworks regulated. 
    The city of Kingsburg hereby regulates the sale, use and display of fireworks, as defined by state law and this chapter, to the full extent not expressly or impliedly prohibited by state or federal law. The invalidity of any of the following sections, or portions thereof, shall not affect the remaining provisions. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement) 
8.08.020 - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of these sections, unless otherwise apparent from the context, certain words and phrases used herein are defined as follows: 
    "Continuous permit list" means all eligible organizations which successfully obtained and operated fireworks stands with continuous permits for same in calendar year 2001. 
    "Dangerous fireworks" means any fireworks specified as such in the State Fireworks Law, Sections 12500, et seq., of the Health and Safety Code of the State, and such other fireworks as may be determined to be dangerous by the State Fire Marshal. 
    "Eligible organization" means any local "not for profit" charitable, religious, civic, service or patriotic group or organization which has been in existence within the city and has held regularly constituted meetings within the city throughout one full year preceding an application for the permit required by this chapter. 
    "Rotating permit list" means all eligible organizations on the waiting list referenced in subsection G of Section 8.08.040 of this chapter as of five o'clock p.m. on September 28, 2001. These organizations shall be placed on the rotating list in the same order to receive any available fireworks stand permit(s) on this list. The remainder of the rotating list eligibility order shall be determined among all other eligible organizations desiring to sell safe and sane fireworks in the city which filed at City Hall between eight o'clock a.m. October 1, 2001 and five o'clock p.m. March 1, 2002 a completed "interest application" provided by the city clerk's office, based on the sequence resulting from a public drawing among those organizations to be conducted by the city clerk at City Hall at five o'clock p.m. on March 7, 2002. The number of available rotating permits shall be the balance of the total number of permits authorized by the fireworks ordinance after deducting those to be issued to the continuous permit list. The maximum term for rotating permits shall be three successive calendar years for any one organization. 
    "Safe and sane fireworks" means and includes any fireworks not designated as "dangerous fireworks," except that, in any case, only end fuses may be used. 
    "Stand" means any building, counter, or other structure of a temporary nature used in the sale or offering for sale of fireworks pursuant to a permit duly issued. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement) 
8.08.030 - Sales, use and/or display of fireworks-Permits required. 
A.  Except as otherwise authorized herein, it shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale any fireworks of any kind in the city. With a permit issued pursuant to these provisions, persons are authorized to sell or offer for sale only safe and sane fireworks in the city in compliance with and subject to the provisions hereof. Except for safe and sane fireworks, it shall be unlawful to use or display any other fireworks in the city unless a special permit for such express purpose has been issued pursuant to Section 8.08.120. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement) 
8.08.040 - Permits to sell safe and sane fireworks-Applications and fees. 
    Permits to sell safe and sane fireworks shall be issued by the city clerk's office upon application therefore, only to eligible organizations and only after such organizations have met all the applicable requirements set forth in this section. 
A.  Any eligible organization desiring to sell safe and sane fireworks in the city shall make an application therefore on or after January 1 each year at the city fire department. 
B.  Such application shall be signed by a bona fide officer of the eligible organization, wherein the officer, as authorized agent on behalf of the organization and its officers, agents and/or employees, shall agree to abide by state laws and administrative regulations and all the stipulations of this code and the permit if permission to operate a fireworks stand shall be granted to the organization. 
C.  Completed applications shall be returned to the fire department no later than five o'clock p.m. on the first regular business day in May of each year. Any eligible organization making an application for such permit to sell safe and sane fireworks which fails to return the completed application prior to five o'clock p.m. on the first regular business day in May shall not be issued a permit to sell safe and sane fireworks. 
D.  All eligible organizations shall obtain and submit to the fire department as part of the completed application the following completed forms supplied by the fire department: 
1.  The property owner's release form signed by the property owner authorizing permission to erect a fireworks stand on his/her property; 
2.  The fireworks storage form indicating where the fireworks will be stored when not in the approved stand; 
3.  The State Fire Marshal's license to sell safe and sane fireworks; 
4.  A copy of the temporary seller's permit issued by the State Board of Equalization; and 
5.  The certificate of insurance required by Section 8.08.070. 
E.  When all the application requirements have been completed, and the fireworks stand location has been approved, the fire department shall authorize the erection of a fireworks stand and shall notify the city clerk's office to issue a permit to the qualified organization. Each qualified organization shall pay to the city the sum prescribed by appropriate city resolution or ordinance. Each permit shall be for only one stand per eligible organization and shall be forwarded to the fire department for delivery as set forth in subsection F of this section. 
F.  Permits will be effective only when delivered by the fire department after the final inspection of the stand shows compliance with all requirements of this chapter. 
G.  If any organization which, in the previous year, obtained and held a fireworks permit shall fail to successfully complete the application process by five o'clock p.m. on the first regular business day in May, or if additional permits are authorized pursuant to Section 8.08.090, the next existing eligible organization at the top of the waiting list kept by the fire department shall be notified and shall have thirty (30) days to meet all of the requirements set forth in this section. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement) 
8.08.050 - Fireworks stands-Zoning restrictions. 
    Fireworks stands will be allowed only on property in the city which is not currently zoned for any residential use. An exception may be allowed where the property is currently zoned for residential use but is designated on an adopted general or specific plan for a future nonresidential use. Public safety, ingress, egress and adequate parking will be additional factors considered by the fire department before approving any site for fireworks sales. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement) 
8.08.060 - Regulations. 
    It shall be unlawful for any eligible organization to which a permit has been issued: 
A.  To sell or offer for sale any fireworks within a distance of one hundred (100) feet of any pump or dispensing device for gasoline or other flammable liquids, or within thirty (30) feet of any building, or less than ten (10) feet from any public roadway or back of curb; 
B.  To employ in the sale of fireworks any person under the age of eighteen (18) years; 
C.  To fail to clear all flammable or burnable materials within thirty (30) feet from any fireworks stand and to maintain such condition during the period prescribed for the sale of fireworks; 
D.  To allow smoking within twenty-five (25) feet of any stand or to fail to post "No Smoking" signs with such wording in red letters not less than two inches in height on a white background on all sides of any such stand; 
E.  To fail to have immediately available within the stand a certified fire extinguisher or other fire extinguishing device of a type approved by the fire department; 
F.  To sell fireworks earlier than twelve o'clock (12:00) p.m. on June 28 or later than twelve o'clock (12:00) p.m. on July 6 of any year; 
G.  To fail to dismantle and completely remove any stand where fireworks are sold or offered for sale promptly after the close of sales but in no event later than five o'clock p.m. on July 6 of any year; and 
H.  To obtain or use more than one permit for one stand per year. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement) 
8.08.070 - Certificate of insurance. 
    Prior to the issuance of a permit, the eligible organization shall procure a certificate of insurance acceptable to the city. The certificate shall name the city, and its officers, agents, and employees, as additional insureds in the amount of no less than five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) combined bodily injury and property damage for each occurrence. The certificate shall specify the time, location, and dates to be covered by the policy. The certificate shall be provided to the fire department no later than five o'clock p.m. on the first regular business day in May of the subject year or at such other time as the fire chief may allow. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement) 
8.08.080 - Number of fireworks stand permits allowed. 
    There shall be allowed eight fireworks stand permits in the city, plus one additional permit when the city population reaches thirteen thousand (13,000), plus one additional permit thereafter for every three thousand (3,000) of additional population in the city. The city population shall be determined based on annual population figures provided to the city by the state as of January 1 of each year. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; Ord. 2002-01 § 1, 2002) 
8.08.090 - Method of issuance of fireworks stand permits. 
    Notwithstanding anything in the fireworks ordinance or the ordinance codified in this section to the contrary, the method of issuance of fireworks stand permits to eligible organizations beginning calendar year 2003 shall be as follows: 
A.  For each fireworks stand permit sought, whether continuous or rotating, the interested eligible organization must file a separate "interest" application with the city clerk in January of the calendar year in which the permit is to be issued. A separate "permit to sell" application, together with an approved fireworks stand permit issued for that calendar year, must be obtained in accordance with the fireworks ordinance application process as amended by the ordinance codified in this section. 
B.  Only one fireworks stand permit may be issued to any eligible organization in any calendar year except as expressly authorized by subsection C of this section. 
C.  On or before February 10 of the calendar year in which permits are to be issued, those organizations filing an "interest application" as described in subsection A of this section shall be placed upon one of two permit lists as follows: 
1.  Continuous Permit List. All eligible organizations which successfully obtained and operated fireworks stands with continuous permits for same in the prior calendar year shall be placed on this list. Each such organization shall have priority in issuance for the same number of continuous permits that organization obtained in that prior year. In no event shall the total of such continuous permits exceed the number of those permits successfully obtained and operated in the prior year. Any continuous permit which is expressly waived, not applied for, not obtained or revoked, shall reduce the number of annually available continuous permits accordingly with a corresponding increase of the number of annually available rotating permits. 
2.  Rotating Permit List. All eligible organizations which successfully obtained and operated fireworks stands with rotating permits for same in the prior calendar year shall be placed in priority order on this list for not to exceed three successive years per organization. Any remaining available rotating permits shall be issued to the other remaining eligible organizations which filed timely "interest" applications based on the sequence resulting from a public drawing to be conducted at City Hall by the city clerk on or before February 10 of that calendar year. The number of available rotating permits shall be the balance of the permits authorized by the fireworks ordinance after issuance of the permits to the continuous permit list. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; Ord. 2002-01 § 3, 2002) 
8.08.100 - Suspension and revocation of permits. 
A.  Suspension. Violation of Section 8.08.060(G) will result in a suspension of equal number of days the following year or next issuance of a permit to sale or offer for sale fireworks within the city and at a minimum of one day suspension. Violation of all other portions of Section 8.08.060, except as listed under "Revocation" below, will result in a suspension of operation until the violation has been corrected and approved by the fire department. Any suspensions lasting more than one day will require the fireworks booth to be emptied of product and the product stored in an approved storage facility. During suspensions lasting less than one day, the fireworks booth will be closed but monitored by a responsible party continuously. 
B.  Revocation. Any violation of this chapter or other city laws, or the terms and conditions of the permit, or state laws or administrative rules or regulations, or safety rules of the fire department shall be grounds for the immediate revocation of the permit. All officers, agents and employees of the eligible organization shall be responsible for compliance with all the provisions of this chapter. Any eligible organizations issued a permit which is subsequently revoked in the calendar year issued shall be ineligible for a fireworks stand permit in the next following calendar year. Violation of Section 8.08.060(B) and (D) will result in immediate revocation of an organizations permit. Disregard for the conditions of "Suspension" will result in revocation of an organizations permit. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement) 
8.08.110 - Required fireworks operator training. 
    Notwithstanding anything in the fireworks ordinance or this chapter to the contrary, starting in calendar year 2002 and continuing thereafter, no fireworks stand permit shall be issued to any eligible organization unless at least one of the organization's designated responsible adults has certified he/she attended a "fireworks stand operator seminar" conducted after January 1 of that calendar year by a responsible member of the fireworks industry approved by the city fire chief. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; Ord. 2002-01 § 4, 2002) 
8.08.120 - Unsuccessful permit application. 
    Subsection G of Section 8.08.040 of this chapter is hereby repealed; and any permit not successfully applied for in any calendar year shall not be available for issuance again until the following calendar year. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; Ord. 2002-01 § 6, 2002) 
8.08.130 - Administration. 
    The city manager and fire chief may/shall promulgate and enforce additional rules, regulations and forms consistent with the purposes of these sections. The city manager, fire chief, police chief, and/or building official and/or their authorized deputies or designees may/shall enforce the provisions hereof consistent with law. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; Ord. 2002-01 § 5, 2002) 
8.08.140 - Other provisions, terms, and conditions. 
    Except as expressly or impliedly modified, superseded or deleted by the foregoing provisions of the ordinance codified in this section, all other provisions, terms and conditions of the fireworks ordinance shall continue and remain in full force and effect. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; Ord. 2002-01 § 9, 2002) 
8.08.150 - State Fireworks Law. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall be construed consistent with (and so as not to conflict with) the State Fireworks Law and regulations promulgated thereunder. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement) 
Chapter 8.10 - DISPLAY OF PRODUCTS CONTAINING PSEUDOEPHEDRINE 
Sections: 

8.10.010 - Display of products containing pseudoephedrine. 
    It shall be unlawful for any individual, partnership, corporation, limited liability company or any other type of entity (collectively "business entity") doing business within the city limits of the city of Kingsburg, to store, stock, keep or display for sale, transfer or distribution any product containing pseudoephedrine in any area or location which is not secure and made unavailable to the public and which is accessible only to employees of such individual or business entity. 
(Ord. 2006-03 § 2, 2006) 
Chapter 8.12 - SOLID WASTE COLLECTION AND/OR DISPOSAL* 
Sections: 

8.12.010 - Definitions. 
    Unless the context otherwise requires, the definitions in this section shall be interpreted consistent with the definitions in the "Act" referenced below and in this code; and shall govern the construction of this chapter. 
    "Act" means the California Integrated Waste Management Act of 1989 (California Public Resources Code Section 40000, et seq.) and all rules and regulations adopted pursuant to the Act, as amended from time to time. 
    "Bin(s)" means the front- or top-loading metal bin containers provided to customers by city or its contract collector(s) for refuse, green waste and/or recyclable materials collection. 
    "Bulk solid waste" means demolition or construction waste and debris (including, but not limited to, wood waste, wallboard, lumber, pipe, masonry, concrete and cement), tree stumps, abandoned vehicles or parts thereof, like items, and such other items as are determined or designated by city from time to time. 
    "Buy-back facility" means a facility which receives source-separated materials for a fee. 
    "City" means the city of Kingsburg and/or city's duly authorized officers, agents and employees. 
    "Collection service(s)" means the process of collection by city or its contract collector(s) from alleyways of refuse and green waste placed in containers by customers (or collection from curbside in those instances where alley service cannot be provided), collection from curbside of recyclable materials placed in containers by customers, collection of street refuse from city rights-of-way and lawful disposal of all such items so collected. 
    "Container(s)" means the automated refuse, green waste, recyclable materials containers and bins as defined herein. 
    "Contract collector" means any person who, under contract with city, provides collection services to customers and/or premises. 
    "Customer" means any and all persons (including the owners, occupants and/or operators of premises) which generate, produce or accumulate solid waste. 
    "Green waste" means grass, leaves, shrub or brush trimmings, general organic debris from yard, greenery and/or organic plant maintenance that is of plant origin, and tree trimmings which do not exceed six inches in diameter or thirty-six (36) inches in length. 
    "Green waste container(s)" means the separate approximately ninety (90) gallon green waste containers provided to customers for green waste collection services. 
    "Person" means an individual, firm, association, partnership, public or private corporation, company, organization, political subdivision, governmental agency, trustee, receiver or any other entity whatsoever. 
    "Premises" means an identifiable tract, lot or parcel of land (with or without habitable buildings or appurtenant structures) located within city. 
    "Recyclable materials" means newspaper, cardboard, chipboard, white and colored ledger paper, computer paper, magazines, tin (steel) and bimetal cans, aluminum cans, glass bottles and jars, tin cans, Polyethylene Teraphthelate ("PET"), Low and High Density Polyethylene Plastic ("LDPE" and "HDPE"), Plastic Containers 1-7, designated scrap metals, other materials which can be processed and returned to the economic mainstream in the form of raw material for new, reused, or reconstituted products which meet the quality standards necessary to be used in the marketplace, and such additional materials as are designated by city. 
    "Recyclable materials container(s)" means the approximately forty-eight (48) gallon or ninety-six (96) gallon plastic containers provided to customers for recyclable materials collection services. 
    "Refuse" means those residential and commercial solid waste products which are regularly, normally, commonly and legally accepted for collection in municipal refuse programs in Fresno County, California, other than recyclable materials, green waste and street refuse as defined herein. Without limiting city's right from time-to-time to determine certain materials are not included in the definition of refuse set forth above, refuse specifically excludes ashes, cement, dirt, tires, motor oil, hazardous materials, rock, plaster, paint, bulk solid waste, wood waste and wallboard. 
    "Refuse container(s)" means the approximately ninety-six (96) gallon or sixty-four (64) gallon plastic containers provided to customers for refuse collection services. 
    "Separate/separation" means the segregation and placement of refuse, green waste and recyclable materials in the separate containers designated for same, and includes the segregation of recyclable materials by customers from their other solid waste for purposes of private sale or donation, rather than placement in the container(s) designated for same. 
    "Solid waste" means all putrescible or non-putrescible solid and semisolid waste including recyclable materials, refuse, garbage, rubbish, trash, decaying vegetable and animal matter, ashes, green waste, industrial waste, swill, offal, tin cans, paper, medical solid waste and other offensive or nauseous substances excepting the following: agricultural solid waste, liquid-carried industrial wastes, sewage or sewage hauled as an incidental part of a septic tank or cesspool cleaning service, medical waste, and hazardous or toxic waste as defined and regulated by federal, state or local laws and regulations, and such other materials as are designated by city. 
    "Solid waste facility" means a disposal site, buy-back facility, material recovery facility (MRF), composting facility, transfer station, or a site that engages in any solid waste processing, or any facility specified in California Public Resources Code Section 40194 and as amended from time to time. Solid waste facility shall include a commercial or industrial business conducting salvage of recyclable materials, but shall exclude private residences engaged in salvaging of recyclable materials for their own purpose. 
    "Street refuse" means solid waste located within city rights-of-way on designated collection service days which is reasonably capable of being collected through the use of the street sweeping equipment utilized for such purposes by city or its contract collector(s). 
    "Walk-in service" means service where solid waste, green waste and/or recyclable material containers may be placed for collection at a location other than the designated collection point, but on the premises. Such service shall be limited to customers who are blind, disabled, or, for some physical reason, cannot move their container to the curb or alley. Hardship cases will be reviewed and a decision made on an individual basis by city. 
    "Wallboard" means sheets or pieces of gypsum drywall. 
    "Wood waste" means wood residue including construction wood waste, pallets, crates, spools, remanufactured wood residue, urban wood waste and tree parts or trimmings of any kind over six inches in diameter or thirty-six (36) inches in length. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; Ord. 2003-13 § 3 (part), 2003) 
8.12.020 - Right to collect or designate contract collector(s). 
    City, in order to more effectively promote and protect the public health and safety and reduce the dangers and hazards of fires and conflagrations, reserves to itself the sole and exclusive right to collect, transport and dispose of solid waste produced, found and accumulated within city, and/or to permit, designate and/or contract with persons to collect and/or dispose of such solid waste as in the judgment of city seems best and upon such terms as city may determine, including the award and/or payment of any franchise fee for the privilege of doing so, whether by permit, designation or contract. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; Ord. 2003-13 § 3 (part), 2003) 
8.12.030 - Collection services/separation mandatory. 
    Except as otherwise provided in Section 8.12.040, all persons within city, and all premises upon which solid waste is produced, generated or accumulated within city, shall be provided with and required to use the collection services provided by city under this chapter, without any exception, all such persons and premises shall be responsible to pay the charges for not less than the designated minimum level of available collection services as they are from time to time set in accordance with this chapter. All such persons and premises using collection services shall separate green waste and recyclable materials from all other refuse and/or solid waste produced, generated or accumulated at their premises and dispose of the same only in accordance with law and the requirements established by city. These requirements shall be established by this chapter and by any other authorized action of city; and may be amended from time to time as may be necessary to meet the requirements of the Act, this chapter, city agreement(s) with contract collector(s) and/or permits or designations issued by city to persons collecting and/or disposing of solid waste in accordance with this chapter. An owner, landlord, or agent of an owner or landlord of a multi-family rental housing property with two or more units, shall comply with the separation responsibilities for the premises by establishing a system for collection, separation, and deposit into the separate designated refuse, green waste and recyclable materials containers for such premises. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; Ord. 2003-13 § 3 (part), 2003) 
8.12.040 - Unauthorized collections. 
    No person other than city shall for gain or hire engage in the business of collecting, hauling, transporting or disposing of any solid waste produced, generated or accumulated within city, or use the public rights-of-way in city for such purpose(s), without first having become a contract collector of city or without first having secured a solid waste collection and/or disposal permit or designation from city to engage in the business of collecting and/or disposing of solid waste. This section does not prevent any individual from otherwise lawfully disposing of the solid waste personally produced, generated or accumulated by that individual. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; Ord. 2003-13 § 3 (part), 2003) 
8.12.050 - Service levels and requirements. 
A.  Frequency, Type and Amounts of Collection. Regular collection services shall be provided all premises at regular scheduled intervals established by city. Special or additional collections may also be provided as determined by city. In cases of disputes about frequency of collection or adequacy of containers, city shall determine the appropriate frequency and the size and number of containers required to provide for the efficient collection of solid waste at any premises. 
B.  Container Storage/Placement. All customers shall store and place containers in a manner and at location(s) for storage and collection acceptable to city. 
C.  Residential Container Storage. All refuse and green waste containers on residential premises having fenced public alley access shall be stored at a location on the premises either inside a fence-line enclosure acceptable to city with inside measurements of not less than four feet deep and eight feet wide which provides space for such containers and access allowing the collector to empty all such containers from the public alley without entering the premises ("approved enclosure"), or inside the alley fence. Any residential alley fence hereafter constructed or replaced within four feet of the adjacent public alley boundary shall be constructed with an approved enclosure. All containers for residential premises without fences and/or without public alley access shall be stored at a location on the premises no closer to public rights-of-way than the applicable structural setback line(s) set forth in the zoning ordinance of city; and shall be visually screened from the adjacent streets, alleys and premises. 
D.  Residential Container Placement for Collection/Return. Except for walk-in service(s), all residential premises containers shall be placed for collection no sooner than five o'clock p.m. on the day preceding the scheduled day of collection and no later than five o'clock a.m. on the scheduled day of collection and shall be returned from the collection location to the storage location no later than twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight on the scheduled day of collection. Solid waste and green waste containers on residential premises with public alley access but no approved enclosure may be placed for collection within the public alley for such purposes only if approved by city. All solid waste and green waste containers on residential premises without public alley access shall be placed for collection behind the curbline. All recyclable materials containers on residential premises shall be placed for collection within the public street right-of-way abutting the premises and behind the curbline. 
E.  Proper Separation and Placement Required. Refuse, green waste and recyclable materials which have not been properly separated, placed in designated containers and located for collection are not required to be collected in accordance with regular collection services; and city may impose special service charges for same. 
F.  Substitute Containers. With city's prior approval, separate refuse, green waste and/or recyclable materials containers may be used in lieu of bins at non-single-family residential premises. With city's prior approval, bins may be used at single-family residential premises in lieu of separate refuse, green waste and/or recyclable materials containers. 
G.  Containers to be Kept Clean. All containers shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition with their lids closed at all times. Should container(s) not be kept in such condition, following notice of such failure, the condition may be corrected at the expense of the person, customer or premises. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; Ord. 2003-13 § 3 (part), 2003) 
8.12.060 - Rates. 
    All rates and charges for collection services shall be fixed by city resolution. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; Ord. 2003-13 § 3 (part), 2003) 
8.12.070 - Billings. 
A.  Collection services shall be included on the regular city utility bill. The charges shall be paid at the same time and in the same manner as other utility charges are paid, and all rules and regulations governing the collection of other city utility bills shall apply to charges for collection services, the same as for other city utilities. 
B.  Any payment received for city utility charges in an amount less than the total billed shall be treated as a partial payment for each such charge and the amount received shall be allocated to the separate accounts in the same ratio as each such charge bears to the whole of the bill. 
C.  The charges for the collection of solid waste resulting from the normal use of a premises shall not be construed as preventing city from imposing reasonable extra charges for the removal of excessive amounts of solid waste. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; Ord. 2003-13 § 3 (part), 2003) 
8.12.080 - Delinquencies. 
    All charges for collection services included on utility bills shall be due and payable at the same time as other utility charges. If a bill for collection services is not paid in full within the time provided, city may discontinue utility service to the premises after following the established rules and regulations governing the collection of utility bills. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; Ord. 2003-13 § 3 (part), 2003) 
8.12.090 - Solid waste accumulations unlawful. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any person to allow or permit to collect or remain on their premises any solid waste in a manner which constitutes a public nuisance. 
B.  In addition to the foregoing, except for the normal accumulation of solid waste between normal collection service days, all premises shall be kept free of solid waste. The owner, occupant or operator of any premises shall be responsible for the safe and sanitary storage of all solid waste so normally accumulated on the premises in a manner such that such solid waste is not visible from public rights-of-way or other nearby premises. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; Ord. 2003-13 § 3 (part), 2003) 
8.12.100 - Burying, dumping or burning solid waste unlawful. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to bury, dump, burn, or permit to be buried, dumped, or burned any solid waste in any place within city, and all solid waste generated in city shall be placed in the designated containers as described in this chapter. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; Ord. 2003-13 § 3 (part), 2003) 
8.12.110 - Public rights-of-way. 
    No solid waste or container(s) shall be deposited, kept or stored in public rights-of-way. No container(s) shall be placed in public rights-of-way except as specifically allowed by city for collection purposes. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; Ord. 2003-13 § 3 (part), 2003) 
8.12.120 - Enforcement/regulatory provisions. 
    City shall enforce the provisions of this chapter and shall have the power to establish rules and regulations consistent with the provisions of this chapter governing the keeping, collection, removal, and disposal of solid waste. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; Ord. 2003-13 § 3 (part), 2003) 
8.12.130 - Agreements with contract collector(s). 
    Agreement(s) for collection services may be entered into between city and persons subject to the provisions of this code and other applicable laws. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter or such agreement(s), contract collector(s) shall have the sole and exclusive right(s) and duty(ies) to collect and dispose of all solid waste in accordance with said agreement(s) and to transport same throughout the streets and alleys of city for such purposes. Any such agreement may be entered into by city upon terms deemed necessary to protect the interests of city and consistent with this chapter, and the Act. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; Ord. 2003-13 § 3 (part), 2003) 
8.12.140 - Exclusive rights/franchises. 
    City may grant any contract collector, for the term of that contract collector's agreement only, an exclusive franchise consisting of the exclusive duty, right and privilege to collect and dispose of solid waste within city on such terms as city shall proscribe in such agreement. Any exclusive franchise itself need not prevent any person, customer or premises from personally and lawfully handling, hauling, or transporting solid waste, refuse, green waste or recyclable materials generated by or from that person's, customer's or premises for purposes of lawfully disposing of the same at an authorized disposal area or transfer station. No exclusive franchise shall affect or limit the right of any person, customer or premises to sell any recyclable materials generated by or from that person, customer or premises to any person lawfully engaged in the business of accepting and processing of same or to donate such recyclable materials to any bona fide charity; provided, all such recyclable materials have been separated by that person, customer or premises prior to such sale or donation. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; Ord. 2003-13 § 3 (part), 2003) 
8.12.150 - Franchise fees/payments. 
    A solid waste collection and/or disposal franchise fee ("franchise fee"), as set by resolution of the city council, is hereby imposed on all sums due each contract collector. Each contract collector shall submit monthly statements to the city which itemize the types, amounts and charges for services rendered by the contract collector and the "monthly net sum" claimed due for that month by such contract collector utilizing the rates determined, in accordance with its agreement with the city. Said monthly statements shall be submitted to city within ten (10) days after the end of the calendar month in which the collection services were provided and shall be accompanied by all monthly reports due city. Within fifteen (15) days after receipt of such statement and reports, city shall review the monthly statement and reports and, upon the city's approval of such statement and reports, shall pay the contract collector the approved monthly net sum due. In lieu of contract collector paying the required franchise fee amount concurrently with submitting each monthly statement, city shall determine and collect the franchise fee amount by multiplying the agreed monthly net sum due for each month by the franchise fee percentage then in effect which will yield the franchise fee the contract collector is required to pay the city. The City shall deduct the monthly franchise fee amount from the monthly net sum due the contract collector for that respective month. City reserves the right to modify at any time the amount of the franchise fee by resolution of the city council adopted at any time during the term of any agreement with any contract collector; and thereafter to collect such modified franchise fee using the same procedure described in this Section 8.12.150. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; Ord. 2003-13 § 3 (part), 2003) 
(Ord. No. 2014-02, § 1, 5-22-2014) 
8.12.160 - Unlawful acts. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any person to store, place, throw, deposit, or cause to be stored, placed, thrown or deposited, any solid waste in or upon any premises not owned, occupied or controlled by such person or in or upon any public right-of-way, park, or other public place; or to accumulate, keep, store or place any solid waste other than in the manner provided or allowed by this chapter. 
B.  It shall be unlawful for any person to remove, damage, destroy, deface, improperly locate, place or store any container. 
C.  It shall be unlawful for any person other than city, a contract collector, or a person otherwise properly permitted or designated by city for such purposes to collect or transport any solid waste which has been placed for collection. 
D.  It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit solid waste in the container(s) of any other person, customer or premises, or to set out solid waste for collection at the collection location of any other person, customer or premises. 
E.  It shall be unlawful for any person, customer or premises to willingly place any materials in the refuse, green waste or recyclable materials containers that do not meet the definitions for same set forth in this chapter. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; Ord. 2003-13 § 3 (part), 2003) 
(Ord. No. 2014-02, § 1, 5-22-2014) 
8.12.170 - Penalties. 
    Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor or, at the option of the citing official or city attorney, an infraction; upon conviction of a misdemeanor, such person shall be punished by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment for a period of not more than six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Upon conviction of an infraction, such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; Ord. 2003-13 § 3 (part), 2003) 
8.12.180 - Severability. 
    If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, word, or phrase of this chapter is held to be unconstitutional or otherwise invalid for any reason, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remainder of this chapter. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; Ord. 2003-13 § 3 (part), 2003) 
Chapter 8.14 - RECYCLING AND DIVERSION OF CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION DEBRIS 

8.14.010 - Findings. 
A.  Pursuant to the California Waste Management Act of 1989 (Public Resources Code §§ 40000 et seq.), the city is required to prepare, adopt and implement source reduction and recycling plans to reach landfill diversion goals. 
B.  Debris from construction, demolition, and renovation of buildings and structures represents a particularly suitable portion of the volume of waste presently coming from the city for recycling and reuse. 
(Ord. No. 2014-06, § 1, 10-1-2014) 
8.14.020 - Definitions. 
    "Applicant": Any individual, firm, limited liability company, association, partnership, political subdivision, government agency, municipality, industry, public or private corporation, or any other entity whatsoever who applies to the city for the applicable permits to undertake construction, remodeling or demolition of a building or structure within the city. 
    "Approved processing site": A Facility identified in the Waste Management Plan and permitted by the California Department of Resource Recycling and Recovery for the processing of construction and demolition debris. 
    "Approved recycling facility": A facility identified in the waste management plan and listed in the California Department of Resources Recycling and Recovery construction and demolition debris recyclers database. 
    "Authorized C&D debris collector or franchised hauler": The persons or entities authorized by the city through a non-exclusive franchise to collect construction and demolition debris in the city. 
    "Compliance official": The designated staff person authorized and responsible for implementing this chapter and approving waste management plans. 
    "Construction and demolition debris or C&D debris": The discarded materials from the construction, renovation, or demolition of a building or structure, generally considered to be not water soluble and non-hazardous in nature, including but not limited to cardboard, plastic, wood, steel, copper, aluminum, glass, brick, concrete, asphalt material, pipe, gypsum, wallboard, metal scraps and lumber. C&D Debris also includes rocks, soils, tree remains, trees, and other vegetative matter that normally results from land clearing, landscaping and development operations for a construction project. 
    "Covered project": Any project which meets the thresholds set forth in Section 8.14.050. 
    "Diversion": To use material for any purpose other than disposal in a landfill or transformation facility. Methods to divert materials from landfills include reuse, salvage, and recycling. 
    "Recycling": The process of collecting, sorting, cleansing, treating, and reconstituting materials that would otherwise become solid waste, and returning them to the economic mainstream in the form of raw material for new, reused, or reconstituted products which meet the quality standards necessary to be used in the marketplace. 
    "Reuse": The use, in the same or similar form as it was produced, of a material that might otherwise be discarded. 
    "Salvage": The controlled removal of construction or demolition debris from a building construction, renovation, or demolition site for the purpose of recycling, reuse, or storage for later recycling or reuse. 
    "Waste management plan or WMP": A completed waste management plan approved by the city for the purpose of compliance with this chapter, submitted by the applicant for any covered project. 
(Ord. No. 2014-06, § 1, 10-1-2014) 
8.14.030 - Diversion requirement. 
    At least ninety (90) percent) of all concrete and asphalt and seventy-five (75) percent of all other C&D debris from a covered project shall be diverted from disposal. 
(Ord. No. 2014-06, § 1, 10-1-2014) 
8.14.040 - Exemption. 
A.  Application: If the unique characteristics of a covered project will make in infeasible to comply with the diversion requirement, the applicant may apply for a diversion requirement exemption at the time the applicant submits the waste management plan. 
B.  The compliance official shall review the information supplied by the applicant and may meet with the applicant to discuss feasible ways of meeting the diversion requirement. Based on the information supplied by the applicant, the compliance official shall determine whether it is feasible for the applicant to meet the diversion requirement. 
C.  If the compliance official determines that the unique characteristics of the covered project makes it not feasible for the applicant to meet the diversion requirement, the compliance official shall determine the maximum feasible diversion rate for C&D debris generated by the covered project and shall identify the new diversion requirement the applicant shall be required to meet. The Applicant shall then have thirty (30) days to resubmit another WMP, in compliance with the new diversion requirement. 
(Ord. No. 2014-06, § 1, 10-1-2014) 
8.14.050 - Thresholds for covered projects. 
A.  Existing Buildings: The construction or renovation of any existing structure or building within the city, the total costs of which are projected to be equal or greater than fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00), shall obtain approval of a WMP prior to beginning any construction activities. 
B.  Demolition: All demolition projects within the city, the total costs of which are projected to be equal or greater than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), shall obtain approval of a WMP prior to beginning any demolition activities. 
C.  New Structures or Buildings: All new residential, commercial and industrial construction within the city shall submit and obtain approval for a waste management plan prior to beginning any construction activities. 
(Ord. No. 2014-06, § 1, 10-1-2014) 
8.14.060 - Waste management plan. 
A.  Prior to commencing a covered project, an applicant, except when using an authorized C&D debris collector, shall submit a complete waste management plan to the compliance official. The completed WMP shall contain the following: 
1.  Estimated volume or weight of C&D debris to be generated by the covered project and material type; 
2.  Determination if the materials will be sorted on-site or mixed; 
3.  Anticipated volume or weight of material that can be diverted via reuse, recycling or salvage by material type; 
4.  The name and location of the approved processing site and/or approved recycling facility the materials will be hauled to; 
5.  Identification of the persons and/or entities that will be transporting the materials and a description of the method used to transport the materials. 
6.  Estimated volume or weight of C&D Debris that will be disposed at a landfill. 
B.  Approval of the WMP shall be required prior to the issuance of any building or demolition permit. 
C.  Approval of a WMP shall not be required where emergency demolition is required to protect public health or safety. 
D.  The compliance official shall only approve a WMP if it is determined that all of the following conditions have been met: 
1.  The WMP provides all of the information set forth in this section. 
2.  The WMP satisfies the diversion requirement for all C&D debris generated by the covered project or the revised diversion goal identified in accordance with the applicant's approved diversion exemption request. 
(Ord. No. 2014-06, § 1, 10-1-2014) 
8.14.070 - Reporting. 
A.  Except when using an authorized C&D debris collector, following the completion of a covered project, the applicant shall, as a condition precedent to final inspection and to issuance of any certificate of occupancy or final approval of a covered project, submit documentation to the compliance official that evidences compliance with all the requirements of the WMP. The documentation shall consist of a final completed WMP showing: 
1.  Actual volume or weight of waste generated by material type; 
2.  The volume or weight of material that was diverted via reuse, recycling or salvage by material type; 
3.  The name and location of the approved processing site and/or approved recycling facility the materials were hauled to; 
4.  Actual volume or weight of C&D debris disposed of at a landfill. 
B.  To the extent practical C&D debris shall be weighed. When weighing is not practical due to size or other considerations, a volumetric measurement can be used at the discretion of the compliance official. 
(Ord. No. 2014-06, § 1, 10-1-2014) 
8.14.080 - Collection by authorized C&D debris collector in lieu of WMP and reporting. 
A.  An applicant that chooses to utilize an authorized C&D debris franchise hauler to haul and dispose of all C&D debris from a covered project shall be exempt from the WMP requirements of Section 8.14.060 and the reporting requirements of Section 8.14.070. In such cases, the applicant must: 
1.  Submit to the compliance officer, in lieu of a WMP required by Section 8.14.060 and prior to the issuance of a building or demolition permit, a statement identifying the C&D debris franchised hauler who will remove the C&D debris from the covered project. The applicant shall include a copy of the contract evidencing that the C&D franchised hauler has been hired to remove the C&D debris from the covered project. 
2.  Submit to the compliance officer, in lieu of the reporting required by Section 8.14.070 and as a condition precedent to final inspection and to issuance of any certificate of occupancy or final approval of a covered project, certification that all C&D debris from the covered project was removed by the C&D debris franchise hauler. Said certification shall clearly indicate total tons removed by the C&D debris franchise hauler which was diverted via reuse, recycling or salvage and the total tons removed by the C&D debris franchise hauler disposed of at a landfill. 
(Ord. No. 2014-06, § 1, 10-1-2014) 
8.14.090 - Non-exclusive C&D debris collection franchise. 
A.  Requirement. Effective October 31, 2014, no person shall provide the collection of C&D debris in the city unless they first receive a franchise to engage in such activity from the city. The city shall retain the right to provide C&D debris collection services for materials collected from city facilities and parks, and from special events and venues sponsored by the city, provided that such collection shall be performed by city crews or the city's exclusive solid waste, recyclables and green waste franchisee. 
B.  Non-Exclusive Rights. C&D debris collection services in the city are considered non-exclusive, and such service may be provided by any person granted a nonexclusive C&D Debris collection franchise with the city. 
C.  Eligibility. A nonexclusive franchise may be granted by the city council to any person, business, or entity which satisfies the requirements of this section. The city council may impose a limit on the number of franchisees when in the opinion of the city council it is in the public interest to restrict the number of franchisees. 
D.  Application for Non-Exclusive Franchise. All applications to provide C&D debris collection service shall be filed with the director of public works and contain the following information, plus such other information as the director public works may deem necessary: 
1.  Applicant Information: Provide a cover letter that includes the following applicant information. The cover letter shall be signed by the applicant, if the applicant is a sole proprietorship or by an officer of the applicant if the applicant is a legal entity, submitting the application, who is duly authorized to bind the applicant to the terms and conditions of the application and the non-exclusive franchise: 
a.  Company Name. 
(i)  Form of business organization (sole proprietorship, partnership (includes limited or general, corporation, limited liability company), etc. 
(ii)  Contact name, title, phone, fax, and e-mail address. 
(iii)  Business mailing address. 
(iv)  Names of persons doing business under fictitious name (if applicable). 
(v)  Names of partners of partnership or members of LLCs (if applicable). 
(vi)  Names of officers of corporation (if applicable). 
b.  Qualifications Information. 
(i)  Description of Applicant. A detailed statement of the corporate or other business entity organization of the applicant. 
(ii)  Municipal references. 
(iii)  Customer references. 
(iv)  Proof of insurance. 
(v)  History of litigation, regulatory actions, and liquidated damages. 
(vi)  Criminal history. 
(vii)  City of Kingsburg business license. 
c.  Operations Information. 
(i)  Diversion Plan-A plan describing how the applicant will satisfy the diversion requirements of the C&D debris collected. 
(ii)  Estimated number of vehicles. 
(iii)  Estimated number of containers. 
(iv)  Hazardous waste procedures. 
(v)  Billing procedures. 
(vi)  Approved processing site and approved recycling facility. 
d.  Signed Non-Exclusive Franchise Agreement. Two (2) executed copies of the city's standard non-exclusive franchise agreement shall be attached to the application. 
e.  Application Fee. A non-refundable application fee in an amount as set forth in the city's master fee schedule shall accompany the application to pay for the costs of studying, investigating, and otherwise processing the application. 
E.  Application Submittal. The director of public works shall accept new applications annually from March 1 through April 30. 
F.  Application Review. The director of public works shall evaluate any and all applications and provide a written recommendation to the city manager as to the qualifications and capabilities of the applicant. In order to receive a recommendation for approval, the applicant must demonstrate, by experience, reputation, and capacity, that it is qualified to provide the C&D debris collection services, that it has the necessary equipment to transport such material to appropriate places for recycling, processing, and/or disposal, and that it will meet the diversion requirements of this chapter. 
G.  Waive Irregularities. The city council may, in its discretion, waive any minor irregularities contained in an application. 
H.  Franchise Procedure. The procedures set forth in this chapter shall govern the procedure for granting or denying the non-exclusive C&D debris collection franchises. The city council may adopt by resolution such additional procedures not inconsistent with this chapter. 
I.  Non-Exclusive Franchise Agreements, Required Terms. The director of public works shall prepare a standard form of non-exclusive C&D debris collection franchise agreement. Each franchise agreement shall include the following terms: 
1.  Term. The duration of the franchise agreement shall be a term of two (2) years, unless terminated sooner. 
2.  Scope of Agreement. The franchise agreement shall identify the scope of the services to be provided by the franchisee, the processing and disposal locations to be used by franchisee, and other similar matters relating to the collection, transportation, recycling, processing, and disposal services to be provided by the franchise. 
3.  Public Education. The franchise agreement shall provide for the franchisee to prepare and distributed information to its customers describing how to prepare material covered by the franchise for collection, materials that are excluded from collection, and related matters. 
4.  Performance Standards. The franchise agreement shall specify the hours of collection, the manner in which containers will be serviced, franchisee responsibility for vehicle appearance, maintenance, and related matters, and hazardous waste inspection and handling. 
5.  Record Keeping and Reporting. The franchise agreement shall require the franchisee to maintain accurate accounting, statistical, and other records relating to services provided under the franchise, report submittal requirements, and related matters. 
6.  Franchise Fees and Administrative Charges. The franchise agreement shall state the amount of the franchise fee and other charges to be paid by the franchisee as consideration for the contractual right to provide the services covered by the franchise agreement in the city. The franchise fee shall be one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each two-year franchise or portion thereof. 
7.  Indemnity and Insurance Requirements. The franchise agreement shall contain appropriate indemnity and defense provisions, and insurance requirements. 
8.  Default. The franchise agreement shall identify the events that constitute a default thereunder, as well as the remedies available to the non-defaulting party. 
J.  Each franchise agreement shall be submitted to the City Council for approval at the same time a recommendation for approval of a franchisee is made. 
(Ord. No. 2014-06, § 1, 10-1-2014) 
8.14.100 - Enforcement. 
A.  Violation of any provisions of this chapter may be enforced by civil action including an action for injunctive relief. In any civil enforcement action, administrative or judicial, the city shall be entitled to recover its attorneys' fees and costs from an applicant who is determined by the court to have violated this chapter. 
B.  Violation of any provisions of this chapter shall constitute an infraction punishable by a fine in an amount established by resolution of the city council. There shall be a separate infraction for each day on which a violation occurs. Where the violation is the failure to achieve the diversion requirements applicable to the covered project and the C&D debris from the covered project have already been disposed, the violation shall be deemed to have ceased after a period of ten (10) days. The city shall recover costs and attorneys' fees incurred in connection with enforcement of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2014-06, § 1, 10-1-2014) 
8.14.120 - Severability. 
    If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of this ordinance, or any part thereof, is for any reason held to be unconstitutional, invalid, or unenforceable by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of the remaining portions of this ordinance or any part thereof. The city council hereby declares that it would have passed each section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of this ordinance irrespective of the fact that one or more sections, subsections, subdivisions, paragraphs, sentences, clauses, or phrases be declared unconstitutional, invalid, or ineffective. To this end, the provisions of this ordinance are declared severable. 
(Ord. No. 2014-06, § 1, 10-1-2014) 
Chapter 8.16 - NUISANCES 
Sections: 

8.16.010 - Purpose and intent. 
    It is the purpose and intent to exercise the powers of this city to determine, abate and recover costs thereof from all persons found to be maintaining a public nuisance under the general laws and constitutional authority granted by the state of California. 
(Prior code § 58-0001) 
8.16.020 - Definitions. 
    "Nuisance" means anything which is injurious to health, or is indecent or offensive to the senses, or an obstruction to the free use of property, so as to interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property, or lawfully obstructs the free passage or use, in the customary manner, of any navigable lake, or river, bay, stream, canal or basin, or any public park, square, street or highway (Civil Code Section 3479). 
    "Public nuisance" means any nuisance which affects at the same time an entire community or neighborhood, or any considerable number of persons, although the extent of the annoyance or damage inflicted upon individuals may be unequal (Civil Code Section 3480). 
(Prior code § 58-0002) 
8.16.030 - Notice and public hearing. 
A.  When the existence of a public nuisance is suspected, the city council may set the matter for public hearing to determine if one exists, the method of abatement, and imposition of costs as a lien as may be required. 
B.  Written notice of the hearing shall be given to the person(s) deemed responsible no later than ten (10) days prior to said hearing. 
C.  Nothing in the foregoing subsections shall prevent duly authorized officers of the city from exercising emergency powers as provided by law where the public nuisance is found to be immediately dangerous to the general public's health, safety and welfare. 
(Prior code § 58-0003) 
8.16.040 - Hearing procedure. 
A.  At the hearing, city officials and staff shall present evidence as to the existence of the public nuisance, the person(s) responsible therefore, and identify the property involved and the estimated costs of abating same. 
B.  Any person affected may present other or additional evidence bearing upon the above issues. 
C.  The mayor or his/her designee shall preside over the hearing, and courtroom rules of evidence or procedure shall not be required. Hearsay evidence shall be admissible and sufficient to support a finding. The findings and decision need only be supported by substantial evidence with the burden of proof on the city to establish aforesaid issues. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; prior code § 58-0004) 
8.16.050 - Decision. 
    Upon the conclusion of the public hearing, the city council shall, by majority vote, decide: 
A.  Whether a public nuisance exists; 
B.  The person(s) responsible therefore and property upon which it has been maintained; 
C.  The method of abatement deemed necessary under the circumstances and the estimated costs thereof; 
D.  Whether the costs of abatement shall be assessed and collectible and the manner thereof. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; prior code § 58-0005) 
8.16.060 - Order for abatement. 
    The council may order the abatement of any such public nuisance forthwith or within a time certain. Said order may be directed to the city staff or the person(s) found responsible, or both. The council may order that all costs of abatement, including administrative costs, engineering or attorney fees incurred by city in abating the public nuisance be assessed against the person(s) found responsible, and levied and collectible as provided by Government Code Section 38773 and other applicable laws. 
(Prior code § 58-0006) 
8.16.070 - Special assessment and lien. 
    If so ordered by the city council, the costs of abatement as herein defined and determined shall be submitted to the county assessor's office, along with a certified copy of the council order of abatement and a description of the parcel or parcels of land upon which said costs shall be imposed as a lien and special assessment pursuant to Government Code Section 38773.5 and other applicable laws. 
(Prior code § 58-0007) 
8.16.080 - Limitation of actions. 
    No action in law or equity may be filed on the decision or order of the city council as set forth herein unless filed in a court of competent jurisdiction within one hundred eighty (180) days from the date of said decision. 
(Prior code § 58-0009) 
Chapter 8.20 - WEED AND RUBBISH ABATEMENT 
Sections: 

8.20.010 - Purpose and intent. 
    The purpose and intent of this article is to fully exercise the city's constitutional and statutory powers in the abatement of weeds and rubbish, refuse, dirt, debris, or any other matter or material which affects aesthetics or may become a health or fire hazard for the general health, safety and welfare of the public. 
(Ord. 94-01 § 2 (part), 1994: prior code § 42-4000) 
8.20.020 - Definitions. 
    Unless the provision or context otherwise requires, these definitions shall govern the construction of this chapter: 
    "Inspector" means the fire chief or his/her designee who shall be responsible for the enforcement of the provisions herein. 
    "Rubbish" shall include, but not be limited to, accumulations of dirt, paper, vegetative clippings, and other solid waste matters. 
    "Weeds" means all grasses, or noxious weeds as defined in the California Agriculture Code, Section 5004, or plant growth which is not regularly cultivated or maintained for foodstuffs or ornamental purposes which, when dry, create a fire hazard. 
(Ord. 94-01 § 2 (part), 1994) 
8.20.030 - Declaration of nuisance. 
    No person, whether such person is the owner, agent, or person in control of any lot or parcel of land within the city, shall maintain, permit, or allow such premises to be maintained in such a condition where weeds, rubbish, refuse, dirt, debris, or other materials are likely to create conditions which may affect the health, safety, or welfare of the residents in the vicinity of neighboring properties or the aesthetics thereof. The existence of any of the following conditions on any parcel or street, alley, sidewalk, or right-of-way abutting such parcel, is prohibited and is hereby declared a public nuisance: 
A.  Weeds, rubbish, refuse, dirt, debris, or any other matter or material which affects aesthetics or may become a fire hazard; 
B.  Weeds, rubbish, refuse, dirt, debris, or any other matter or material which may provide a breeding place or refuge for rodents, insects, or other vermin; 
C.  Weeds which may produce pollen which is injurious to the health, safety, comfort, or welfare of the residents of the city and weeds which are otherwise subject to abatement by law; and 
D.  Other vegetation or materials that because of lack of maintenance create conditions which may become a fire or health hazard or preclude abatement of the property or affect the aesthetics thereof. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; Ord. 94-01 § 2 (part), 1994: prior code § 42-4002) 
8.20.040 - Inspection required. 
    The inspector shall make a periodic survey of all real property within the corporate limits of the city and determine if any vegetative growth or accumulation or rubbish fits within the definitions herein, and prepare a list of the owners thereof from the last equalized assessment rolls of the county assessor's office. 
(Ord. 94-01 § 2 (part), 1994: prior code § 42-4003) 
8.20.050 - Abatement notices. 
    The inspector shall cause required notice be given by personal service or by mailing such notice by depositing such notice in the United States mail at Kingsburg, California, addressed to the owner of such lot, piece or parcel of land, at the last equalized assessment roll. Such notice shall bear the date of personal service or mailing. Such notices shall be in substantially the following form: 
Notice to destroy weeds and remove rubbish, refuse, dirt, debris and other vegetation and material. 
 Notice is hereby given that, contrary to the provisions of Article 4, Chapter 2, Title 4 of the Kingsburg Municipal Code, weeds, rubbish, refuse, dirt, debris or other vegetation and materials are existing upon the following described property (give address) that constitute a public nuisance and must be abated by the removal of the weeds, rubbish, refuse, dirt, debris, and/or other vegetation or materials. Unless such removal is made within fourteen (14) days after the date of this notice, the same shall be removed by the City and the cost of the removal shall be assessed upon the land from which such weeds, rubbish, refuse, dirt, debris, and other vegetation and materials were removed, and such cost so assessed will constitute a lien upon such land until paid. 
All persons having any objections to the proposed removal may appeal to the City Manager, in writing, within seven days after the date of this notice, by delivery of this notice of appeal to the City Clerk at Kingsburg City Hall, 1401 Draper Street, Kingsburg, California. Failure to file such a notification will result in the City proceeding with the work required at your expense in a timely fashion without further notice or hearing. 
Dated this_______ day of ________. 
Fire Chief 
Kingsburg, California 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; Ord. 94-01 § 2 (part), 1994: prior code § 42-4004) 
8.20.060 - Appeals. 
    The owner of the property affected by the abatement notice or notice of costs of abatement may appeal to the city manager the determination of the fire chief. Any such appeal must be filed with the city clerk within seven days from the mailing of the notice appealed. Such appeals must be in writing and shall state the objections and the name, address and the telephone number of the person filing the appeal. The hearing on such objections shall be held by the city manager or his/her designee. Notice of such hearing shall be given at least seven days before such hearing by a written notice served personally upon or sent by regular mail, postage prepaid, to the party appealing. The city manager or his/her designee has the authority to conduct the hearing; to hear and review oral and written evidence; and to approve, modify, or eliminate the work required to be done or to approve, modify or disallow any of the costs of abatement, all based on evidence presented. The written notice of determination of the city manager or his/her designee shall be mailed to the party appealing by the city clerk within seven days of the conclusion of the hearing. Decisions of the city manager or his/her designee may be appealed to the city council. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; Ord. 94-01 § 2 (part), 1994: prior code § 42-4005) 
8.20.070 - Abatement by city. 
A.  Where No Appeal. Where no appeal has been timely made to the city manager, and the weeds, rubbish, refuse, dirt, debris, or other vegetation or materials have not been removed from the premises in question, or from the street, alley, sidewalk, or right-of-way abutting such premises, as directed by the notice, within such fourteen (14) day period, the fire chief shall thereupon cause the same to be removed, by city crews or private contractor, who may enter upon private property for the purpose of so doing. 
B.  Where Appeal Has Been Made. Where an appeal has been made to the city manager, and the city manager or his/her designee, or the city council has finally determined that removal or abatement shall be required, and such weeds, rubbish, refuse, dirt, debris, or other vegetation or materials have not been removed from the premises in question or from the street, alley, sidewalk, or right-of-way abutting such premises as set forth in the final notice of determination, the fire chief shall thereupon cause the same to be removed by city crews or private contractor who may enter upon private property for the purpose of so doing. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; Ord. 94-01 § 2 (part), 1994: prior code § 42-4006) 
8.20.080 - Costs of abatement-Reports-Posting-Notice of costs of abatement. 
    The fire chief shall keep an account of the costs of abatement or suppression, including administrative costs, on each separate parcel in question or from the street, alley, sidewalk, or right-of-way abutting such premises, where work is done by him/her or by contract as provided in this article. The fire chief shall submit to the council for confirmation an itemized written report showing such costs. A copy of the report shall be made available at least three days prior to its submission to the council. 
    In addition, a notice of costs of abatement showing the total costs of abatement of the nuisance from each property (or abutting street, alley, sidewalk or right-of-way) shall be mailed by depositing such notice in the United States mail, at Kingsburg, California, addressed to the owner of such lot, piece or parcel of land, at the last equalized assessment roll. Such notice shall state that the costs will be assessed against the affected parcel and made a lien on said parcel to be levied and collected as provided by law unless paid before (insert date). Appeals to such assessment may be made to the city manager by mailing a written notice to the city clerk within ten (10) days from the date of this notice. If the costs are not paid and no objections are timely filed, the property will be assessed without any hearing or further notice for the amount shown in said schedule of costs. Appeals of the costs of assessments shall be processed in accordance with Section 8.20.050. At the time fixed for receiving the report or upon completion of appeal, whichever applies, the council shall confirm the report by resolution. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; Ord. 94-01 § 2 (part), 1994: prior code § 42-4007) 
8.20.090 - Transmitting to taxing officials. 
    The city clerk shall cause a certified copy of the resolution referred to in the preceding section to be transmitted to the county tax assessor's office and the county auditor's office for entry on the tax rolls. 
(Ord. 94-01 § 2 (part), 1994: prior code § 42-4008) 
Chapter 8.22 - ABANDONED RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY REGISTRATION 
Sections: 

8.22.010 - Title. 
    This chapter shall be known as the "Abandoned Residential Property Registration Ordinance and may be so cited. 
(Ord. No. 2008-08, § 1, 2008) 
8.22.020 - Purpose and intent. 
    It is the purpose and intent of this chapter to establish an abandoned residential property registration program as a mechanism to protect residential neighborhoods within the city limits of the City of Kingsburg from becoming blighted through the lack of adequate maintenance and security of abandoned properties. 
(Ord. No. 2008-08, § 1, 2008) 
8.22.030 - Definitions. 
    The terms as used in this chapter or in any resolution or standard adopted by the Kingsburg City Council pursuant to this chapter shall have the following meanings: 
    "Abandoned" means a property that is vacant and is under a current notice of default, notice of trustee's sale, pending tax assessor's lien sale or that has been the subject of a foreclosure sale where the title to the property was retained by the beneficiary of a deed of trust involved in the foreclosure, or that is transferred to the beneficiary of the deed of trust under a deed in lieu of foreclosure or sale. 
    ""Accessible property" means a property that is accessible through a compromised or breached gate, fence, wall or other similar feature. 
    "Accessible structure" means a structure or building that is unsecured or breached in such a way as to allow access to the interior space by unauthorized persons. 
    "Beneficiary" means a lender under a note secured by a deed of trust. 
    "Buyer" means any person, partnership, limited liability company, association, corporation, trust or other entity, or fiduciary who agrees to transfer anything of value in consideration of receiving title to the property. 
    "City" means the City of Kingsburg. 
    "Dangerous building" means any building or structure that would constitute a "dangerous building" as defined in section 302 of the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings or as defined by the International Conference of Building Officials and adopted by the city in force. 
    "Days" means consecutive calendar days. 
    "Deed of trust" means an instrument by which title to real estate is transferred to a third-party trustee as security for a real estate loan. This definition applies to any and all subsequent deeds of trust, including, without limitations, second deeds of trust. 
    "Deed in lieu of foreclosure or sale" means a recorded document that transfers title to property from the trustor of a deed of trust to the beneficiary of a deed of trust or to a buyer upon consent of the beneficiary of the deed of trust. 
    "Default" means the failure to fulfill a contractual obligation, whether monetary or otherwise. 
    "Distressed" means a property that is under a current notice of default, or notice of trustee's sale, or pending tax assessor's lien sale or has been foreclosed upon by the trustee and title to the property conveyed to the beneficiary or a buyer by a trustee's sale or title to the property is conveyed to the beneficiary or a buyer by way of a deed in lieu of foreclosure or sales agreement. 
    "Evidence of vacancy" means any condition that on its own, or combined with other conditions, would lead a reasonable person to believe that the property is vacant. Such conditions include, without limitation, overgrown or dead vegetation, accumulation of newspapers, circulars, flyers or mail, past-due utility notices or disconnected utilities, accumulation of trash, junk or debris, the absence of window coverings such as curtains, blinds or shutters, the absence of furnishings or personal items consistent with residential habitation, lack of maintenance of swimming pool and statements by neighbors, passersby, delivery agents, or government employees that the property is vacant. 
    "Foreclosure" means the process by which a property, subject to a deed of trust, is sold at auction to satisfy the debt if the trustor secured by the deed of trust. 
    "Local" means within ten (10) road-driving miles distance of a property. 
    "Neighborhood standard" means those conditions that are present on a simple majority of properties within a three hundred (300) foot radius of an individual property. A property that is the subject of a neighborhood standard comparison, or any other abandoned property within the three hundred (300) foot radius, shall not be counted toward the simple majority. 
    "Notice of default" means a recorded notice that a default has occurred under a deed of trust and that the beneficiary intends to proceed with a trustee's sale if the default is not cured as required by the provisions of the notice of default. 
    "Out-of-area" means in excess of ten (10) road-driving miles distance of the property. 
    "Owner" means any person, partnership, limited liability company, association, corporation, or other entity, or fiduciary having legal or equitable title or any interest in any property. 
    "Owner of record" means the owner having record title to the property at any given point in time as identified in the office of the Fresno County Recorder's Office. 
    "Property" means any unimproved or improved residential real property or portion thereof, situated in the city and includes the buildings or structures located on the property regardless of condition. 
    "Residential Building" means any building or structure or portion thereof, designed or permitted to be used for residential dwelling purposes, whether or not legally permitted or zoned for such use. 
    "Securing" means such measures as may be directed by the city's city building official or his or her designee that assist in rendering a property inaccessible to unauthorized persons including, but not limited to, the repairing of fences and walls, chaining or pad locking of gates, and the repair or boarding of door, window or other openings. Boarding shall be completed to a minimum of the current Housing and Urban Development (HUD) securing standards at the time the boarding is completed. 
    "Trustee" means the person, partnership, limited liability company, association, corporation, or other entity or fiduciary named as trustee under a deed of trust. 
    "Trustor" means the person, partnership, limited liability company, association, corporation or other entity or fiduciary named as the trustor under a deed of trust. 
    "Vacant" means a Residential Building that is not legally occupied. 
(Ord. No. 2008-08, § 1, 2008) 
8.22.040 - Recordation of transfer of loan, deed of trust, assignment of rents. 
    Within ten (10) days after transfer, assignment or conveyance of a loan secured by a deed of trust recorded against title to property, or the substitution of a new or replacement trustee, the new beneficiary or trustee shall record with the Fresno County Recorder's Office an assignment of deed of trust or substitution of trustee or similar document which identifies the name of the new beneficiary or trustee and the mailing address and contact telephone and facsimile number of the new beneficiary or trustee. 
(Ord. No. 2008-08, § 1, 2008) 
8.22.050 - Registration. 
(A)  A beneficiary and trustee identified in a deed of trust recorded against title to property located in the city or its designee shall perform an inspection of the property that is after default by the trustor and prior to recording a notice of default with the Fresno County Recorder's Office. If the property is found to be vacant or shows evidence of vacancy, it is, hereby deemed abandoned and the beneficiary and trustee shall, within ten (10) days after the inspection, register the property with the city's city building official or his or her designee on forms provided by the city. 
(B)  If the property is occupied but remains in default, it shall be inspected by the beneficiary and trustee monthly until: 
1.  The trustor cures the default, or 
2.  The property is found to be vacant or shows evidence of vacancy, at which time it shall be deemed abandoned and the beneficiary and trustee shall, within ten (10) days after the inspection, register the property with the city's city building official, or his/her designee, on forms provided by the city. 
(C)  The registration required by subsections (A) or (B) above shall contain the name of the beneficiary and trustee, the mailing address of the beneficiary and trustee, a specific contact person with telephone and facsimile numbers for that specific contact person, and in the case of a out-of-area beneficiary and trustee, the local property management company responsible for the security, maintenance, and marketing of the property. 
(D)  An annual registration fee shall accompany the registration form. The fee and registration shall be valid for the remaining portion of the calendar year in which the registration was provided. Subsequent registrations and fees are due January 1 of each year and must be received no later than January 15 of the year due. 
(E)  A property shall remain subject to the annual registration requirement, payment of fees and the security and maintenance standards of this chapter so long as the property remains vacant. 
(F)  Any beneficiary and trustee that has registered a property under this section must report any change of information contained in the registration to the city's city building official or his/her designee within ten (10) days after the change. 
(G)  Any beneficiary or trustee who fails to comply with any of the requirements of this section shall be subject to enforcement under chapter 1.16 of title 2 of this Code and pursuant to any other federal, state or local laws, regulation or ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2008-08, § 1, 2008) 
8.22.060 - Maintenance requirements. 
    In addition to any other applicable provisions and requirements of this Code, properties subject to registration under this chapter shall be maintained by the beneficiary and trustee as follows: 
(A)  In comparison to the neighborhood standard, the property shall be kept free of weeds; dry brush; dead vegetation; trash; junk; debris; building materials; any accumulation of newspapers, circulars, flyers, notices, except those required by federal, state or local law; discarded personal items, including but not limited to, furniture, clothing, large and small appliances or any other items that give the appearance that the property is abandoned or vacant. 
(B)  All buildings, structures, fences and other improvements located on the property shall be maintained free of graffiti, tagging, or similar markings by removal or painting over with an exterior-grade paint that matches the color of the exterior of the building, structure, fence or improvement. 
(C)  All areas located on the property visible from the public right-of-way shall be landscaped and maintained to the neighborhood standard at the time registration is required. 
1.  Landscape includes, without limitation, grass, ground covers, bushes, shrubs, hedges or similar plantings, decorative rock or bark. or artificial turf or sod designed specifically for residential installation. 
2.  Landscape does not include weeds, broken concrete, asphalt, decomposed granite, plastic sheeting, mulch, indoor-outdoor carpet, or any similar material. 
3.  Maintenance includes, without limitation, regular watering, irrigation, cutting, pruning and mowing of required landscape, and removal of all trimmings. 
(D)  Pools and spas shall either be kept in working order so the water remains clear and free of pollutants, debris, and any kind of larvae that would cause a health danger to the surrounding vicinity, or drained and kept dry. In every case, properties with pools or spas must comply with the minimum security fencing requirements of the state. 
(E)  Adherence to this section does not relieve the beneficiary and trustee of any obligations set forth in any covenants, conditions, and restrictions and/or home owners' association rules and regulations which may apply to the property. 
(Ord. No. 2008-08, § 1, 2008) 
8.22.070 - Security requirements. 
    In addition to any other applicable provisions and requirements of this Code, properties subject to registration under this chapter shall be secured by the beneficiary and trustee as follows: 
(A)  The property shall be maintained in a secure manner so that it is not accessible to unauthorized persons. Secure manner includes, without limitation, the closure and locking of all windows, doors, gates, and any other opening of such size that may allow a child access to the interior of the property or any building or structure on the property. In the case of broken windows or doors, securing means the replacement or boarding of the window or door. 
(B)  If the property is owned by a corporation, partnership, limited liability company, association, or other entity or a fiduciary or an out-of-area beneficiary, trustee or owner: 
1.  A local property management company shall be retained by said owner to perform the monthly inspections and to maintain and secure the property as required by this chapter. The property management company and specific contact person therefore shall be specifically identified on the registration form for the property. 
2.  The property shall be posted with the name and twenty-four-hour contact telephone and facsimile number of the local property management company. The posting shall be no less than eighteen (18) inches by twenty-four (24) inches and shall be of a font that is legible from a distance of fifty (50) feet from the street fronting the property and shall contain, along with the twenty-four-hour contact name and numbers, the words "THIS PROPERTY MANAGED BY" and "TO REPORT PROBLEMS OR CONCERNS CALL." The posting shall be placed on the interior of a window facing the street fronting the property so that it is visible from the street, or secured to the exterior of a building or structure facing the street fronting the property so that it is visible from the street. If no such area exists, the posting shall be attached to a stake of sufficient size to support the posting in a location in the front of the property that is visible from the street but not readily accessible to vandals. The exterior posting must be constructed of and printed with weather resistant materials. 
3.  The local property management company shall inspect the property no less than on a monthly basis to determine if the property is in compliance with the requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2008-08, § 1, 2008) 
8.22.080 - Additional authority. 
    In addition to the enforcement remedies established by other applicable provisions or requirements of this Code, the [city's] city building official, or his/her designee, and the fire chief shall have the authority to require the beneficiary, trustee, owner and property management company to implement additional maintenance and/or security measures including, but not limited to, securing any and all doors, windows or other openings, installing security lighting, increasing on-site inspection frequency, employment of an on-site security guard, or other measures as may be reasonably required to reduce the decline of the property. 
(Ord. No. 2008-08, § 1, 2008) 
8.22.090 - Maintenance and security by city. 
(A)  If any person or entity subject to the provisions of this chapter fails to maintain and secure property as required by this chapter within ten (10) days after the date of issuance of a notice of violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, the city shall have the right to enter the property to maintain and secure the property by city personnel or private contractor, and entry upon the property is expressly authorized for such purposes. The city and/or its contractor shall not be held liable to any person or entity for any purpose or any reason as a result of exercise of its right to enter, maintain and secure a property unless damage to the property is caused by the gross negligence or willful misconduct of the city and/or its contractor. Upon completion of the maintenance and/or security the property, the city shall cause a statement of the costs and expenses to be prepared for submission to the city council. The city shall set a time and place for the city council to receive and consider the statement of costs and expenses and shall serve on the owner of the property and any other applicable person or entity subject to the provisions of this chapter, a copy of the statement of costs and expense and a notice of the time and place at which the city council will receive and consider the statement of costs and expenses. The statement of costs and expenses and the notice of date and time of city council consideration thereof shall be served in the same manner as provided in [sub]section[s] 17.92.046(c)(1) [and] (2) of this Code. The city council shall conduct a hearing and accept oral and written evidence regarding the statement of costs and expenses. The city council may sustain, modify or overrule the statement of costs and expenses. The decision of the city council is the final decision regarding the statement of costs and expenses. 
(B)  If the owner of the property and/or any person or entity subject to the provisions of this chapter fails to pay the total amount of costs and expenses approved by the city council within fifteen (15) days after the date of such approval, the city shall file in the office of the Fresno County Recorder a notice of lien of substantially the following form: 
NOTICE OF LIEN 
"Pursuant to the authority vested by the City of Kingsburg Municipal Code, and on or about ________, the Kingsburg City Council did assess costs and expenses in the amount of $________ upon that certain real property commonly known as ___________, Kingsburg, California, and more particularly described in Exhibit "A", which is attached hereto and made a part hereof ("Real Property"), and the same has not been paid. The City of Kingsburg hereby claims a lien on the Real Property for said costs and expenses in the amount of $________. This amount shall be a lien upon the Real Property until the sum has been paid in full and discharged of record." 
    Immediately upon the recording of the notice of lien, the total amount of the costs and expenses assessed shall constitute a lien on the real property. Such lien shall, for all purposes, be upon parity with the lien of state and local taxes. 
(C)  The notice of lien, after recording, shall be delivered to the Tax Assessor of Fresno or Tulare County, as applicable, who shall enter the amount on the county assessment book opposite the description of the real property, and the amount, shall be collected together with all other taxes levied thereon against the real property. Thereafter, the amount set forth in the notice of lien shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary county taxes are collected and shall be subject to the same penalties and interest and to the same procedure under foreclosure and sale in case of delinquency as provided for ordinary county taxes. All laws applicable to the levy, collection and enforcement of county taxes are made applicable to the levy, collection and enforcement of the costs and expenses. 
(Ord. No. 2008-08, § 1, 2008) 
8.22.100 - Fees. 
    The fee for registering an abandoned residential property shall be set by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2008-08, § 1, 2008) 
8.22.110 - Enforcement. 
    Every violation of this chapter is declared to be a nuisance and may be enforced pursuant to the applicable provisions of this Code and applicable state and federal law. Violations of this chapter shall be treated as a strict liability offense regardless of intent. 
(Ord. No. 2008-08, § 1, 2008) 
Chapter 8.24 - STORMWATER QUALITY MANAGEMENT 
Sections: 

8.24.010 - Title. 
    This chapter shall be known as the "Stormwater Quality Management Ordinance" of the City of Kingsburg and may be so cited. 
(Ord. No. 2009-06, § 1, 6-3-09) 
8.24.020 - Purpose and intent. 
    The purpose and intent of this chapter is to ensure the health, safety, and general welfare of citizens of Kingsburg, and protect and enhance the water quality of watercourses and water bodies in a manner pursuant to and consistent with the Federal Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.) by reducing pollutants in Kingsburg stormwater discharges to the maximum extent practicable and by effectively prohibiting non-stormwater discharges to the Kingsburg storm drain system. 
(Ord. No. 2009-06, § 1, 6-3-09) 
8.24.030 - Definitions. 
    The terms used in this Chapter shall have the following meanings: 
    Agricultural lands is defined as a parcel of land of five or more acres used primarily for agricultural purposes, including, without limitation, the raising of tree, vine, field, forage, or other plant life, crops of all kinds, or the maintenance, breeding, and raising of animals. 
    Authorized enforcement agent is the public works director of the City of Kingsburg and any employee designated by the public works director to act as the authorized enforcement agent. 
    Best management practices is defined as any activities, practices, and procedures to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly to the Kingsburg municipal storm drain system and waters of the United States. Best management practices include, without limitation: treatment facilities to remove pollutants from stormwater; operating and maintenance procedures; facility management practices to control runoff, spillage or leaks of non-stormwater, waste disposal, drainage from materials storage; and the prohibition of specific activities, practices, and procedures. 
    Clean Water Act is the federal Water Pollution Control Act enacted by Public Law 92-500 as amended by Public Laws 95-217, 95-576, 96-483, and 97-117 (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.) 
    Green waste is grass, leaves, shrub, brush and tree trimmings and general organic debris from yard maintenance this is of plant origin. 
    Hazardous materials is defined as any material, including, without limitation, any substance, waste, or combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health, safety, property, or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed. 
    Illicit connections are defined as any of the following: 
1.  Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which allows an illicit discharge to enter the storm drain system including, without limitation, any conveyances which allow sewage, process wastewater, or wash water to enter the storm drain system and any connections to the storm drain system from indoor drains and sinks, regardless of whether said drain or connection had been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by any government agency; or 
2.  Any drain or conveyance from a commercial or industrial land use to the storm drain system which has not been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by the city and any other applicable governmental agency. 
    Illicit discharge is defined as any direct or indirect non-stormwater discharge into the storm drain system, except as exempted in section 8.24.090 of this chapter. 
    Industrial National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) stormwater discharge permits are defined as general, group, and individual stormwater discharge permits which regulate facilities, defined in federal NPDES regulations, as engaging in industrial activity pursuant to the Clean Water Act. The California Regional Water Quality Control Board, Central Valley Region (hereinafter, regional board) and the State Water Resources Control Board have adopted general stormwater discharge permits, including but not limited to the general construction activity and general industrial activity permits. 
    City NPDES stormwater discharge permit is defined as the city's NPDES stormwater discharge permit issued pursuant to the Clean Water Act by the regional board to the city to regulate discharge from the city's storm drain system to waters of the U.S. (Order No. __________, NPDES Permit No. ___________, and any amendments, revisions, or reissuance thereof.) 
    Non-stormwater discharge is defined as any discharge to the city's storm drain system that is not composed entirely of stormwater. 
    Permit area is defined as the area subject to the terms and conditions of the city's NPDES stormwater discharge permit; said area being the planned urban local drainage areas specified within the city's adopted storm drainage master plan, as it may be amended from time to time. 
    Person is defined as any natural person, firm, association, club, organization, corporation, partnership, limited liability company, business trust, company, government agency, or other entity which is recognized by law. 
    Pollutant is defined as anything which causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants include, without limitation: paints, varnishes, and solvents; oil and other automotive fluids; non-hazardous solid wastes and yard wastes; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; hazardous materials, substances and wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from constructing or demolishing a building or structure (including, without limitation, sediments, slurries, and concrete rinsates); and noxious or offensive matter of any kind. 
    Pollution is defined as the man-made or man-induced alteration of the quality of waters by pollutants to a degree which unreasonably affects, or has the potential to unreasonably affect, either the waters for beneficial uses or the facilities which serve these beneficial uses. 
    Porter-Cologne Act means the California Porter-Cologne Water Quality Control Act and as amended. (California Water Code § 13000 et seq.) 
    Premises is defined as any building, structure, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking areas. 
    Storm drain system is defined as all publicly-owned facilities operated by the city [in] which stormwater is collected and/or conveyed, including, without limitation, any roads with drainage systems, city streets, gutters, curbs, inlets, piped storm drains, pumping facilities, retention and detention basins, natural and man-made or altered drainage channels, reservoirs, and other drainage structures which are within the permit area and are not part of a publicly owned treatment works as defined at 40 Code of Federal Regulations section 122.2. 
    Stormwater is defined as any surface flow, runoff, and drainage associated with rain storm events or snow melt. 
(Ord. No. 2009-06, § 1, 6-3-09) 
8.24.040 - Applicability. 
    This chapter shall apply to all stormwater generated on any developed and undeveloped urban lands lying within the city and within the permit area as amended or revised from time to time. This chapter shall not apply to stormwater generated on agricultural lands. 
(Ord. No. 2009-06, § 1, 6-3-09) 
8.24.050 - Administration. 
    Responsibility for administration. The city's public works director shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this chapter. Any powers granted or duties imposed upon the city's public works director may be delegated in writing by the city's public works director to persons or entities acting in the interest of or in the employ of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2009-06, § 1, 6-3-09) 
8.24.060 - Severability. 
    The provisions of this chapter are hereby declared to be severable. If any provisions, clause, sentence, or paragraph of this chapter or the application thereof to any person or circumstance shall be held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the other provisions or application of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2009-06, § 1, 6-3-09) 
8.24.070 - Regulatory consistency. 
    This chapter shall be construed to assure consistency with the requirements of the Federal Clean Water Act and California Porter-Cologne Act and Acts which amend or supplement either Act, applicable implementing regulations thereto and the City NPDES Permit No. ___________ and any amendments, revisions or reissuance thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2009-06, § 1, 6-3-09) 
8.24.080 - Ultimate responsibility of discharge. 
    The standards set forth in this chapter and promulgated pursuant to this chapter are minimum standards. This chapter does not intend or imply that compliance by any person will ensure that there will be no contamination, pollution, or unauthorized discharge of pollutants into waters of the U.S. caused by said person. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the city, or any agent or employee of the city for any damages that result from any discharger's reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2009-06, § 1, 6-3-09) 
8.24.090 - Prohibition of illicit discharge. 
    The commencement, conduct or continuance of any illicit discharge into the storm drain system is prohibited except as described below. 
(a)  Discharges from the following activities will not be considered a source of pollutants into the storm drain system and to waters of the U.S. when properly managed to ensure that potential pollutants are not present, and therefore they shall not be considered illicit discharges subject to this prohibition, unless specifically determined to cause a violation of the provisions of the Porter-Cologne Act, Clean Water Act, or this chapter: water line flushing; uncontaminated pumped groundwater and other discharges from potable water sources; landscape irrigation and lawn watering; irrigation water, stormwater runoff and return flows from agricultural lands; diverted stream flows; rising groundwater; groundwater infiltration to the storm drain system; foundation and footing drains; water from crawl space pumps; air conditioning condensation; springs; individual residential and occasional non-commercial car washing; flows from riparian habitats and wetlands; dechlorinated swimming pool discharges; municipal and construction-related street wash waters; and flows from fire fighting. 
(b)  The prohibition shall not apply to any non-stormwater discharge permitted or approved under any NPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge order issued to the discharger and administered by the State of California under the authority of the Federal Environmental Protection Agency, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the NPDES permit, waiver, or order and all other applicable laws, ordinances and regulations and provided that written approval has been granted by the city for any discharge in the storm drain system. 
(c)  With written concurrence of the regional board, the city may, in writing, exempt other non-stormwater discharges which are not a source of pollutants to the storm drain system or waters of the U.S. 
(Ord. No. 2009-06, § 1, 6-3-09) 
8.24.100 - Prohibition of illicit connections. 
(a)  The construction, installation, use, maintenance, repair or continued existence, after the effective date of this chapter of any illicit connections to the storm drain system is prohibited. 
(b)  This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit connections made prior to the effective date of this chapter, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection. 
(Ord. No. 2009-06, § 1, 6-3-09) 
8.24.110 - Waste disposal prohibitions. 
    No person shall throw, deposit, leave, maintain, keep, or permit to be thrown, deposited, left or maintained, in or upon any public or private property, driveway, parking area, street, alley, sidewalk, component of the storm drain system, or waters of the U.S., any refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, green waste or other discarded or abandoned objects, articles, and accumulations, so that the same may cause or contribute to pollution. Green waste and wastes deposited in streets immediately prior to and for the purposes of authorized collection are exempted from this prohibition. 
(Ord. No. 2009-06, § 1, 6-3-09) 
8.24.120 - Discharge in violation of the city's NPDES storm water discharge permit. 
    Any discharge that could result in or contribute to a violation of the city's NPDES stormwater discharge permit or any amendment or revision thereto or reissuance, is a violation of this chapter and is prohibited. Person(s) causing or responsible for such discharge are liable for any damages or violations caused thereby, and shall defend, indemnify, and hold harmless the city and its officials, officers, employees, representatives and agents from any administrative or judicial enforcement action relating to such discharge and any and all claims, causes of action, damages, enforcement actions, consent decrees and any expenses, costs and attorney fees in any way related thereto. 
(Ord. No. 2009-06, § 1, 6-3-09) 
8.24.130 - Discharges in violation of industrial NPDES storm water discharge permit. 
    Any person subject to any industrial NPDES stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit. Proof of compliance with said NPDES stormwater discharge permit may be required in a form acceptable to the city prior to or as a condition of the approval of any subdivision map, site plan, building permit, development or improvement plan or other land use entitlement; inspection of the facility subject to the NPDES stormwater discharge permit; during any enforcement proceeding or action; or for any other reason or cause. 
(Ord. No. 2009-06, § 1, 6-3-09) 
8.24.140 - Requirement to prevent, control, and reduce storm water pollutants. 
(a)  The city may adopt requirements identifying appropriate best management practices for any activity, operation, or facility which may cause or contribute to pollution or contamination of stormwater, the storm drain system, or waters of the U.S. Every person undertaking such activity or operation, or owning or operating such facility shall comply with such requirements. 
(b)  The city may adopt requirements identifying appropriate best management practices to control the volume, rate, and potential pollutant load of stormwater runoff from new development and redevelopment projects as may be appropriate to minimize or eliminate the generation, transport and discharge of pollutants. The city shall incorporate such requirements in any land use entitlement and construction or building-related permit to be issued relative to such new development or redevelopment. The owner and developer shall comply with the terms, provisions, and conditions of such land use entitlements and building-related permits as required in this chapter. 
(c)  Notwithstanding the presence or absence of requirements promulgated pursuant to subsections (a) and (b) of this section 8.24.140, any person engaged in activities or operations, or owning facilities or property which will or may discharge in pollutants into storm water, the storm drain system, or waters of the U.S. shall implement best management practices to the extent they are technologically and economically achievable as determined by the city to prevent and reduce such pollutants. 
(Ord. No. 2009-06, § 1, 6-3-09) 
8.24.150 - Requirements to eliminate illicit discharge. 
    The authorized enforcement agent may require, by written notice, that a person responsible for an illicit discharge immediately, or by a specified date, discontinue the illicit discharge and, if necessary, take any measures as determined by the city to eliminate the source of the illicit discharge and prevent the occurrences of future illicit discharges. 
(Ord. No. 2009-06, § 1, 6-3-09) 
8.24.160 - Requirement to eliminate or secure approval for illicit connections. 
(a)  The authorized enforcement agent may require, by written notice, that a person responsible for an illicit connection to the storm drain system comply with the requirements of this chapter to eliminate or secure approval for the connection by a specified date, regardless of whether or not the connection or discharges had been established or approved prior to the effective date of this chapter. 
(b)  If, subsequent to eliminating a connection found to be in violation of this chapter, the person responsible for an illicit connection can demonstrate that an illicit discharge will no longer occur, said person may request city approval to reconnect. The reconnection or reinstallation of the connection shall be such person's sole cost and expense and shall comply with the provisions of this chapter and any applicable federal or state law, rule, regulation, ordinance or permit. 
(Ord. No. 2009-06, § 1, 6-3-09) 
8.24.170 - Requirement to remediate. 
    Whenever an authorized enforcement agent finds that a discharge of pollutants is taking place or has occurred which will result in or has resulted in pollution of stormwater, the storm drain system, or waters of the U.S., the city may require, by written notice to the Person responsible for the discharge that the pollution be remediated and the affected property restored within a specified time and at such person's sole cost and expense. 
(Ord. No. 2009-06, § 1, 6-3-09) 
8.24.180 - Requirement to monitor and analyze. 
    The authorized enforcement agent may require, by written notice, that any person engaged in any activity and/or owning or operating any facility which may cause or contribute to stormwater pollution, illicit discharges, and/or non-stormwater discharges to the storm drain system or waters of the U.S., undertake at said person's sole costs and expense such monitoring and analyses and to furnish such reports to the city as the city deems necessary to determine compliance with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2009-06, § 1, 6-3-09) 
8.24.190 - Notification of spills. 
    Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person engaged in any activity and/or owning or operating any facility or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a facility or operation has information of any known or suspected release of materials which are resulting or may result in illicit discharges or pollutants discharging into stormwater, the storm drain system, or waters of the U.S., said person shall, at its sole cost and expense, take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release. In the event of a release of a hazardous material, said person shall immediately notify emergency response officials of the occurrence via emergency dispatch services (911). In the event of a release of non-hazardous materials, said person shall notify the city in person or by telephone or facsimile no later than 5:00 p.m. of the day of the release. If the release occurs after 5:00 p.m. Or during a weekend or state holiday, such notice shall be given by 9:00 a.m. the next business day. Notifications in person or by telephone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to the city within three business days after the telephone notice. 
(Ord. No. 2009-06, § 1, 6-3-09) 
8.24.200 - Authority to inspect. 
    Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any provision of this chapter, or whenever an authorized enforcement agent has cause to believe that there exists, or potentially exists, in or upon any premises any condition which constitutes a violation of this chapter, the authorized enforcement agent may enter such premises at any time to inspect the same and to inspect and copy records related to stormwater compliance and compliance with the provisions of this chapter. In the event the owner or occupant refuses entry after a request to enter and inspect has been made, the city is hereby empowered to seek assistance from any court of competent jurisdiction to obtain such entry. 
(Ord. No. 2009-06, § 1, 6-3-09) 
8.24.210 - Authority to sample, establish sampling devices, and test. 
    During any inspection of a premises, the authorized enforcement agent may take any samples deemed necessary to aid in the pursuit of the inquiry or to record premises activities. Subject to the access provisions of section 8.24.200, the city may install on any property or premises such devices as the city deems necessary to conduct sampling, metering and monitoring and may perform any tests to determine the source of a discharge. 
(Ord. No. 2009-06, § 1, 6-3-09) 
8.24.220 - Notice of violation. 
(a)  The authorized enforcement agent may enforce the provisions of this chapter in the same manner as any other city ordinance is enforced. 
(b)  Prior to any other enforcement action, the city may order compliance with this chapter by written notice of violation to the person responsible for the violation. Such notice may require without limitation: 
1)  The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting; 
2)  The elimination of illicit connections or discharges; 
3)  That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall immediately cease and desist; 
4)  The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property; and 
5)  The implementation of source control or treatment best management practices. 
(Ord. No. 2009-06, § 1, 6-3-09) 
Chapter 8.26 - SMALL RESIDENTIAL ROOFTOP SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2015-09, § 1, adopted July 1, 2015, set out provisions intended for use as §§ 8.14.010-8.14.060. For purposes of clarity, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as §§ 8.26.010-8.26.060. 

8.26.010 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to establish an expedited, streamlined permitting process that complies with the California Solar Rights Act and California Assembly Bill 2188 to achieve timely and cost-effective installations of small residential rooftop solar energy systems. The provisions of this chapter encourage the use of residential solar systems by removing unreasonable barriers, minimizing costs to property owners and the city and expanding the ability of residential property owners to install solar energy systems. This chapter allows the city to achieve these goals while protecting the public health and safety of the citizens of Kingsburg. 
(Ord. No. 2015-09, § 1, 7-1-2015) 
8.26.020 - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter: 
    "Association" means a nonprofit corporation or unincorporated association created for the purpose of managing a common interest development. 
    "Common interest development" means a community apartment project, condominium project, planned development or stock cooperative. 
    "Electronic submittal" means a submission to the city utilizing Email, the Internet or facsimile. 
    "Reasonable restrictions" on a solar energy system are those restrictions that do not significantly increase the cost of the system or significantly decrease its efficiency or specified performance or that allow for an alternative system of comparable cost, efficiency, and energy conservation benefits. 
    "Restrictions that do not significantly increase the cost of the system or decrease its efficiency or specified performance" means: 
A.  For water heater systems or solar swimming pool heating systems: An amount exceeding ten (10) percent of the cost of the system, but in no case more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or a decrease in system efficiency by an amount exceeding ten (10) percent as originally specified and proposed. 
B.  For photovoltaic systems: An amount not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) over the system cost as originally specified and proposed, or a decrease in system efficiency by an amount exceeding ten (10) percent as originally specified and proposed. 
    "Small residential rooftop solar energy system" means all of the following: 
    A solar energy system that is no larger than ten (10) kilowatts alternating current nameplate rating or thirty (30) kilowatts thermal and conforms to all applicable state fire, structural, electrical, and other building codes as adopted or amended by the city and all state and city health and safety standards. The solar energy system must be installed on a single family or duplex multi-family dwelling and the solar panel or module array cannot exceed the maximum legal building height as defined by the city. 
    "Solar energy system" means either of the following: 
A.  Any solar collector or other solar energy device whose primary purpose is to provide for the collection, storage, and distribution of solar energy for space heating, space cooling, electric generation, or water heating. 
B.  Any structural design feature of a residential building, whose primary purpose is to provide for the collection, storage, and distribution of solar energy for electricity generation, space heating or cooling, or for water heating. 
    "Specific, adverse impact" means a significant, quantifiable, direct, and unavoidable impact, based on objective, identified, and written public health or safety standards, policies, or conditions as they existed on the date the application was deemed complete. 
(Ord. No. 2015-09, § 1, 7-1-2015) 
8.26.030 - Application. 
A.  The provisions of this chapter apply to the permitting of all small residential rooftop solar energy systems in the City of Kingsburg. 
B.  Small residential rooftop solar energy systems legally established or permitted prior to the effective date of this chapter are not subject to the requirements of this chapter unless physical modifications or alterations are undertaken that materially change the size, type, or components of a small rooftop energy system in such a way as to require new permitting. Routine operation and maintenance or like-kind replacements shall not require a permit. 
(Ord. No. 2015-09, § 1, 7-1-2015) 
8.26.040 - Solar energy system requirements. 
A.  All solar energy systems shall meet applicable health and safety standards and requirements imposed by the state and the city, building and fire departments. 
B.  Solar energy systems for heating water in single-family residences and for heating water for swimming pool applications shall be certified by an accredited listing agency as defined by the California Plumbing and Mechanical Code. 
C.  Solar energy systems for producing electricity shall meet all applicable safety and performance standards established by the California Electrical Code, the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, and accredited testing laboratories such as Underwriters Laboratories and, where applicable, rules of the public utilities commission regarding safety and reliability. 
(Ord. No. 2015-09, § 1, 7-1-2015) 
8.26.050 - Duties of planning department and building official. 
A.  All documents required for the submission of an expedited solar energy system application shall be made available on the publicly accessible city website. 
B.  Electronic submittal of the required permit application and documents by email, the Internet, or facsimile shall be made available to all small residential rooftop solar energy system permit applicants. 
C.  An applicant's electronic signature shall be accepted on all forms, applications, and other documents in lieu of a wet signature. 
D.  The City of Kingsburg's Planning Department shall adopt a standard plan and checklist of all requirements with which small residential rooftop solar energy systems shall comply to be eligible for expedited review. 
E.  The small residential rooftop solar system permit process, standard plan(s), and checklist(s) shall substantially conform to recommendations for expedited permitting, including the checklist and standard plans contained in the most current version of the California Solar Permitting Guidebook adopted by the Governor's Office of Planning and Research. 
F.  All fees prescribed for the permitting of small residential rooftop solar energy system must comply with Government Code Section 65850.55, Government Code Section 66015, Government Code Section 66016, and State Health and Safety Code Section 17951 as amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 2015-09, § 1, 7-1-2015) 
8.26.060 - Permit review and inspection requirements. 
A.  The city planning department shall adopt an administrative, nondiscretionary review process to expedite approval of small residential rooftop solar energy systems within sixty (60) days after this chapter becomes effective. 
B.  The planning department shall issue a permit or other nondiscretionary approval three (3) business days after an over-the-counter application is deemed complete and meets the requirements of the approved checklist and standard plan or within three (3) business days after the date of receipt of an application sent by electronic submittal is deemed complete and meets the requirements of the approved checklist and standard plan. 
C.  The city building official may require an applicant to apply for a use permit if the building official finds, based on substantial evidence, that the solar energy system could have a specific, adverse impact upon the public health and safety. Such decisions may be appealed to the Kingsburg City Council in accordance with the applicable provisions of Section 17.04.090 of Chapter 17.04 of Title 17 of the Kingsburg Municipal Code. 
D.  Review of the application shall be limited to the building official's review of whether the application meets the requirements of the approved checklist and standard plan and all applicable local, state, and federal building, health and safety requirements. 
E.  If a use permit is required, the building official may deny an application for the use permit if the building official makes written findings based upon substantive evidence in the record that the proposed installation would have a specific, adverse impact upon public health or safety and there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the adverse impact. Such findings shall include the basis for the rejection of any potential feasible alternative for preventing the adverse impact. Such decisions may be appealed to the Kingsburg City Council in accordance with the applicable provisions of Section 17.04.090 of Chapter 17.04 of Title 17 of the Kingsburg Municipal Code. 
F.  Any condition imposed on an application shall be designed to mitigate the specific adverse impact upon health and safety at the lowest possible cost. 
G.  A feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific, adverse impact includes, but is not limited to, any cost-effective method, condition, or mitigation imposed by the city on another similarly situated application in a prior successful application for a permit. The city shall use its best efforts to ensure that the selected method, condition, or mitigation meets the conditions of subparagraphs (A) and (B) of paragraph (1) of subdivision (d) of Section 714 of the Civil Code defining restrictions that do not significantly increase the cost of the system or decrease its efficiency or specified performance of the system. 
H.  The city shall not condition approval of an application on the approval of an association, as defined in Section 4080 of the Civil Code. 
I.  If an application is deemed incomplete, a written correction notice detailing all deficiencies in the application and any additional information or documentation required to be eligible for expedited permit issuance shall be sent to the applicant for resubmission. 
J.  Only one (1) inspection shall be required and performed by the building official for small residential rooftop solar energy systems eligible for expedited review. A separate fire inspection may be performed if deemed required by the Kingsburg Fire Department. The inspection shall be performed in a timely manner and shall include consolidated inspections, if possible. An inspection will be scheduled within two (2) business days after a request and provide a four-hour inspection window. If a small residential rooftop solar energy system fails inspection, the reasons for the failure will be set forth in written notice and provide to the applicant. Upon satisfaction of the issues identified in the written notice, another inspection will be scheduled in accordance with this Subsection J. 
(Ord. No. 2015-09, § 1, 7-1-2015) 
Title 9 - PUBLIC PEACE, MORALS AND WELFARE 
Chapters: 
Chapter 9.04 - PUBLIC OFFENSES 
Sections: 

9.04.010 - Games prohibited. 
    The games of "Seven Up," "Poker," "Draw Poker," "Three Card Monte," and all other games and devices played for money or other things of value, or for checks, credit or other representative of value, not already prohibited by any law of the state, are hereby prohibited in all places within the city. 
(Prior code § 51-1000) 
9.04.020 - Playing games prohibited. 
    No person shall deal, play, or carry on; open or cause to be opened; conduct, either as owner, hirer, or employee; aid or abet any of these things; or bet at, on, or against any game or device not already prohibited by any law of the state, for money, check, credit, or other thing or representative of value, or the chance of winning or getting any money or check or other thing of value. 
(Prior code § 51-1001) 
9.04.030 - Permitting games prohibited. 
    No person shall knowingly permit any of the games or devices prohibited by Section 51-1000 in any place owned, rented, or controlled by him, in whole or in part. 
(Prior code § 51-1002) 
9.04.040 - Gambling machines. 
    No person shall exhibit, use, maintain, or operate any so-called vending machine or other mechanical device for the sale of goods, wares, or merchandise, which mechanical device shall deliver one article or quantity of merchandise atone operation of said machine, and other articles or quantities of merchandise at another operation of said machine, or which shall deliver other than a specific article or specific quantity of merchandise, or its or their equivalent, for a specific and uniform price at any and all times, the character, quantity and price being set out in plain lettering on the face of the machine or device which is being exhibited, used, maintained, or operated. 
(Prior code § 51-1003) 
9.04.050 - Possession of machines. 
    The possession by any person of any vending machine or other mechanical device that is so constructed that the same may be used or operated contrary to the provisions of Section 9.04.040 shall be prima facie evidence that the same has been so used or operated. 
(Prior code § 51-1004) 
Chapter 9.08 - GRAFFITI 
Sections: 

9.08.010 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the prompt abatement of graffiti from public and private properties in the city; to provide for methods of controlling the sale to and the unauthorized use of aerosol paint containers and wide tipped marker pens by minors; and to encourage citizens to report occurrences of graffiti vandalism within the city. 
    Due to the increase of graffiti vandalism on both public and private property, a condition has arisen within the city which has resulted in a deterioration of property values and concern for the quality of life of the city's citizens. The city council finds and determines that graffiti constitutes a public nuisance which, left unabated, adversely affects the city's image, business development, retail sales, and residential housing costs. Allowing graffiti to remain on public or private property encourages additional unacceptable occurrences of graffiti, fuels fear among the community and is a factor which not only depreciates the value of the property which has been the target of such vandalism, but also depreciates the value of adjacent and surrounding properties. The purpose of this chapter is, therefore, to minimize the impact which graffiti has on the city's quality of life, economic stability, environmental image, aesthetic standard, and the overall sense of feeling of safety and security of its citizens. Because the existence of graffiti tends to breed community discontent and criminal and gang related activities, the ordinance will serve to mitigate these problems through quick removal and control of graffiti vandalism. 
(Ord. 94-02 (part), 1994) 
9.08.020 - Graffiti defined. 
    Graffiti is defined as, but not limited to, an unauthorized inscription, word, figure, design, writing or picture which is marked, etched, scratched, drawn or painted upon any public property or any structure, wall, fence, sidewalk, sign, public utility box, or any structural component of any building, bridge, structure or any facility in public view to any person utilizing any public street in the city of Kingsburg, including but not limited to any roadway, parkway, sidewalk, or alley. 
(Ord. 94-02 (part), 1994) 
9.08.030 - Sale of aerosol paint containers or wide tipped marker pens to minors. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer to sell or cause to be sold, any aerosol or pressurized container of paint and/or any wide tipped marker pens exceeding four millimeters in width, containing anything other than a solution which can be removed with water when dry, to any person under the age of eighteen (18) years who is not accompanied by a responsible adult. 
(Ord. 94-02 (part), 1994) 
9.08.040 - Possession by minors. 
    It is unlawful for any individual under the age of eighteen (18) years, who is in a public place or on private property, without the consent of the owner, tenant or operator thereon, and who is not accompanied by a responsible adult, to: (1) possess an aerosol or pressurized container of paint; and/or (2) wide tipped marker pens with tips exceeding four millimeters in width which contain other than a solution which can be removed with water when dry. 
(Ord. 94-02 (part), 1994) 
9.08.050 - Signs required. 
    Any person engaged in the retail sale of aerosol or pressurized containers of paint and/or wide tipped marker pens exceeding four millimeters in width, containing anything other than a solution which can be removed with water when dry, shall display at the location of said items a sign clearly visible and legible to employees and customers which states as follows: 
"It is unlawful for any person to sell, lend or give to any individual under the age of eighteen (18) years, who is not accompanied by a responsible adult, an aerosol or pressurized container of paint or wide tipped marker pens exceeding four millimeters in width, containing anything other than a solution which can be removed with water when dry." 
(Ord. 94-02 (part), 1994) 
9.08.060 - Removal. 
A.  General. Any person applying graffiti within the city shall have the duty to remove same in a manner approved by the city and the property owner within twenty-four (24) hours after notice by the city or public or private owner of the property involved. Failure of any person to so remove graffiti shall constitute an additional violation of this chapter. Consistent with Civil Code Section 1714.1, where graffiti is applied by minors, the parent or guardian shall be responsible for such removal or payment of costs thereof. 
B.  Public Property. Whenever the director of public works or his/her designate representative determines that graffiti exists upon property owned by the city, it shall be removed as soon as possible. When the property is owned by a public entity other than the city, the removal of the graffiti may be authorized by the director of public works or his/her representative, and removal undertaken by city only after securing written consent of the public entity having jurisdiction over the property. The public entity shall execute a release and waiver as approved by the city's risk manager. 
C.  Notice of Affected Area-Requirement to Remove Graffiti. Where graffiti is located upon private property and said graffiti is capable of being viewed by persons utilizing any public right-of-way or sidewalk within the city, it is the property owner's duty to remove said graffiti promptly from the property and to restore said property at least to the condition it was in prior to such act of vandalism. When graffiti removal solutions are not adequate to remove the graffiti and paint must be used, to the extent possible, the same color paint shall be used as the original paint on the property involved. When paint is used to cover graffiti, a block or area must be painted rather than painting over the graffiti lettering only. If the property owner fails to promptly remove the graffiti, the city shall cause a written notice to be served upon the owner of the affected property notifying the owner of the location and description of the graffiti and of the property owner's obligation to remove said graffiti. It shall be the responsibility of the property owner to commence removal of the graffiti described in the notice within fifteen (15) days of service or personal delivery of the notice, and to diligently and promptly pursue total removal of said graffiti; provided that an exception may exist in cases of undue hardship as established pursuant to Section 9.08.060(D). The service is complete at the time of deposit of the notice in the U. S. mail or by personal delivery of the notice to the owner of the property subject to removal of graffiti. The failure of any person to receive such notice shall not affect the validity of any proceeding. 
D.  Undue Hardship-Optional Procedure for Removal. In the event the property owner cannot comply with the requirement of Section 9.08.060(C) of this chapter due to hardship, the property owner shall file a written request for waiver of the removal requirement with the city public works director. The property owner shall explain his/her reason(s) for making such request. The written request shall be filed within the fifteen (15) day removal period stated in Section 9.08.060(C). In determining whether the request for waiver will be granted, and subsequent assistance provided to the property owner in removal of said graffiti, the city shall consider the following circumstances: 
1.  The cost of restoration of the property to its original state prior to the imposition of the graffiti in proportion to the relative value of the property; 
2.  The ability of the owner to pay for such removal; 
3.  Whether or not the property has been the target of previous incidents of graffiti or whether a pattern of vandalism to such property exists. The decision of the city in the form of a written response by the public works director, as to whether or not to grant the waiver, shall be final. 
E.  City's Release From Liability. A written request to waive the requirements of Section 9.08.060(C) shall be accompanied by a "Release from Liability" form signed by the property owner which shall release the city and its authorized agents from any and all liability that may be caused or attributed to removal of graffiti from the owner's premises by persons acting under the authorization of the city. 
F.  Approval for City to Remove Graffiti. A written request to waive the requirements of Section 9.08.060(C) accompanied by a signed release from liability form shall constitute an express approval by the property owner that the city or its authorized representatives may provide for the removal of the graffiti on owner's property by persons acting under the authorization of the city. 
G.  Failure to Remove Graffiti or Seek Waiver of Removal. In the event the owner fails to remove graffiti from his/her property after he/she fails to request a waiver of such removal, or such waiver has been denied, the city may declare the property a public nuisance and the city may take any of the following courses of action: 
1.  City may direct the removal of graffiti from the property with the cost of work performed billed to the property owner who may select the option of direct payment of costs. Failure to make direct payment for the abatement of graffiti shall constitute a special assessment against the respective lot or parcel plat to which it relates. The assessment may be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary municipal taxes are collected and shall be subject to the same penalties and the same procedure and sale in case of delinquency as provided for ordinary municipal taxes. All laws applicable to the levy, collection and enforcement of municipal taxes shall be applicable to the special assessment. Upon completion of the graffiti abatement work, the public works director shall cause to be recorded in the office of the recorder of Fresno County, a notice of completion of graffiti abatement proceedings against a particular parcel involved. The notice of completion of graffiti abatement proceedings shall have the effect when recorded of conclusively establishing that graffiti abatement proceedings have been completed and that all necessary charges incurred on account thereof by the city are due and owing and constitute a special assessment against the subject real property. This notice shall specify the name for the current owner of the parcel as shown on the last equalized assessment rolls of the County of Fresno and the Fresno County Assessor's Parcel Number for the parcel involved. 
(Ord. 94-02 (part), 1994) 
9.08.070 - Appeal of cost of removal. 
    A property owner shall have fifteen (15) days from the date of mailing by the city of the bill for the cost of removal of graffiti from the owner's property to file an appeal. Said appeal must be submitted in writing to the city clerk. Upon receipt of the written appeal, the city clerk shall schedule a hearing before the city council. The public works director shall be so notified and shall submit a written report to the city council, with a copy to the appealing party, setting forth justifications for the description of the work done and the cost thereof. The city clerk shall notify the party appealing of the date and time of the hearing before the city council, at least ten (10) days in advance of such hearing. At the time and place of such hearing, the public works director shall present his/her report and the appealing party shall present any and all information in opposition to the calculation of the cost of removal. At the conclusion of the hearing, the city council shall determine what cost, of any, is to be imposed upon the appealing party. 
(Ord. 94-02 (part), 1994) 
9.08.080 - Responsibility. 
    Any individual who is found guilty of violating Section 9.08.090(A) of this chapter shall pay restitution to the property owner, in addition to authorized penalties. If the violator is a minor, the parent or guardian shall be responsible for payment of restitution. If unable to pay, the juvenile may be permitted to work off his/her payment under the direction of at least one parent by removing any graffiti. 
(Ord. 94-02 (part), 1994) 
9.08.090 - Penalties. 
A.  It shall be unlawful to apply graffiti on any premises as described herein. Notwithstanding the classification of a violation of the chapter as a misdemeanor, at the time an action is commenced to enforce the provision of this section, the trial court, upon recommendation of the prosecuting attorney, may reduce the charged offense from a misdemeanor to an infraction. 
B.  It shall be unlawful and an infraction for a minor to possess any aerosol paint container or wide tipped marker pen as described herein in violation of Section 9.08.040. 
C.  Any person convicted of a misdemeanor under this chapter shall be punished by: (1) a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) and/or thirty (30) days in the County Jail for a first violation; (2) a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1000.00) and/or ninety (90) days in the County Jail for a second violation of this chapter within one year; and (3) a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1000.00) and/or six months in the County Jail for each additional violation of the chapter within one year. 
D.  Any person convicted of an infraction under this chapter shall be punished by: (1) a fine not exceeding fifty dollars ($50.00) for a first violation; (2) a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the second violation of this chapter within one year; and (3) a fine not exceeding two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for each additional violation of this chapter within one year. Each day that a violation continues shall be regarded as a new and separate offense. 
(Ord. 94-02 (part), 1994) 
9.08.100 - Alternatives. 
    Nothing in the foregoing sections shall be deemed to prevent the city from commencing a civil or criminal proceeding to abate a public nuisance under applicable Civil or Penal Code provisions as an alternative to the proceedings set forth herein. 
(Ord. 94-02 (part), 1994) 
9.08.110 - Severability. 
    It is declared to be the intention of the city council that the subsections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this section form an interrelated program for dealing with the problem of graffiti and vandalism within the city, but that such subsections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases are distinct and severable and, in the event that any subsections, paragraphs, clauses and phrases are declared unconstitutional, invalid or unenforceable by any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality, invalidity or unenforceability shall not affect any of the remaining subsections, paragraphs, clauses or phrases of this section. 
(Ord. 94-02 (part), 1994) 
Chapter 9.12 - FIREARMS 
Sections: 

9.12.010 - Firearms-Discharge prohibited. 
    No person shall fire or discharge any pistol, gun, rifle, any description of firearm, cannon, missile, rocket, or other device loaded with explosive or shot, or use any air gun, BB gun, or other device for the propulsion of shot or other similar substance within the city. 
(Prior code § 54-0000) 
9.12.020 - Exception. 
    Section 9.12.010 does not apply to any peace officer while engaged in the official discharge of his/her duties, nor to any citizen who may discharge a firearm while lawfully defending his/her person or property. 
(Prior code § 54-0001) 
9.12.030 - Confiscation. 
    Upon conviction of a violation of Section 9.12.010, the chief of police is hereby authorized to confiscate any article of personal property therein set out as used in violation of said section. 
(Prior code § 54-0002) 
Chapter 9.16 - CURFEW 
Sections: 

9.16.010 - Minors under 18. 
    No person under the age of eighteen (18) years shall loiter, loaf, congregates be present at, or be upon any public street, way, square, park, place, building, or at or in any place of business, business house, public dance hall, or other place designed for the accommodation of the public, between the hours of eleven o'clock (11:00) p.m. of one day and five o'clock a.m. of the following day. 
(Prior code § 51-3000) 
9.16.020 - Minors under 16. 
    No person under the age of sixteen (16) years shall loiters loaf, congregate, be present at or be upon any public street, way, square, park, place, building, or at or in any place of business, business house, public dance hall, or other places designed for the accommodation of the public, between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) p.m. of one day and five o'clock a.m. of the following day. 
(Prior code § 51-3001) 
9.16.030 - Exceptions. 
    The provisions of Sections 9.16.010 and 9.16.020 shall not apply: 
A.  To any minor who is accompanied by his/her parent, guardian, or other adult person having the lawful custody of such minor. 
B.  To the following places, to wit: public theatres and places where supervised entertainment, play, or instruction for minors under the age of eighteen (18) years is conducted; provided, however, that this exception shall apply only to minors who are in attendance at such theatres or places for the purpose of attending the entertainment, supervised entertainment, play, or instruction thereby afforded. 
C.  To any minor, while engaged in going to or returning from, in direct routes, the places mentioned in subsection (B) and his/her home or other place of abode; provided, however, in the event such minor stops, loiters, loafs, or congregates, or deviates from such direct route, this exception shall not apply. 
D.  To any minor while lawfully employed, or to such minor while engaged in going to or returning from his/her place of employment in a direct route between such place of employment and his/her place of abode. 
(Prior code § 51-3002) 
9.16.040 - Violation by minor. 
    Any minor violating the provisions of this article may be immediately apprehended and lawfully detained and appropriate proceedings may be instituted under and pursuant to the provisions of the Juvenile Court law, as set forth in the Welfare and Institutions Code of the state. 
(Prior code § 51-3003) 
9.16.050 - Responsibility of parent. 
    No parent, guardian, or other adult person having the lawful custody, permanent or temporary, of any minor person shall suffer, permit, or let, either willfully or negligently, such minor to violate the provisions of Section 9.16.010 or 9.16.020. 
(Prior code § 51-3004) 
Chapter 9.20 - MISCELLANEOUS OFFENSES 
Sections: 

9.20.010 - Loitering on school grounds-When prohibited. 
    It shall be a misdemeanor for any person, not a student of the school involved, to return to any school grounds, school buildings or streets, sidewalks, or public ways adjacent thereto, without lawful business therein, within a period of ninety (90) days if the person has been asked during school hours or during school functions to leave the school grounds, school buildings or streets, sidewalks, or public ways adjacent thereto, by the Chief Administrative Officer of said school, or by any certified school employee designated as the agent of the Chief Administrative Officer or by any peace officer for any of the following reasons: 
A.  Misconduct on or about any of the above described premises: (misconduct is to be defined by local school regulations regarding conduct on campus, and/or by Penal Code Section 415); 
B.  Conviction of any offense requiring registration under Section 290 of the Penal Code; 
C.  Conviction of any offense included in Division 10 or Division 10.5 of the Health and Safety Code; or 
D.  Repeated and/or frequent loitering in or about the above described premises, without having lawful business at said premises. 
(Prior code § 51-5000) 
9.20.020 - Drinking on street, alley or public playground. 
    No person shall possess an open container containing an alcoholic beverage nor drink any beer, wine or other intoxicating beverage on any public street,. sidewalk, alley, highway, public playground or school ground within the city. This section shall not be deemed to make punishable any act or acts which are prohibited by any law of the state. 
(Prior code § 51-6000) 
9.20.030 - Soliciting-Request required. 
    The practice of going in and upon private residences in the city, by solicitors, peddlers, hawkers, itinerant merchants, and transient vendors of merchandise, not having been requested or invited so to do by the owner or owners, or occupant or occupants, of said private residences, for the purpose of soliciting orders for the sale of goods, wares, or merchandise, or for the purpose of disposing of, or peddling or hawking, the same, is hereby declared to be a nuisance, and punishable as such; and no person shall commit such a nuisance. 
(Prior code § 53-0000) 
Title 10 - VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC 
Chapters: 
Chapter 10.04 - VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC GENERALLY 
Sections: 

10.04.010 - One-way streets. 
    Upon those streets, and parts of streets, and alleys designated by resolution of the council, vehicular traffic shall move only in the indicated direction when signs indicating the direction of traffic are erected and maintained at every intersection where movement in the opposite direction is prohibited. 
(Prior code § 41-1006) 
10.04.020 - One-way streets-Parking. 
    Upon those streets, parts of streets, and alleys designated by resolution of the council as one-way streets and alleys, and when signs are in place giving notice of the direction of travel thereon, vehicles parked on those streets and alleys must park facing in the direction of traffic movement. 
(Prior code § 41-1007) 
10.04.030 - Truck routes. 
A.  Whenever any provision of this chapter designates any street, or portion thereof, as a "truck route", the chief of police is hereby authorized to designate such street or streets by appropriate signs as "Truck Routes" for the movements of vehicles exceeding a maximum gross weight limit of three tons. 
B.  When any such truck route or routes are established and designated by appropriate signs, the operator of any vehicle exceeding a maximum gross weight limit of three tons shall drive on such route or routes and none other, except when necessary to traverse another street or streets to destinations for the purpose of loading or unloading, but then only by such deviation from the nearest truck route as is reasonably necessary. The provisions of this section shall not apply to passenger buses under the jurisdiction of the public utilities commission. 
(Prior code § 41-1008) 
10.04.040 - Truck routes-Designated. 
    The following streets are hereby declared truck routes: 
A.  Sierra Street for the entire city limit. 
B.  Simpson Street for the entire city limit. 
(Ord. 92-01 (part), 1992: Ord. 423 § 1, 1984: prior code § 41-1009) 
(Ord. No. 2015-06, § 1, 6-17-2015) 
10.04.050 - Erection of stop signs. 
    Whenever any provision of this chapter, or any ordinance or resolution of this city, designates and describes any street or portion thereof as a through street, or designates that stop signs shall be placed at an intersection or rail crossing, the Superintendent of Streets shall place and maintain stop signs as provided in the Vehicle Code of the state, and no such regulations shall be effective until such signs are in place. 
(Prior code § 41-1010) 
10.04.060 - Erection of yield signs. 
    Whenever any provision of this chapter, or any ordinance or resolution of this city, designates that yield right-of-way signs shall be placed at one or more approaches or intersections of streets and highways, the Superintendent of Streets shall erect and maintain yield right-of-way signs in the manner as provided in the Vehicle Code of the state, and no such regulations shall be effective until such signs are in place. 
(Prior code § 41-1011) 
10.04.070 - Compliance. 
    When stop signs or yield right-of-way signs are erected as herein provided, every driver of a vehicle shall stop or yield the right-of-way, as the case may be, as required by the Vehicle Code of the state. 
(Prior code § 41-1012) 
10.04.080 - Funeral processions. 
    No person shall obstruct the free and uninterrupted passage in, upon, along or through any street of any funeral cortege or procession, nor obstruct, impede or prevent the passage of any person or persons attending the conveyance of the body of the deceased to a place for holding services thereover, or to a place of interment. 
(Prior code § 41-1013) 
10.04.090 - Crosswalks-Pedestrian crossings. 
    No pedestrian shall cross a street at other than a crosswalk. 
(Prior code § 41-1014) 
10.04.100 - Prima facie speed limits specified. 
A.  Pursuant to California Vehicle Code §§ 22357 and 22358 and based upon engineering and traffic surveys conducted, there are hereby established specified prima facie speed limits on certain streets within the city, provided same are adequately posted. 
B.  Such speed limits and designated streets shall be as set forth by resolution. 
(Prior code § 41-1015) 
10.04.110 - Vehicles on private property. 
    No person shall operate, drive or park any motor vehicle in, over or upon private property without the express permission of the owner thereof. 
(Prior code § 41-1016) 
10.04.120 - When vehicles may be removed from street. 
    Any regularly employed and salaried officer of the police department of this city may remove or cause to be removed: 
A.  Any vehicle that has been parked or left standing upon a street, highway or alley for seventy-two (72) or more consecutive hours. 
B.  Any vehicle which is parked or left standing upon a street or highway between the hours of seven o'clock a.m. and seven o'clock p.m. when such parking or standing is prohibited by ordinance or resolution of this city and signs are posted giving notice of such removal. 
C.  Any vehicle which is parked or left standing upon a street or highway when the use of such street or highway, or portion thereof, is necessary for the cleaning, repair or construction of the street or highway, or for the installation of underground utilities; or where the use of the street or highway, or any portion thereof, is authorized for a purpose other than the normal flow of traffic; or when the use of the street or highway, or any portion thereof, is necessary for the removal of equipment, articles or structures of unusual size, and the parking of such vehicle would prohibit or interfere with such use or movement, provided that signs giving notice that such vehicle may be removed, are erected or placed at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to removal. 
(Prior code § 41-1017) 
10.04.130 - Curb markings to indicate no stopping and parking regulations. 
    The provisions of these parking regulations shall apply to public and private off-street as well as public streets, provided that the owner of such public or private property consents in writing thereto and, provided further, that the property is posted indicating their applicability, with the owner paying the cost of such markings and posting. 
    The chief of police is hereby authorized, subject to the provisions and limitations of this chapter, to place the following curb or parking stall markings to indicate parking or standing regulations, and such markings shall have the meanings as set forth herein: 
A.  Red shall mean no stopping, standing or parking at any time except as permitted by the Vehicle Code, and except that a bus may stop in a red zone marked or signed as a bus zone; 
B.  Yellow shall mean no stopping, standing or parking at any time except Sundays and holidays for any purpose other than the loading or unloading of passengers or materials; provided, that the loading or unloading of passengers shall not consume more than three minutes nor the loading or unloading of materials more than thirty (30) minutes, unless the materials loaded or unloaded exceed two and one-half tons, in which event twelve (12) minutes shall be allowed for the loading and unloading of each ton of materials; and provided further, that for the purpose of conducting funeral services, a hearse accompanied by a maximum of three passenger vehicles may occupy a yellow zone for a period not to exceed two hours. These regulations shall apply between seven o'clock a.m. and six o'clock p.m. 
C.  White shall mean no stopping, standing or parking for any purpose other than loading or unloading of passengers which shall not exceed three minutes, and such restrictions shall apply between seven o'clock a.m. and six o'clock p.m. of any day except Sundays and holidays; 
D.  Green shall mean no standing or parking for longer than twenty-four (24) minutes at any time between nine o'clock a.m. and six o'clock p.m. of any day except Sundays and holidays; 
E.  Blue shall mean parking in the area designated is restricted to disabled persons, as defined in California Vehicle Code, Section 22511.5: 
1.  Said handicapped parking restrictions shall apply to all public property within the city, provided the provisions of California Vehicle Code Section 22507.8(b) are complied with; 
2.  Such handicapped parking restrictions shall apply to private property, provided the provisions of California Vehicle Code Section 22511.8 are complied with; 
3.  Any vehicle parked in violation of these handicapped parking restrictions may be towed away pursuant to California Vehicle Code Section 22511.8. 
(Prior code § 41-1018) 
10.04.140 - Use of streets and alleys for storage of vehicles. 
    Subject to ordinances and resolutions of the city providing for no parking or more restrictive parking of vehicles on public streets and alleys, in which event such more restrictive ordinance or resolution shall apply, no person who owns or has possession, custody or control of any vehicle shall park such vehicle upon any public street or alley in the city for more than a consecutive period of seventy-two (72) hours. 
(Prior code § 41-1020) 
10.04.150 - Operation of vehicles near certain institutions or residential areas-"Residential area" defined. 
    It is unlawful for any person to ride or operate any vehicle of any type on any private property or unoccupied public property within one-quarter of a mile of any school, hospital, convalescent home or residential area, as herein defined, except upon a regularly established private road, driveway or parking lot appurtenant to a structure on that property. A "residential area," within the meaning of this section, means any one-quarter mile in depth abutting a public or private road and one-quarter mile in length measured along such road, and which contains any apartment house, condominium, multiple-unit dwelling structure, or four or more residences of any kind or combination. 
(Prior code § 41-1021) 
10.04.160 - Shrubbery obstructing visibility at intersections. 
    Whenever the chief of police finds that any hedge, shrubbery or tree growing at or near a roadside obstructs the view at any intersection, or any traffic upon the streets approaching such intersection, he/she shall cause the hedge, shrubbery or trees to be immediately trimmed and, if need be, removed. 
(Prior code § 41-1022) 
10.04.170 - Obstructions-Restrictions in general. 
    No person shall place, or cause to be placed, any obstruction, or allow any obstruction so placed to remain upon any street, as defined by this code, and which definition includes but is not limited to, sidewalks, or any alley or easement within the city, or obstruct the free passage of persons over any part of any such street, alley or easement; provided, that this section shall not prohibit any acts authorized by this code relating to the construction of any awnings or buildings, nor prohibit the erection of telegraph, telephone or electric facilities otherwise authorized by law, and this section shall not apply to goods in actual course of delivery, receipt or removal with reasonable dispatch for a time not longer than two hours, nor to shade trees, nor to permanently existing cellar or basement ways or barriers surrounding them, constructed under permits heretofore or hereafter granted nor the erection of any such which complies with this code as now existing or as hereafter amended, and for which a permit has been issued. This section shall not apply to obstructions placed and maintained under an encroachment permit issued by the city. 
(Prior code § 41-1023) 
10.04.180 - U-Turns prohibited. 
    In addition to the restrictions on u-turns contained in the Vehicle Code of the State of California, on those, parts of streets and intersections designated by resolution of the city council prohibiting the u-turns of vehicles and when signs are erected to indicate no such u-turn, no vehicle shall make a u-turn in violation thereof. 
(Prior code § 41-1024) 
Chapter 10.08 - PARKING 
Sections: 

10.08.010 - Congested district defined. 
    "Congested district" means the area bounded on the northeast by the northeasterly line of "A" Street, on the northwest by the northwesterly line of Draper Street, on the southwest by the southwesterly line of Front Street, and on the southeast by the southeasterly line of Draper Street. 
(Prior code § 41-1000) 
10.08.020 - Parking-Restriction in general. 
    Upon those streets, parts of streets, and alleys designated by resolution of the council as being restricted in the parking of vehicles thereon, when signs are in place restricting the parking of vehicles on either or both sides of such street, part of street, or alley, vehicles shall only park thereon in accordance with such signs restricting parking of vehicles. 
(Prior code § 41-1001) 
10.08.030 - Overnight parking prohibited. 
    No person shall park any vehicle on any streets within the fire limits of the city between the hours of two o'clock a.m. and five o'clock a.m. for more than fifteen (15) minutes. 
(Prior code § 41-1002) 
10.08.040 - Simpson Street parking. 
    Parking regulations on Simpson Street from Mission Street (formerly Highway 99) in the following locations shall be as follows: 
A.  On the east side of Simpson Street from Mission Street on the south to the northern most limits of the city, parking shall be restricted to two hours. 
B.  On the west side of Simpson Street, between Laurel Street and Mission Street, there shall be diagonal parking only, except for eight hundred (800) feet between Sierra Street and Frontage Road, where there shall be no parking. 
    Said areas shall be properly striped or posted as required. 
(Ord. 470, 1988: prior code § 41-1003) 
10.08.050 - Parking trucks and trailers. 
    No person shall park a truck or truck tractor and/or trailer having a gross minimum weight in excess of three gross tons on the side of any street or alley whose immediately adjacent private property has other than commercial, manufacturing, or both types of usage, except for the purpose of loading or unloading of merchandise or materials, nor shall any person park such truck or truck tractor and/or trailer between the hours of two o'clock a.m. and six o'clock a.m. of any day on the side of any street or alley whose immediately adjacent private property has commercial, manufacturing, or both types of usage. This section shall not apply to any utility vehicle accorded exemption by Section 22512 of the Vehicle Code of the State of California. 
(Prior code § 41-1003.10) 
10.08.060 - Two-hour limit. 
    No person shall park or stand any vehicle for more than two hours, at any one time, between the hours of nine o'clock a.m. and six o'clock p.m. of any day, except Sundays or holidays, or for any period of time between the hours of four o'clock a.m. and six o'clock a.m. of any day, upon any of the streets, or portions of streets set forth in the following locations: 
A.  Draper Street, both sides, from California Street to Lincoln Street. 
B.  Lincoln Street, west side, from Draper Street to two hundred (200) feet north of Draper Street. 
C.  Marion Street, eastside, from Draper Street to Lewis Street; and both sides, from Draper Street to two hundred (200) feet north of Draper Street. 
D.  Smith Street, both sides, from Draper Street to two hundred (200) feet north and south of Draper Street. 
(Prior code §§ 41-1004, 41-1004.10, 41-1004.30, 41-1004.40 and 41-1004.60) 
10.08.070 - Angle parking. 
A.  No person shall park or stand any vehicle within the congested district except at an approximate twenty-five (25) degrees diagonal to the curb on the right of such vehicle, except as provided in subsections (B) or (C). 
B.  Upon all streets where the distance between curbs is over forty (40) feet, no person shall park or stand any vehicle except at an approximate forty-five (45) degrees diagonal to the curb on the right of such vehicle, except that in residential districts, where there is no congestion of vehicles, parallel parking shall also be permitted, and except as provided in subsection (C). 
C.  Upon Draper Street, between the east line of California Street and a point six feet west of the west line of Washington Street, no person shall park or stand any vehicle except diagonal to the curb in conformance with markings or signs therefor. The superintendent of streets shall indicate diagonal parking by placing white lines upon the surface of the roadway of said portion of Draper Street indicating the angle at which parking is required. 
D.  Notwithstanding subsections (A), (B), and (C), parallel parking shall be required upon California Street opposite the Southern Pacific Depot; Lincoln Street, from Lewis Street to Sierra Street; and Washington Avenue from Eighteenth Street to Sierra Street. 
(Prior code § 41-1005) 
10.08.080 - Parking for certain purposes prohibited. 
A.  No person shall park or display a vehicle, vessel or other personal property: 
1.  Upon a public or private street, or public or private real property for the purpose of displaying such vehicle, vessel or other personal property for sale, hire or rental unless the real property is zoned for the transaction of such business and the vendor is duly licensed for said business. 
2.  Upon any street, alley or roadway for the purpose of painting, greasing or repairing said vehicle, vessel or other personal property except repairs necessitated by an emergency. 
3.  Upon any street, alley or roadway for the purpose of washing, waxing or polishing same and when a charge is made for such services. 
B.  Subsection (A)(1) above shall not prohibit persons from parking said items on private residential property belonging to the owner of said items nor parking on the public street immediately adjacent to said owner's private residential property. 
C.  "Vehicle" shall mean the same as defined in California Vehicle Code, Section 670. 
D.  "Vessel" shall mean the same as defined in California Vehicle Code, Section 9840(a). 
E.  "Personal property" is defined elsewhere in this code. 
F.  The placing of any vehicle, vessel or other personal property with a sign or other advertising device thereon or proximate thereto, indicating same is for sale, hire or rental, shall constitute prima facie evidence that same was parked or placed there for the purpose of displaying same for sale, hire or rental. 
G.  A violation of this section shall constitute an infraction. 
(Ord. 439, 1985) 
10.08.090 - Parking by permit only. 
A.  Between the hours of eight o'clock a.m. and four o'clock p.m. on any day that Kingsburg High School is in session, (including summer school session), no person shall park or stand any vehicle along: 
1.  The south side of Sierra Street between 18th Avenue and 21st Avenue; 
2.  19th Avenue between Sierra Street and Riverside Street; 
3.  20th Avenue between Sierra Street and Riverside Street; and 
4.  The north side of Tulare Street between 16th Avenue and 18th Avenue (collectively "permit parking zone"), without the required permit displayed on the left side of the vehicle's rear bumper. 
B.  Except that, a person residing upon real property located adjacent to that portion of a street or avenue located within the permit parking zone ("affected property") may request from the Kingsburg police department: 
1.  A maximum of two permanent parking permits allowing the parking of two vehicles, owned by residents of affected property, within the permit parking zone during the hours identified in subsection A of this section; and 
2.  A maximum of two temporary visitor parking permits per day, allowing visitors of the residents of affected property to park within the permit parking zone during the hours identified in subsection A of this section. The visitor parking permits must be displayed on the left side of the front dashboard of the visitor's vehicle. 
C.  A violation of this section shall constitute an infraction. 
(Ord. 2005-01 § 1, 2005) 
Chapter 10.12 - ABANDONED VEHICLES 
Sections: 

10.12.010 - Declaration of purpose and definitions. 
    In addition to and in accordance with the determination made and the authority granted by the State of California under Section 22660 of the Vehicle Code to remove abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles or parts thereof as public nuisances, the city hereby makes the following findings and declarations: 
    The accumulation and storage of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles or parts thereof on private or public property not including highways is hereby found to create a condition tending to reduce the value of private property, to promote blight and deterioration, to invite plundering, to create fire hazards, to constitute an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the health and safety of minors, to create a harborage for rodents and insects and to be injurious to the health, safety and general welfare. Therefore, the presence of an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle or part thereof, on private or public property not including highways, except as expressly hereinafter permitted, is hereby declared to constitute a public nuisance which may be abated as such in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
    As used in this chapter: 
    "Vehicle" means a device by which any person or property may be propelled, moved, or drawn upon a highway, except a device moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
    "Highway" means a way or place of whatever nature, publicly maintained and open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. Highway includes street. 
    "Public property" does not include "highway." 
    "Owner of the land" means the owner of the land on which the vehicle, or parts thereof, is located, as shown on the last equalized assessment roll. 
    "Owner of the vehicle" means the last registered owner and legal owner of record. 
(Prior code § 48-0000) 
10.12.020 - Exemptions. 
    This chapter shall not apply to: 
A.  A vehicle or part thereof which is completely enclosed within a building in a lawful manner where it is not visible from the street or other public or private property; or 
B.  A vehicle or part thereof which is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed dismantler, licensed vehicle dealer, a junk dealer, or when such storage or parking is necessary to the operation of a lawfully conducted business or commercial enterprise. 
    Nothing in this section shall authorize the maintenance of a public or private nuisance as defined under provisions of law other than Chapter 10 (commencing with Section 22650) of Division 11 of the Vehicle Code and this chapter. 
(Prior code § 48-0001) 
10.12.030 - Provisions not exclusive. 
    This chapter is not the exclusive regulation of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles within the city. It shall supplement and be in addition to the other regulatory codes, statutes, and ordinances heretofore enacted by the city, the state, or any other legal entity or agency having jurisdiction. 
(Prior code § 48-0002) 
10.12.040 - Enforcement official. 
    Except as otherwise provided herein, the provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced by the chief of police. In the enforcement of this chapter, such officer and his/her deputies may enter upon private or public property to examine a vehicle or parts thereof, or obtain information as to the identity of a vehicle and to remove or cause the removal of a vehicle or part thereof declared to be a nuisance pursuant to this chapter. 
(Prior code § 48-0003) 
10.12.050 - Person authorized to remove vehicle. 
    When the city council has contracted with or granted a franchise to any person or persons, such person or persons shall be authorized to enter upon private property or public property to remove or cause the removal of a vehicle or parts thereof declared to be a nuisance pursuant to this chapter. 
(Prior code § 48-0004) 
10.12.060 - Administrative costs. 
    The city council shall from time to time determine and fix an amount to be assessed as administrative costs (excluding the actual cost of removal of any vehicle or part thereof) under this chapter. 
(Prior code § 48-0005) 
10.12.070 - Authority of chief of police. 
    Upon discovering the existence of an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle, or parts thereof, on private property or public property within the city, the chief of police shall have the authority to cause the abatement and removal thereof in accordance with the procedure prescribed herein. 
(Prior code § 48-0006) 
10.12.080 - Notices of intention to remove vehicle. 
    A ten (10) day notice of intention to abate and remove the vehicle, or parts thereof, as a public nuisance shall be mailed by registered mail to the owner of the land and to the owner of the vehicle, unless the vehicle is in such condition that identification numbers are not available to determine ownership. The notices of intention shall be in substantially the following forms: 
NOTICE OF INTENTION TO ABATE AND REMOVE AN ABANDONED, WRECKED, DISMANTLED OR INOPERATIVE VEHICLE OR PARTS THEREOF AS A PUBLIC NUISANCE 
(Name and address of owner of the land) 
 As owner shown on the last equalized assessment roll of the land located at (address), you are hereby notified that the undersigned pursuant to Section 48-0006, Chapter 8, Title 4, of the Kingsburg Municipal Code, has determined that there exists upon said land an (or parts of an) abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle registered to _______, license number _______,which constitutes a public nuisance pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 8, Title 4 of the Kingsburg Municipal Code. 
 You are hereby notified to abate said nuisance by the removal of said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) within 10 days from the date of mailing of this notice, and upon your failure to do so the same will be abated and removed by the city and the costs thereof, together with administrative costs, assessed to you as owner of the land on which said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) is located. 
 As owner of the land on which said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) is located, you are hereby notified that you may, within 10 days after the mailing of this notice of intention, request a public hearing and if such a request is not received by the hearing officer within such 10-day period, the Chief of Police shall have the authority to abate and remove said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) as a public nuisance and assess the costs as aforesaid without a public hearing. You may submit a sworn written statement within such 10-day period denying responsibility for the presence of said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) on said land, with your reasons for denial, and such statement shall be construed as a request for hearing at which your presence is not required. You may appear in person at any hearing requested by you or the owner of the vehicle or, in lieu thereof, may present a sworn written statement as aforesaid in time for consideration at such hearing. 
Notice Mailed_______;sigr; \(date)       Chief of Police 
NOTICE OF INTENTION TO ABATE AND REMOVE AN ABANDONED, WRECKED, DISMANTLED OR INOPERATIVE VEHICLE OR PARTS THEREOF AS A PUBLIC NUISANCE 
(Name and address of last registered and/or legal owner of record of vehicle-notice should be given to both if different) 
 As last registered (and/or legal) owner of record of (description of vehicle-make, model, license, etc.), you are hereby notified that the undersigned pursuant to Section 48-0006, Chapter 8, Title 4, of the Kingsburg Municipal Code, has determined that said vehicle (or parts of a vehicle) exists as an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle at (described location on public or private property) and constitutes a public nuisance pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 8, Title 4 of the Kingsburg Municipal Code. 
 You are hereby notified to abate said nuisance by the removal of said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) within 10 days from the date of mailing of this notice, 
 As registered (and/or legal) owner of record of said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle), you are hereby notified that you may, within 10 days after the mailing of this notice of intention, request a public hearing and if such a request is not received by the hearing officer within such 10-day period, the Chief of Police shall have the authority to abate and remove said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) without a hearing. 
Notice Mailed_______;sigr; \(date) Chief of Police 
(Prior code § 48-0007) 
10.12.090 - Request for public hearing. 
    Upon request by the owner of the vehicle or owner of the land received by the chief of police within ten (10) days after the mailing of the notices of intention to abate and remove, a public hearing shall be held by the hearing officer on the question of abatement and removal of the vehicle or parts thereof as an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle, and the assessment of the administrative costs and the cost of removal of the vehicle or parts thereof against the property on which it is located. 
    If the owner of the land submits a sworn written statement denying responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on his/her land within such ten (10) day period, said statement shall be construed as a request for a hearing which does not require his/her presence. Notice of the hearing shall be mailed, by registered mail, at least ten (10) days before the hearing to the owner of the land and to the owner of the vehicle, unless the vehicle is in such condition that identification numbers are not available to determine ownership. If such a request for hearing is not received within said ten (10) days after mailing of the notice of intention to abate and remove, the city shall have the authority to abate and remove the vehicle or parts thereof as a public nuisance without holding a public hearing. 
(Prior code § 48-0008) 
10.12.100 - Hearing procedure-Action by hearing officer. 
    All hearings under this chapter shall be held before the director of public works, herein designated "hearing officer," who shall hear all facts and testimony he/she deems pertinent. Said facts and testimony may include testimony on the condition of the vehicle or parts thereof and the circumstances concerning its location on the said private property or public property. The hearing officer shall not be limited by the technical rules of evidence. The owner of the land may appear in person at the hearing or present a sworn written statement in time for consideration at the hearing, and deny responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on the land, with his/her reasons for such denial. 
    The hearing officer may impose such conditions and take such other action as he/she deems appropriate under the circumstances to carry out the purpose of this chapter. He/she may delay the time for removal of the vehicle or parts thereof if, in his/her opinion, the circumstances justify it, At the conclusion of the public hearing, the hearing officer may find that a vehicle or parts thereof has been abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or is inoperative on private or public property and order the same removed from the property as a public nuisance and disposed of as hereinafter provided and determine the administrative costs and the cost of removal to be charged against the owner of the land. The order requiring removal shall include a description of the vehicle or parts thereof and the correct identification number and license number of the vehicle, if available at the site. 
    If it is determined at the hearing that the vehicle was placed on the land without the consent of the owner of the land and that he/she has not subsequently acquiesced in its presence, the hearing officer shall not assess the costs of administration or removal of the vehicle against the property upon which the vehicle is located or otherwise attempt to collect such costs from such owner of the land. 
    If the owner of the land submits a sworn written statement denying responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on his/her land but does not appear, or if an interested party makes a written presentation to the hearing officer but does not appear, he/she shall be notified in writing of the decision. 
(Prior code § 48-0009) 
10.12.110 - Appeal. 
    Any interested party may appeal the decision of the hearing officer by filing a written notice of appeal with the said hearing officer within five days after his/her decision. 
    Such appeal shall be heard by the city council which may affirm, amend or reverse the order or take other action deemed appropriate. 
    The clerk shall give written notice of the time and place of the hearing to the appellant and those persons specified in Section 10.12.070. 
    In conducting the hearing the city council shall not be limited by the technical rules of evidence. 
(Prior code § 48-0010) 
10.12.120 - Removal of vehicle. 
    Five days after adoption of the order declaring the vehicle or parts thereof to be a public nuisance, five days from the date of mailing of notice of the decision if such notice is required by Section 10.12.090, or fifteen (15) days after such action of the governing body authorizing removal following appeal, whichever is later, the vehicle or parts thereof may be disposed of by removal to a scrap yard or automobile dismantler's yard. After a vehicle has been removed it shall not thereafter be reconstructed or made operable. 
(Prior code § 48-0011) 
10.12.130 - Notice to department of motor vehicle removal. 
    Within five days after the date of removal of the vehicle or part thereof, notice shall be given to the Department of Motor Vehicles identifying the vehicle or part thereof removed. At the same time there shall be transmitted to the Department of Motor Vehicles any evidence of registration available, including registration certificates, certificates of title and license plates. 
(Prior code § 48-0012) 
10.12.140 - Costs assessed against land. 
    If the administrative costs and the cost of removal which are charged against the owner of a parcel of land pursuant to Section 10.12.090 are not paid within thirty (30) days of the date of the order, or the final disposition of an appeal therefrom, such costs shall be assessed against the parcel of land pursuant to Section 38773. 5 of the Government Code and shall be transmitted to the tax collector for collection, Said assessment shall have the same priority as other city taxes. 
(Prior code § 48-0013) 
Chapter 10.16 - TRAINS 
Sections: 

10.16.010 - Jumping on or off prohibited. 
    No person shall jump or climb on or off any locomotive, or railroad train or car, while the same is in motion. 
(Prior code § 41-2000) 
10.16.020 - Speed limit. 
    No person in charge, having control or directing the movement of any locomotive, or any railroad car, shall cause or permit any such locomotive, car, or cars, to be propelled along or across any of the street crossings of the city at a greater speed than seventy (70) miles per hour for passenger trains, and at a greater speed than sixty-five (65) miles per hour for freight trains; provided that when the engine or locomotive pulling any such train shall have passed over the last distant crossing lying wholly or partially inside the city limits of the city in the direction in which said train is then moving, it shall be lawful to increase the speed of said train. 
(Prior code § 41-2001) 
10.16.030 - Blocking intersections. 
    No person in charge, having control, or directing the movement of any locomotive or any railroad cars, shall cause or permit the same to remain or stand across or in any way block a street crossing within the city so as to hinder or obstruct vehicular or pedestrian travel across the tracks at such street crossing for a period longer than five minutes. 
(Prior code § 41-2002) 
Chapter 10.20 - BICYCLES AND SKATEBOARDS 
Sections: 

10.20.010 - Definitions. 
    Unless the particular provision or the context otherwise requires, the definitions and provisions contained in the following subsections shall govern the construction, meaning, and application of words and phrases used in this article, and, except to the extent that a particular word or phrase is otherwise specifically defined herein, the definitions contained in Chapter 1.04 (commencing with Section 1.04.010) of Title 1 of this code, shall also govern the construction, meaning and application of words and phrases used in this chapter. The definition of each word or phrase shall constitute, to the extent applicable, the definition of each word or phrase which is derived from it, or from which it is a derivative, as the case may be. 
    "Bicycle" means any device upon which a person may ride, which is propelled by human power through a system of belts, chains or gears and which has wheels at least twenty (20) inches in diameter and a frame size of at least fourteen (14) inches. 
    "Bicycle dealer" means any person who is engaged wholly or partly in the business of selling bicycles, or buying or taking in trade bicycles for the purposes of resale, selling or offering for sale, or otherwise dealing with bicycles, whether or not such bicycles are owned by such person or entity. The term also includes agents or employees of such person or entity. 
    "Bicycle lane" means any lane within the roadway designated by signs and markings for the operation of bicycles. 
    "Bicycle license" means and includes license tag or decal designated by the state in accordance with Section 39001 of the California Vehicle Code, to be permanently affixed to the bicycle in a visible location and which bears a unique number permanently assigned to that bicycle by the state. 
    "Bicycle path" means any specifically designated area for bicycle travel, physically separated from the roadway. 
    "Bicycle registration certificate (registration)" means and includes that ownership card issued by the licensing agency or agent of the city upon receipt of the designated license fee. 
    "Bicycle route" means any route recommended for bicycle travel which may include bicycle paths and public streets for accommodating bicycle riders. 
    "Central business district/central traffic district" means all streets and portions of streets within the area described as follows: all that area bounded by California Street, Lewis Street, Smith Street and Ellis Street, including both sides of such streets and both sides of Draper Street from Smith Street to Sierra Street. 
    "Cyclist" means any bicycle operator. 
    "Licensing agency" means and includes that party or parties designated by the chief of police as official licensing agencies of bicycles in the city. 
    "Pedestrian" means any person afoot or any cyclist having dismounted a bicycle and then proceeding to move the bicycle afoot. 
    "Police officer" means every officer of the police department of this city or any officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to make arrests for violations of traffic regulations. 
    "Skateboard" means any device that combines a board and wheels which the operator propels by standing on it and pushing with a foot or hand. 
    "Vehicle code" means the Vehicle Code of the State of California. 
(Ord. 455 (part), 1986; prior code §§ 45-1002-45-2000) 
10.20.020 - License required. 
    No person residing in the city shall operate a bicycle on any street or sidewalk, or upon any public path set aside for the exclusive or semi-exclusive use of bicycles, within the city, unless such bicycle has been licensed under the provisions of this chapter. 
    For purposes of this chapter, the chief of police and his/her representatives shall be designated as the official licensing agent. The chief of police is hereby authorized to appoint any person or persons to assist in the capacity of bicycle licensing agencies. Each licensing agency shall license bicycles for persons residing in the city only; all other bicycle license applicants shall be referred to their respective city or jurisdiction of residency, licensing agencies shall submit monthly reports to the licensing agent indicating both a monthly and year-to-date summary of all licensing activities and fees collected. 
(Prior code § 45-2001) 
10.20.030 - Issuance of registration certificate/license. 
    At the time that any person licenses a bicycle and pays the established license fee in accordance with the provisions of this article, the licensing agency shall provide him/her with a registration certificate bearing the date, owner's name, address, telephone number, bicycle license number, the bicycle manufacturer, type and frame number and any other descriptive material concerning the bicycle deemed necessary by the licensing agent, and provisions for the transfer of ownership of such bicycle. In addition, at the time of licensing, the bicycle owner shall be issued his/her permanent bicycle license bearing the unique number reflecting the proper indicia procured from the Director of Motor Vehicles pursuant to Section 39001 of the California Vehicle Code. Any bicycle license issued under this article prior to December 31, 1978, shall expire on December 31, 1978, and all renewals of any such issued license and all initial bicycle licenses issued subsequent to December 31, 1978, shall be for a uniform three year period pegged to January 1, 1979. 
(Prior code § 45-2002) 
10.20.040 - Sale or transfer of bicycle. 
    Whenever any person sells, trades, disposes of or transfers any bicycle licensed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, he/she shall endorse upon the registration certificate previously issued for such bicycle a written transfer of same, setting forth the name, address and telephone number of the transferee, the date of transfer, the signature of the transferer, and shall deliver such registration certificate, so endorsed, to the licensing agency at the time of transfer. The transferee shall, within ten (10) days after such transfer, apply to such licensing agency for a transfer of the registration certificate. A fee of one dollar shall be charged for such transfer of ownership. 
(Prior code § 45-2003) 
10.20.050 - Report and replacement of lost or stolen license receipt or bicycle. 
    In the event that any registration certificate, issued pursuant to the provisions of this article, be lost or stolen, the licensee of such bicycle shall immediately notify the licensing agency and within ten (10) days after such notification shall apply to such licensing agency for a duplicate registration certificate; whereupon, such licensing agency shall issue to such licensee a duplicate registration certificate, upon payment to such licensing agency of a fee of one dollar. 
    In the event that any bicycle license, issued pursuant to the provisions of this article, be lost or stolen, the licensee shall immediately notify the licensing agency of such loss and shall within ten (10) days apply to such licensing agency for a new bicycle license; whereupon, such licensing agency shall issue to such licensee a new bicycle license upon payment to such licensing agency of a fee of one dollar. 
(Prior code § 45-2004) 
10.20.060 - Fees. 
    The fees required to be paid pursuant to the provisions of this article are: 
A.  For the initial period from September 15, 1975, to December 31, 1978, the sum of one dollar and fifty cents for each new bicycle license and registration certificate; provided, that such fee shall be apportioned as follows: if issued during the period from January 1, 1977 to December 31, 1977, one dollar only; if issued during the period from January 1, 1978 to December 31, 1978, the sum of fifty cents only. For each new license and certificate issued after December 31, 1978, the fee shall be one dollar and fifty cents if issued during the first year of the three year period of the license, one dollar if issued during the second year of such three year period, and fifty cents if issued during the third year of the three year period. 
B.  The fee for the renewal of a bicycle license upon its expiration shall be the sum of one dollar and fifty cents. 
C.  For each transfer of registration certificate, the sum of fifty cents. 
D.  For each replacement of a bicycle license or registration certificate, the sum of fifty cents. 
E.  For each impounding fee for bicycles found to be in violation of this article, the sum of one dollar. 
F.  For each violation of this article, a fine of two dollars. 
(Prior code § 45-2005) 
10.20.070 - Tampering with registration certificate, bicycle license and serial number. 
    It is unlawful for any person to tamper with, destroy, mutilate or alter any registration certificate issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
    It is unlawful for any person to remove, destroy, mutilate or in any way alter or tamper with any bicycle license issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
    It is unlawful for any person to remove, alter or mutilate the serial number of any bicycle frame licensed under the provisions of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 45-2006) 
10.20.080 - Weekly bicycle sales reports required. 
    Any person engaged in the business of buying, selling or trading new or used bicycles within the city is hereby required to make a weekly report to the licensing agency giving the name, address and telephone number of all persons either buying, selling or trading new or used bicycles and the bicycle manufacturer, type, frame number and bicycle license number, if any. 
(Prior code § 45-2007) 
10.20.090 - Bicycles in violation of chapter-Impoundment and fine. 
    The licensing agency shall have the right to impound and retain possession of any bicycle in violation of the provisions of this chapter and may retain possession of such bicycle until the provisions of this chapter are complied with. A fine of two dollars shall be imposed for any violation of this article pursuant to Section 39011 of the Vehicle Code. 
(Prior code § 45-2008) 
10.20.100 - Bicycle fund. 
    All amounts collected in excess of the cost of conducting and administering the bicycle licensing program, including reasonable cost-reimbursement to licensing agencies, shall be placed in a special bicycle fund. The bicycle fund shall be used to improve bicycle safety programs and to establish and maintain bicycle facilities, including but not limited to, bicycle paths and lanes. 
(Prior code § 45-2009) 
10.20.110 - Identification of bicycles by serial numbers. 
    All bicycles sold as of September 15, 1975, shall have, as a means of identification, serial numbers stamped on the frame of the bicycle in a manner determined by the Director of Motor Vehicles. The police department (or other appropriate city or county agency) may stamp numbers on the left rear fork ends of such bicycles not bearing manufacturers' serial numbers. 
(Prior code § 45-2010) 
10.20.120 - Rental agencies. 
    A rental agency operating within the city shall not rent or offer any bicycle for rent unless such bicycle is licensed as provided in this article. 
(Prior code § 45-2011) 
10.20.130 - Annual bicycle safety report. 
    The chief of police shall prepare an annual bicycle safety report. It is to include accident data; enforcement, licensing, registration and educational activities; and other data which he/she deems pertinent. The report shall be submitted to the council on or before June 30th of each calendar year. 
(Prior code § 45-2012) 
10.20.140 - State authority. 
    Reference is hereby made to California Vehicle Code Division 11, Chapter 1, Article 4, relating to laws applicable to bicycle use and equipment, and by such reference and all statutes relating to the operation of bicycles are hereby incorporated into this chapter. Every person operating a bicycle on a roadway has all the rights and is subject to all the duties applicable to the driver of a motor vehicle by the laws of this state or by the ordinances which by their nature can have no application, and except as otherwise provided in this chapter. 
(Prior code § 45-6000) 
10.20.150 - Operation upon sidewalks. 
    No person shall ride a bicycle, skateboard, skates or roller blades upon a sidewalk within the central business district as described in this chapter (except as to the south side of Lewis Street and the west side of California Street), nor shall any person ride upon any other sidewalk within this city which has been posted or painted with signs prohibiting such riding. 
(Ord. 94-03, 1994: Ord. 455 (part), 1986: prior code § 45-6001) 
10.20.160 - Closing of streets for bicycle racing. 
    The council may authorize the temporary closing of a portion of any highway within the city pursuant to State Vehicle Code, Section 21101(e) for the purpose of allowing a bicycle racing event. 
(Prior code § 45-6002) 
10.20.170 - Bicycle parking. 
    No person shall park a bicycle within the central business district as described by this chapter except at locations provided for the parking of bicycles and posted authorized bicycle parking, nor shall any person park a bicycle at any location within the city which has been posted with signs prohibiting such parking. 
(Prior code § 45-6003) 
10.20.180 - Infraction. 
    Any violation of this chapter shall be an infraction and except as is herein otherwise specifically provided, a violation shall be punishable in accordance with Section 36.900 of the Government Code of the State of California. 
(Prior code § 45-7000) 
Chapter 10.24 - BUSINESS DIRECTIONAL SIGNS 
Sections: 

10.24.010 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to promote the health, safety and general welfare by (1) providing citizens, tourists, travelers and other users of the public streets in the city with information and guidance concerning public accommodations, facilities, commercial services and points of scenic, cultural, historic, educational, recreational and religious interest; (2) reducing visual distractions which pose a hazard to drivers of motor vehicles and other users of the public streets; and (3) preserving, enhancing and protecting the natural scenic beauty and aesthetic features of the city. 
(Ord. 2006-06 § 1 (part), 2006) 
10.24.020 - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter: 
    "Business directional sign" means a sign erected and maintained in accordance with this chapter, which identifies and points the way to public accommodations or facilities, commercial services for the traveling public, and points of scenic, historical, cultural, recreational, educational and religious interest. 
    "Sign" means any structure, display, logo, device or representation which is designed or used to advertise or call attention to any thing, person, activity or place and is visible from any public street. 
    "Trailblazing sign" means sign which directs the traveling public to an area of the city as well as to parking locations in that area. It may include a logo design and/or words and numerals. It shall be located on a sign frame and/or at roadway intersections as needed along the route to the area. 
(Ord. 2006-06 § 1 (part), 2006) 
10.24.030 - Compliance with ordinances and statutes. 
    No person may erect or maintain any business directional sign except as provided in this chapter. All business directional signs erected or maintained in the city shall comply with the provisions of this chapter and applicable state law. 
(Ord. 2006-06 § 1 (part), 2006) 
10.24.040 - Size, shape, color and materials. 
A.  The size, shape and color of business directional signs shall be consistent with the State of California Department of Transportation SG44-2 sign as it currently exists as it may be changed or modified from time to time. The material of construction shall be aluminum per the State of California Department of Transportation Standard Specifications as may be amended from time to time. Up to three sign panels can be installed on the same sign post so long as this configuration does not inhibit sight distance as determined by the city. 
B.  Signs shall be mounted on two four inches by six inches treated douglas fir posts in accordance with the State of California Department of Transportation Standard Plans and Specifications as may be amended from time to time. The minimum sign height from the lowest panel to the ground level shall be seven feet. 
(Ord. 2006-06 § 1 (part), 2006) 
10.24.050 - Location. 
A.  The location of a business directional sign must be approved by the city. 
B.  Business directional signs must provide direction to a business, service facility, or point of interest located within a one mile radius of the proposed location of the sign. 
(Ord. 2006-06 § 1 (part), 2006) 
10.24.060 - Maintenance and removal. 
A.  All business directional signs shall be constructed and installed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter by a sign company retained by the owner of the signs and at the owner's sole cost and expense. An encroachment permit must be obtained from the city for any sign proposed to be installed within the city right-of-way. 
B.  Any business directional signs erected pursuant to this chapter which are destroyed, defaced, deteriorated or in need of repair shall be replaced and reinstalled by the owner, at the owner's expense. The city shall have the right to remove and dispose of any destroyed, defaced or deteriorated business directional sign or any business directional sign which requires repair without liability to the owner. The owner of such sign shall reimburse the city the cost of such removal and disposal. 
C.  If the accommodations, facilities, services or point of interest identified on business directional signs terminate, cease to exist or are no longer offered, the owner of said signs shall remove said signs, within thirty (30) days after the date the accommodations, facilities, services, or point of interest terminate, cease to exist or are no longer offered. If the owner fails to remove said signs within the thirty (30) day period, the city may remove and dispose of said signs without liability to the owner. The owner of said signs shall reimburse the city the cost of such removal and disposal. 
D.  Any business directional signs which do not conform to this chapter shall be removed or corrected by the owner within ten (10) days after written notice from the city of said noncompliance. If the owner of said sign fails to correct or remove said signs within the ten (10) day period, the city may remove and dispose of said signs without liability to the owner. The owner of said signs shall reimburse the city the cost of such removal and disposal. 
(Ord. 2006-06 § 1 (part), 2006) 
10.24.070 - Application. 
    Any person wishing to install a business directional sign shall make application for a permit to do so at the city building department. The application form will be provided by the city. At the time of submitting the application, the applicant shall pay the applicable application fee. 
(Ord. 2006-06 § 1 (part), 2006) 
10.24.080 - Issuance of permits, standards. 
    The planning director or his/her designee shall review the application to determine whether all requirements of this chapter have been met. If all provisions of this chapter have been met a permit will be issued. 
(Ord. 2006-06 § 1 (part), 2006) 
10.24.090 - Permits not transferable. 
    Permits for installation of business directional signs are not transferable or assignable. Any change in ownership of a business, service facility or point of interest shall require a new application and a new permit. 
(Ord. 2006-06 § 1 (part), 2006) 
10.24.100 - Limitation on number of signs. 
    The planning director or his/her designee shall issue no more that one sign per business, service facility or point of interest within a one-half mile radius of said business, service facility or point of interest. 
(Ord. 2006-06 § 1 (part), 2006) 
10.24.110 - Annual fee. 
    Each owner shall pay an annual fee for each permit issued pursuant to this chapter. The purpose of the annual fee is to reimburse the city the fee for costs incurred by the city to inspect business directional signs. The initial annual fee will be paid along with the application fee with submission of the application for a permit and shall apply for the remainder of the city fiscal year but shall not be prorated for any fraction of a year. 
(Ord. 2006-06 § 1 (part), 2006) 
10.24.120 - Nonrefundable. 
    The application fee shall not be refunded if the application for a permit is denied. The initial annual fee will be refunded if the permit is denied. 
(Ord. 2006-06 § 1 (part), 2006) 
10.24.130 - Setting of fees. 
    The application fee and annual fee shall be set by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. 2006-06 § 1 (part), 2006) 
10.24.140 - Validity and severability. 
    In the event any section, subsection or portion of this chapter shall be declared by any court to be invalid for any reason, such a decision shall not affect the validity of the other sections, subsections or other portions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2006-06 § 1 (part), 2006) 
10.24.150 - Enforcement. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced in accordance with the applicable provisions of the Kingsburg Municipal Code. 
(Ord. 2006-06 § 1 (part), 2006) 
Title 12 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PLACES 
Chapter 12.04 - STREETS AND SIDEWALKS GENERALLY 

12.04.010 - Bench mark. 
    The United States Geological Survey Bench Mark existing in the city as of December 9, 1912, on the south side of Simpson Street near the southeasterly end thereof is declared to be two hundred ninety-four and seven hundred fifty-four (294.754) thousandths feet above sea level, and all elevations, grades, and measurements herein established are established with said Bench Mark as reference point and the sea level datum, base or zero, and the provisions of this chapter are adopted with reference to the map entitled official Map of the City of Kingsburg, filed in the office of the Recorder of Fresno County on September 10, 1909, and recorded in the book 5 of Surveys, at page 12 thereof, Fresno County records. 
(Prior code § 61-1000) 
12.04.020 - Official grade plat. 
    Commencing with and measuring vertically from said bench mark as a basis, certain elevations (in feet) along the streets of the city have been established and recognized as official for the purposes of calculating street grades, and said elevations have been marked and set forth in white letters upon a map prepared by John S. Bates, a civil engineer acting in the capacity of city engineer of the city, which said map is entitled "Official Grade Plat of the City of Kingsburg, California," having been prepared in November, 1912, and also marked "filed in the Office of the City Clerk of the City of Kingsburg this December 2, 1912, J. W. McIntyre, City Clerk", is hereby adopted as the official grade map of the city, and the figures shown upon said map in white are hereby declared to be the official elevations in feet at the points indicated from which the grades are to be determined, excepting that the elevation of the top of the curb at the southwest corner of the intersection of Draper Street and Kingsburg Avenue shall be two hundred ninety-five and fifteen one hundredths (295.15) feet; and the elevation of the top of the curb at the northwest corner of the intersection of Draper Street and Kingsburg Avenue shall be two hundred ninety-five and one tenth (295.10) feet; and the elevation of the top of the curb at the southeast corner of the intersection of Draper Street and Kingsburg Avenue shall be two hundred ninety-five and one tenth (295.10) feet; and the elevation of the top of the curb at each of the four corners at the intersection of Kingsburg Avenue and Burns Avenue shall be two hundred ninety-five (295.00) feet; and the elevation of the top of the curb of the southwest corner and the southeast corner of the intersection of Kingsburg Avenue and West Street shall be two hundred ninety-four and eight tenths (294.80) feet; and the elevation of the top of the curb on the north side of Kingsburg Avenue, extending from the intersection of the westerly line of West Street produced northerly east to the easterly line of West Street produced northerly, shall be two hundred ninety-four and eight tenths (294.80) feet; and the elevation of the top of the curb at the four corners of the intersection of West Street and North Street shall be two hundred ninety-four and four tenths (294.40) feet; and the elevation of the top of the curb on First Avenue at its intersection with the southerly city limits (as of August 25, 1919) shall be two hundred ninety-two and five tenths feet (295.50); and the elevation of the top of the curb on Kingsburg Avenue at its intersection with the easterly city limits (as of August 25, 1919) shall be two hundred ninety-seven and thirty-five one hundredths feet (297.35); and the elevation of the top of the curb on the north side of Kingsburg Avenue, extending from the intersection of the westerly line of East Street produced northerly, east to the easterly line of East Street produced northerly, shall be two hundred ninety-six and seven tenths (296.70) feet; and the elevation of the top of the curb on the north side of Kingsburg Avenue, extending from the intersection of the westerly line of Park Street produced northerly, east to the easterly line of Park Street produced northerly shall be two hundred ninety-seven and two tenths (297.20) feet. 
(Prior code § 61-1001) 
12.04.030 - Grade elevations-Top of curb. 
    The grade elevations given on the official grade plat at the street corners are the elevations for the top of the curb throughout the circular part as shown on the diagram upon said plat. 
(Prior code § 61-1002) 
12.04.040 - Street dimensions. 
    The width of streets between curbs, the height of curbs above the gutter, the height of the center of the street above the gutter for all the streets in the city are hereby declared to be those set forth, designated and fixed according to and upon the table shown upon the official grade plat, for the purposes of said table and said plat and of this chapter, Draper Street, Front Street, from Ellis Street to Lewis Street, Marion Street from Ellis Street to Lewis Street, Smith Street, from Ellis Street to Lewis Street, and all of Simpson Street are declared to be business streets, and all other streets are declared to be residence streets. 
(Prior code § 61-1003) 
12.04.050 - Miscellaneous grades. 
    The grade for walk corners, vertical curves for curb, and walk grades and cross-section of half street are hereby fixed as shown on the official grade plat. 
(Prior code § 61-1004) 
12.04.060 - Additional grades. 
    That from time to time as other elevations or grades are established or adopted by the city, the city engineer shall designate the same together with the date of establishment or adoption in a similar manner upon the official grade plat. 
(Prior code § 61-1005) 
12.04.070 - Plat to be filed. 
    The official grade plat shall be filed in, and shall be and remain a record of, the office of the city clerk. 
(Prior code § 61-1006) 
Chapter 12.08 - STREET AND SIDEWALK IMPROVEMENTS 

12.08.010 - Permit required. 
    No person shall lay, make, or construct, or cause to be laid, made, or constructed, any sidewalk, curbing, or other street work or improvement in and upon any street, alley, or other public place within the city without a permit from the city. 
(Prior code § 61-2000) 
12.08.020 - Application for permit. 
    Application for a permit shall be filed with the city, shall be in writing, and shall state the kind, character, location, and amount of work or improvement sought to be done; and shall be accompanied by a satisfactory guarantee that: the incidental expense of surveying and inspecting will be paid, that the work will be done in accordance with the specifications adopted by the city for the doing of such work, and that the work will be commenced within ten (10) days after the permit is issued and completed within such reasonable time as the superintendent of streets may designate. 
    Such application shall include a certificate of insurance reflecting liability insurance naming the city as an additionally-named insured in coverage and amounts acceptable to the city. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; Ord. 460, 1987; prior code § 61-2001) 
12.08.030 - Issuance of permit. 
    Upon the filing of an application and satisfactory guarantee, the city shall issue a permit for the work desired to be done; provided that no permit shall be issued by the city clerk for a less amount of work or improvement of any kind or for a less distance thereof than one block, except under the direction of the council. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; prior code § 61-2002) 
12.08.040 - Grades for work. 
    No sidewalk, curbing or other street work or improvement shall be laid, made, or constructed in and upon any street, alley, or other public place within the city until the proper lines and grades shall have been determined and located and stakes set therefor by the city engineer. The charge set by the city engineer therefor shall be paid to the city by the person to whom the permit for the work was issued within thirty (30) days after the filing with the city of accounts of such charges by the city engineer. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; prior code § 61-2003) 
12.08.050 - Acceptance of work. 
    No sidewalk, curbing, or other street work or improvement laid, made, or constructed, shall be accepted by the city unless the same was laid, made, or constructed in accordance with the specifications adopted by the city for doing such work, and no such acceptance shall be made by the city council until the incidental expenses of surveying and inspecting shall first have been paid; and no person having done or caused to be done any of such work, shall be entitled to collect from any property owner, his/her agent or assigns, any compensation for any part or portion of said work done until all of the incidental expenses of surveying and inspecting shall have been paid, and until the said work shall have been accepted in writing by the superintendent of streets. Such acceptance shall be notice to the property owner, his/her agent or assigns, that the work was done to the satisfaction of the city. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; prior code § 61-2004) 
12.08.060 - Specifications. 
    Specifications for sidewalk, curbing, or other street work or improvement shall be established from time to time by the council by resolution; provided, however, except to the extent superseded by subsequently adopted resolution or resolutions, the provisions of the following ordinances, and the specifications contained therein, shall remain in full force and effect: Ordinance No. 66, adopted January 20, 1913; Ordinance No. 71, adopted June 30, 1913; and Ordinance No. 122, adopted December 18, 1922. 
(Prior code § 61-2005) 
12.08.070 - Enforcement. 
    The director of public works, or its designee, is hereby authorized to enforce the provisions of this chapter in accordance with the applicable provisions of Chapter 17.92 of Title 17 of the Kingsburg Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 2010-02, § 2, 7-21-2010) 
Chapter 12.10 - OUTDOOR DINING AREAS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2014-03, § 1, adopted June 4, 2014, amended former Ch. 12.10, §§ 12.10.010-12.10.110, in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 12.10 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2007-01, § 1, 2007; Ord. No. 2010-02, § 3, 7-21-2010. 

12.10.010 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to promote increased business and pedestrian traffic by providing safe and visually appealing opportunities to create outdoor dining areas on public sidewalks and public right-of-way in commercial zone districts. The provisions of this chapter do not apply to and do not restrict the use of outdoor areas, including, without limitation, outdoor cafes located upon the premises of an establishment where food and beverages, including alcoholic beverages are served and consumed. 
(Ord. No. 2014-03, § 1, 6-4-2014) 
12.10.020 - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter: 
    "Alcoholic beverages" means only beer and wine. 
    "Establishment" means a business location: (i) whose principal use is the serving of food to the general public and where serving of wine and beer is an accessory use; and (ii) whose principal use is the serving of alcoholic beverages to the general public and where serving of food is an accessory use. 
    "Outdoor dining area" means the use of portions of public sidewalks and public rights-of-way areas within a commercial zone district used by an establishment for the serving and consumption of food and beverages, including alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. No. 2014-03, § 1, 6-4-2014) 
12.10.030 - Where permissible. 
    All outdoor dining areas must be located and operated adjacent to and incidental to the operation of an establishment. Use of the public sidewalk and public right-of-way must be confined to the actual public sidewalk and public right-of-way frontage of an establishment and must not encroach upon adjacent public sidewalk or public right-of-way. An outdoor dining area shall be restricted as follows: 
A.  Use of the public sidewalk and public right-of-way area for an outdoor dining area is permitted only where the public sidewalk and public right-of-way is wide enough to allow for a minimum of five (5) consecutive feet of sidewalk width at every point in front of the establishment which is clear and unimpeded for pedestrian and wheelchair traffic. 
B.  The outdoor dining area must be clearly delineated from pedestrian traffic with a minimum thirty (30) inch to a maximum thirty-six (36) inch tall removable open style railing, fence or roped boundary or plants and flowers in ornamental planter boxes and pots that are architecturally compatible with the structure housing the establishment. 
(Ord. No. 2014-03, § 1, 6-4-2014) 
12.10.040 - Alcoholic beverages. 
    The service of alcoholic beverages and its consumption by customers in an outdoor dining area is permitted only upon the satisfaction of the following conditions: 
A.  The outdoor dining area must be immediately adjacent to the establishment and located upon the public sidewalk and public right-of-way frontage of the establishment. 
B.  The operator of the establishment shall post a written notice to customers as approved by the city which states the drinking and carrying of an alcoholic beverage is prohibited outside of the outdoor dining area. 
C.  The service of alcoholic beverages in the outdoor dining area must be licensed by the California Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control and comply with all other laws and licensing requirements. 
D.  Such other conditions as the city may deem necessary, including, without limitation, conditions to ensure the public health and safety and protection of public improvements. 
(Ord. No. 2014-03, § 1, 6-4-2014) 
12.10.050 - Health standards. 
    Prior to serving any food or beverages in an outdoor dining area, the outdoor dining area must be inspected and approved by the Fresno County health department. All exterior surfaces within the outdoor dining area shall be kept clean at all times. Restrooms shall be provided in the adjoining establishment. The operator shall maintain the outdoor dining area, including without limitation, the public sidewalk and public right-of-way surface and furniture and adjacent areas, in a clean and safe condition at all times. 
(Ord. No. 2014-03, § 1, 6-4-2014) 
12.10.060 - Special closures. 
    The city shall have the right at any time, and from time to time to prohibit the use of the public sidewalk and public right-of-way as an outdoor dining area. Such prohibitions may arise from but are not limited to, scheduled festivals and similar events, parades, marches, repairs to the street or sidewalk, or emergencies occurring in the area. 
(Ord. No. 2014-03, § 1, 6-4-2014) 
12.10.070 - Permit issuance, findings and conditions. 
    In order to operate an outdoor dining area, a person must obtain an outdoor dining area permit issued by the city. The application for an outdoor dining permit shall be processed by the city as a certificate of occupancy for the outdoor dining area. The application for the outdoor dining permit shall be accompanied by a filing fee established by the city and an accurate drawing showing the configuration of the outdoor dining area, including without limitation, table placement and the method of separating the outdoor dining area from pedestrian traffic along the public sidewalk and public right-of-way. The following conditions must be satisfied before an outdoor dining permit can be issued: 
A.  The proposed operation of the outdoor dining area satisfies all of the applicable provisions of this chapter. 
B.  An outdoor dining area shall have approximately the same floor elevation as the adjacent public sidewalk or public right-of-way area. 
C.  Except as required by Section 12.10.040, no signage is allowed in the outdoor dining area except for one (1) menu display sign no larger than four (4) square feet per face. Signs with more than two (2) faces are prohibited. Only plain unmarked umbrellas may be used in an outdoor dining area. Professionally designed temporary special for the day sign may be permitted up to a total of two (2) square feet in area. 
D.  The applicant shall execute an indemnity agreement in a form provided by the city pursuant to which applicant agrees to indemnify, defend and hold the city and its officials, officers, employees and agents harmless from any and all claims, damages, costs, including reasonable attorney fees, and losses arising from, or in any way related to the applicant's operation of the outdoor dining area. 
E.  The applicant shall maintain, at all times during which the outdoor dining permit is in effect, a policy of general comprehensive liability insurance with limits as approved by the city and insuring against injury or death to persons and claims of property damage resulting from the applicant's use of its outdoor dining area. The city and its officials, officers, employees and agents shall be named as additional insureds under such insurance policy. 
F.  Such other conditions as the city may deem necessary, including, without limitation, hours of use of the outdoor dining area and conditions to ensure the public health and safety, and protection of public improvements. 
G.  No merchandise of any kind shall be displayed in the outdoor dining area except as specifically allowed by the outdoor dining permit. 
H.  The applicant will use the outdoor dining area only during the normal business hours of the establishment, except that the use of the outdoor dining area on Monday thru Friday shall not begin until 4:30 p.m. 
(Ord. No. 2014-03, § 1, 6-4-2014) 
12.10.080 - Term. 
    An outdoor dining permit is personal to the applicant and may not be transferred, assigned or conveyed to any other person. An outdoor dining permit shall terminate on the date the applicant no longer operates the outdoor dining area or discontinues the use of the outdoor dining area for a continuous twelve (12) month period. If a dispute arises as to the date of termination, the decision of the city as to the date of termination shall be final and binding upon the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 2014-03, § 1, 6-4-2014) 
12.10.090 - Violation/revocation. 
    The city shall provide written notice to an applicant of any violation of its outdoor dining permit. Such written notice shall identify the violations of the outdoor dining permit and any provisions of this chapter. The applicant shall have seven (7) days after the date of such written notice to cure the violations identified in the written notice. If the violations are not cured to the satisfaction of the city within said seven-day period, the applicant's outdoor dining permit shall automatically terminate without further action by the city and the applicant shall immediately discontinue use of the outdoor dining area. If the city, in its sole discretion, determines that the continued operation of an outdoor dining area is an immediate threat to public health or safety, the city may immediately, and without written notice and opportunity to cure, revoke the outdoor dining permit. If an outdoor dining permit is terminated or revoked pursuant to this section, the city shall not process an application for an outdoor dining permit for that same manager/owner of the establishment for a period of six (6) months after the date of termination or revocation. 
(Ord. No. 2014-03, § 1, 6-4-2014) 
12.10.100 - Appeal procedures. 
    Within ten (10) days following the date of a decision pertaining to an outdoor dining application or permit, the decision may be appealed to the city council by the applicant. Any decision by the city council shall be final and binding. An appeal application and required fee shall be filed with the community development department and shall state specifically the basis for the appeal. 
(Ord. No. 2014-03, § 1, 6-4-2014) 
12.10.110 - Enforcement. 
    The code enforcement officer for the city, or its designee, or the chief of police for the city, or its designee is hereby authorized to enforce the provisions of this chapter in accordance with the applicable provisions of Chapter 17.92 of Title 17 of the Kingsburg Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 2014-03, § 1, 6-4-2014) 
Chapter 12.12 - CURBS AND GUTTERS 

12.12.010 - Curbs and gutters required. 
    In addition to the requirements set forth in other parts of the Kingsburg municipal code requiring the installation of curbs and gutters in connection with the filing of a subdivision map, any owner of property within the city of Kingsburg prior to commencement of the construction of improvements on any unimproved property within the city of Kingsburg, and any owner of improved property within the city of Kingsburg, prior to remodeling the same or adding any structure to such improved property, shall be required at their own expense to install curbs and gutters on the public street abutting such property in the event such abutting street does not already have curbs and gutters installed, or in the event such existing curbs and gutters do not meet the standards set forth in this chapter. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; prior code § 86-0001) 
12.12.020 - Permit required. 
    No person, firm or corporation shall commence street work on any subdivision, nor shall any such person, firm or corporation commence improvement of any unimproved property within the city of Kingsburg, nor shall any such person firm or corporation commence the remodeling of any improved property or any addition to such improved property without first obtaining a permit from the department of planning and development with respect to the construction of curb and gutter on the public street abutting such property as herein provided. The requirement for such permit shall not apply in the event such unimproved or improved property has existing curbs and gutters meeting the standard set forth in this chapter. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; prior code § 86-0002) 
12.12.030 - Application. 
    An applicant for a permit hereunder shall file with the department of planning and development an application showing: 
A.  Name and address of the owner, or agent in charge, of property abutting the proposed work; 
B.  Name and address of the party doing the work; 
C.  Location of the work area; 
D.  Plan attached showing details of the proposed curb and gutter work to be done on the public street abutting such property; 
E.  Plan attached showing details of such proposed alteration or improvement; and 
F.  Such other information as the department shall find reasonably necessary in determination of whether a permit should issue hereunder. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; prior code § 86-0003) 
12.12.040 - Prerequisites for issuance of permit. 
    The department of planning and development shall issue a permit hereunder when it finds: 
A.  That the plans for the proposed alteration or improvement have been approved by the department; 
B.  That the work shall be done according to the standards and specifications of the city for public work of like character; 
C.  That the driveway entrance for such proposed alteration or improvement does not unreasonably interfere with vehicular and pedestrian traffic, the demand and necessity for parking places, and the means of egress to and from the property affected and adjacent properties; 
D.  That the health, welfare and safety of the public will not be unreasonably impaired. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; prior code § 86-0004) 
12.12.050 - Curb cut (drives) standards. 
    Curb cuts for driveway approaches shall be in accordance with the following standards: 
A.  No curb-cuts for a driveway shall be closer than five feet from the end of the radius return of the curb at intersections. 
B.  Driveway cuts for residential sites shall be of a maximum width of twenty-four (24) feet and a minimum width of twelve (12) feet. A curbed "island" between drives on the same property shall be a minimum of twenty-four (24) feet. The drive or curb cut width shall be measured along the inside sidewalk line and no more than forty (40) percent of the frontage shall be used for drives for vehicular access to each property. 
C.  Curb cut or drives in areas zoned for commercial use or industrial use shall not exceed thirty-five (35) feet in width nor shall more than fifty (50) percent of the frontage be used for drives or vehicular access to each property. A curbed "island" between drives on the same property shall be a minimum of twenty-four (24) feet. 
(Prior code § 86-0005) 
12.12.060 - Abandoned driveway. 
    Where a curb has been cut for a driveway and later the use changes and the drive is relocated or is no longer in use, the property owner shall be required to remove said driveway and install a new curb. 
(Prior code § 86-0006) 
12.12.070 - Repair of curbs and gutters. 
    All curbs and gutters shall be kept in repair by the property owners on which said curb and gutter fronts. 
(Prior code § 86-0007) 
12.12.080 - Removal of buildings or curbs and gutters. 
    Upon the removal of any building from property, or upon the removal of any curb and gutter, any non-conforming curbs and gutters fronting on such property shall be replaced in accordance with this chapter. 
(Prior code § 86-0008) 
12.12.090 - Deviation from curb and gutter standards. 
    The director of planning and development, with the approval of the city council, may grant permission to a property owner to modify the requirements as to the width and location of drive cuts as required in this chapter, provided there are unusual circumstances applicable to the specific property or due to unusual circumstances with respect to a particular existing street intersection. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; prior code § 86-0009) 
12.12.100 - Inspection. 
    Prior to the pouring of any concrete for curbs and gutters being constructed pursuant to a permit issued by the city of Kingsburg, the holder of such permit shall give the city written notice of the fact that the forms therefore have been put in place and the pouring of the concrete therefore shall not be commenced until a representative of the department of public works has inspected such forms and authorized completion of such work. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; prior code § 86-0010) 
12.12.101 - Enforcement. 
    The director of public works, or its designee, is hereby authorized to enforce the provisions of this chapter in accordance with the applicable provisions of Chapter 17.92 of Title 17 of the Kingsburg Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 2010-02, § 4, 7-21-2010) 
Chapter 12.16 - PARADES AND ASSEMBLIES 

12.16.010 - Definitions. 
    "Assembly" means any meeting, gathering or group of twenty-five (25) or more persons, animals or vehicles or a combination thereof having a common purpose, design or goal, upon any public street, sidewalk, alley, park or other public place which substantially inhibits the usual flow of pedestrian or vehicular travel, or which occupies any public area other than a parade as defined in this section. 
    "Parade" means any march, procession, motorcade or promenade consisting of persons, animals or vehicles or a combination thereof having a common purpose, design, destination or goal upon any public place, which does not comply with normal and usual traffic regulation or control. 
(Prior code § 43-1000) 
12.16.020 - Permit required; exception. 
A.  Permit Required. No person shall conduct, manage or participate in any parade or assembly for which a written permit has not been issued in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  Exceptions. This chapter shall not apply to any of the following: 
1.  Funeral processions. As used herein, funeral procession shall mean a single direct movement from a mortuary or church to the place of burial of a human body, under direction of an authorized funeral director. 
2.  A governmental agency acting within the scope of its functions. 
3.  Students going to and from school classes or participating in educational activities, providing such activities are authorized by the school district and are under the immediate direction and supervision of the school authorities authorized by the school district to approve and supervise such activity. 
(Prior code § 43-1001) 
12.16.030 - Prohibited acts. 
    No person shall engage in any parade or assembly activity which would constitute a substantial hazard to public safety or which would materially interfere with or endanger the public peace or rights of residents to the quiet, peaceful and unmolested enjoyment of their property. 
(Prior code § 43-1002) 
12.16.040 - Application and issuance of permit. 
A.  Issuing Authority. The issuing authority shall be the chief of police of the city. 
B.  Approving Authority. The approving authority shall be the chief of police of the city. Disapproval by the approving authority shall constitute disapproval of the permit. The chief of police shall conduct an investigation into the nature of the proposed parade or assembly considering: 
1.  Whether the time, duration, route and size of the parade or assembly will unreasonably disrupt the movement of traffic; 
2.  Whether the parade or assembly is of a size and nature such that it would require diversion of so great a number of police officers of the city to properly police the line of movement or assembly area and the areas contiguous thereto, as to prevent reasonable police protection to the city; 
3.  Whether the permittee has provided for the services of monitors to control the orderly conduct of the parade or assembly in conformity with such permit; 
4.  Whether the permittee has provided reasonable means for informing all the persons participating therein of terms and conditions of such permit; 
5.  Whether the concentration of persons, animals or vehicles or a combination thereof is such as to prevent proper police, fire and ambulance service; 
6.  Whether the parade will move from its assembly area to its disbanding area expeditiously or not without stopping en route except when reasonably required for the safe and orderly conduct of the parade; 
7.  Whether the parade or assembly will interfere with another parade or assembly for which a permit has been granted; 
8.  Whether the parade or assembly will result in harm to persons or property. 
C.  Application. Any person desiring to conduct a parade or assembly shall make written application to the chief of police at least ten (10) days but in no event earlier than ninety (90) days in advance of the proposed parade or assembly. Such application shall include the following information: 
1.  The name, address and telephone number of the person requesting the permit; 
2.  The name and address of any organization or group he/she is representing; 
3.  The name, address and telephone number of the person who will act as parade or assembly chairperson who will be responsible for the conduct of the parade or assembly; 
4.  The number of security personnel provided by the permittee and identifying marks, badges or symbols worn or to be used by such monitors; 
5.  The purpose of the parade or assembly, the estimated number of persons to participate and to otherwise attend, and the number and types of vehicles and animals to participate; 
6.  The method of notifying participants of the terms and conditions of the permit prior to the parade or assembly; 
7.  The date the assembly or parade is to be conducted, the hours the assembly or parade will commence and terminate; 
8.  If a parade, the specific assembly and dispersal locations, the specific route, and the plans, if any, for assembly and dispersal; 
9.  Whether any music will be provided either live or recorded; 
10.  Such other information as the chief of police or his/her designee may deem necessary in order to properly provide for traffic control, street and property maintenance, administrative arrangements, police and fire protection, and for the protection of public health, safety and welfare. 
D.  Denial. The chief of police or his/her designee shall deny the application for the permit if any information supplied by the applicant is false or intentionally misleading or if the chief of police or his/her designee determines that the parade or assembly will endanger the public health, welfare or safety applying the criteria set forth in subsection B of this section and if he/she determines that reasonable adjustments to the community traffic control, street and property maintenance, and police, fire and ambulance protection would not alleviate such danger. Nothing in this chapter shall permit the chief of police to deny a permit based upon political or religious grounds or reasons. 
E.  The chief of police or his/her designee shall uniformly consider each application upon its facts and shall not discriminate in granting or denial of applications. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; prior code § 43-1003) 
12.16.050 - Conditions, alternatives, notice. 
A.  Conditions. The chief of police or his/her designee, upon issuance of the permit, shall impose such reasonable conditions as he/she deems necessary to protect the health, welfare and safety of the community and the participants in such parade or assembly. 
B.  Alternatives. The chief of police or his/her designee shall notify the applicant at least five days in advance of the scheduled assembly or parade with alternate times, places, manner or duration for the conduct of the parade if he/she can reasonably do so and if the application, as submitted, is denied for any of the above reasons. 
C.  Notice. If subsections A or B of this section cannot be accomplished reasonably by the chief of police or his/her designee, he/she shall immediately notify the applicant in writing of the denial of the application and the specific reason or reasons. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; prior code § 43-1004) 
12.16.060 - Appeals. 
    The granting or denial of a permit by the chief of police or his/her designee, pursuant to this chapter, may be appealed to the council by the applicant, permittee or any person affected thereby. Such appeal shall be in writing and shall be filed with the city clerk within twenty-four (24) hours of the decision of the chief of police or his/her designee. Council shall act upon the appeal within three days of filing of the appeal. If a regular council meeting is not scheduled within three days after filing of the appeal, the mayor shall call a special council meeting to consider such appeal. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; prior code § 43-1005) 
12.16.070 - Enforcement. 
    The chief of police, or its designee, is hereby authorized to enforce the provisions of this chapter in accordance with the applicable provisions of Chapter 17.92 of Title 17 of the Kingsburg Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 2010-02, § 5, 7-21-2010) 
Chapter 12.20 - PARK USE REGULATIONS 

12.20.010 - Loitering after certain hours prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to sit, lounge or remain in any public park in the city between the hours of ten-thirty (10:30) p.m. and six o'clock a.m. the next day. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; prior code § 55-0000) 
12.20.020 - Littering parks. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to drop, throw, deposit or leave any newspaper, lunchbox or other paper or box, or any scraps of food, peanut shells or other rubbish in any public park in the city unless the same is deposited in the rubbish or garbage receptacle intended to receive the same. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; prior code § 55-0001) 
12.20.030 - Possession and consumption of alcoholic beverages in parks. 
    No person shall bring into any public park or public recreation area or possess or consume in any such park or recreation area any alcoholic beverage, with the exception of the Historical Park, without first having acquired a permit therefor from the city to be issued by the police department of the city, which permit shall define the manner, the particular conditions under which an alcoholic beverage may be brought onto, possessed and by whom consumed within such park or recreation area. "Alcoholic beverage" as the term is used in this section, includes alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer and any liquid or solid containing alcohol, spirits, wine or beer and which contains one-half of one percent or more of alcohol by volume, and which is fit for beverage purposes either alone or when diluted, mixed or combined with other substances. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; prior code § 55-0002) 
12.20.040 - Tobacco use in city parks. 
    No person shall use tobacco products of any kind, including, but not limited to, tobacco; cigarettes as defined as a rolled product for smoking of any size or shape that: is made of any tobacco, flavored or not, and has a wrapper made of paper or another material; all forms of cigars (including little cigars); smoking or pipe tobacco (including shisha); chewing tobacco and snuff; any product containing, made of, or derived from any amount of tobacco that is intended for human consumption; any product containing, made of, or derived from any amount of nicotine that is intended for human consumption and sold with or without a delivery device or system (for example, eLiquid with nicotine); electronic cigarettes or any device or delivery system sold in combination with nicotine for a single price; and any component, part, or accessory of an electronic cigarette that is used during the operation of the device when sold in combination with nicotine (for example, a battery used in the operation of the device sold with nicotine for a single price), in any city park. No person shall discard chewing tobacco, lighted or unlighted cigars or cigarettes or any tobacco product in any city park. 
(Ord. 2002-02 § 1 (part), 2002) 
(Ord. No. 2017-008, § 1, 12-20-2017) 
12.20.050 - Vehicles in parks. 
    Except for permitted loading and unloading, peace officer and city employees acting in the course of their employment, no person shall drive or convey any vehicle onto the park grounds except by permit issued by the community services department. For the purposes of this section, park grounds include all areas within all parks except for roadway and parking lots intended for public use. 
    All sections of the California Vehicle Code in effect in the city of Kingsburg shall be enforced in all city parks. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; Ord. 2002-02 § 1 (part), 2002) 
12.20.060 - Prohibition of glass containers at Crandell Swim Complex. 
    No person shall bring in, possess, carry, or use glass bottles or glass containers at the facility known as the Crandell Swim Complex. 
(Ord. 2002-02 § 1 (part), 2002) 
12.20.070 - Park and recreation facility permit procedures. 
A.  A permit for the use of a park or recreation facility owned by or under the control of the city shall be required for the following uses: 
1.  Exclusive use of a picnic pavilion or designated area of park for group picnicking activities; 
2.  Exclusive use of the Crandell Swim Complex for group activities; 
3.  Any group or organized activity of fifteen (15) or more persons. 
B.  Park Application and Use Permit. Whenever a permit is required, an application shall be filed with the city of Kingsburg stating: 
1.  Name and address of applicant; 
2.  The nature of the proposed activity; 
3.  The date, hours, and the park facility for which the permit is desired; 
4.  An estimate of attendance; 
5.  The signing of a waiver of release holding the city, their officers, and employees harmless against any and all liability; and 
6.  Any other information, which the city, regarding public health, safety and welfare, finds reasonably necessary to a fair determination as to whether a permit should be issued. 
C.  Permit Fees. The fees and charges for the use of city parks and recreation facilities shall be established by council resolution. The total amount of the fees due for the entire permit period shall be paid at the time of permit issuance. 
D.  Cancellation policy for parks. 
E.  Pool refund policy. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; Ord. 2002-02 § 1 (part), 2002) 
12.20.080 - Golfing prohibited. 
    No person shall hit golf balls or practice balls, play or practice the game of golf in any city or public park. 
(Ord. 2003-02 § 1, 2003) 
12.20.090 - Enforcement. 
    The chief of police or its designee, is hereby authorized to enforce the provisions of this chapter in accordance with the applicable provisions of Chapter 17.92 of Title 17 of the Kingsburg Municipal Code." 
(Ord. No. 2010-02, § 6, 7-21-2010) 
Chapter 12.24 - STREET TREES 

12.24.010 - Purpose of chapter. 
    This chapter is adopted to preserve, protect and promote the public health, safety, peace, comfort, convenience, prosperity and general welfare. More specifically, this chapter is intended to achieve the following: 
A.  To provide a comprehensive plan for planting, replanting and maintenance of trees, shrubs and ground cover within public streets, or which may overhang public streets within the city. 
B.  To establish and maintain a pattern of street trees, shrubs and ground cover within public streets which will enhance the living and working environment of the city, enhance real property values, conserve energy, reduce glare, diminish the effects of vehicular and other noise generated within the city and avoid hazards to public safety occasioned by trees, shrubs and ground cover which are of such physical location or condition as to constitute a public nuisance. 
(Prior code § 61-4000) 
12.24.020 - Definitions. 
    Unless the particular provision or the context otherwise requires, the definitions and provisions contained in the following subsections of this section shall govern the construction, meaning and application of words and phrases used in this chapter, and, except to the extent that a particular word or phrase is otherwise specifically defined in this chapter, the definitions and provisions contained in Chapter 1.04 (commencing with Section 1.04.010) of Title 1 of this code shall also govern the construction, meaning and application of the words and phrases used in this chapter. The definition of each word or phrase shall constitute, to the extent applicable, the definition of each word or phrase which is derived from it, or from which it is a derivative, as the case may be. 
    "Director of public works" or "director" means the director of public works of the city. 
    "Ground cover" means any herbaceous plants and flowering plants which normally grow in close vertical relationship to the ground and which are intended for the ornamental enhancement or conservation of soil areas. 
    "Maintenance" or "maintain" means the pruning, trimming, thinning, spraying, bracing, staking, watering, fertilizing, treatment for disease or injury, or other work performed to promote the life, health, growth or beauty of trees, shrubs and ground cover. 
    "Owner" means the legal owner of real property fronting on any street of the city and any lessee of such owner. 
    "Planning commission" means the city planning commission. 
    "Public street" or "street" means all roads, streets, avenues, boulevards, alleys, parkways and public rights-of-way or any portion thereof, of the city. 
    "Shrub" means woody vegetation or a woody plant which normally has multiple stems and which bears foliage from the ground level up under natural conditions of growth. 
    "Tree" means any woody plant which normally has one stem or trunk bearing foliage or a crown of foliage well above the ground level at maturity. 
(Prior code § 61-4001) 
12.24.030 - Comprehensive street tree plan. 
    The planning commission shall prepare and the city council shall adopt a comprehensive plan for the planting and maintaining of trees, shrubs and ground covers within public streets of the city, which plan shall be designated as the comprehensive street tree plan. Such plan shall include those public streets which, in the commission's judgment, bear a relationship to the purposes of this chapter. The comprehensive street tree plan shall be so prepared that all appropriate public streets may eventually be included in the plan. The comprehensive street tree plan shall consist of a written statement and a map or maps, and such detailed designs as may be appropriate, setting forth or depicting the following: 
A.  The specific types of trees, shrubs and ground covers to be planted and/or maintained and including their desirable spacing and location. 
B.  The identification of those existing trees, shrubs and ground covers which should be retained. 
C.  The identification of those trees, shrubs and ground covers which may constitute a hazard or public nuisance, and which may require substantial maintenance or removal. 
    In preparing the initial version of the comprehensive street tree plan, the planning commission and city council may limit the plan's content to stating or depicting the specific types of trees required as provided under subsection (A) of this section. It is the intent of this section that all information required in the comprehensive street tree plan shall be developed gradually in recognition of the practical problems associated with fulfilling all requirements of this section. 
(Prior code § 61-4002) 
12.24.040 - Master list of trees, shrubs and ground cover. 
    The planning commission shall prepare and the city council shall adopt by resolution, a master list of trees, shrubs and ground covers that are suitable for purposes of implementing and carrying out the comprehensive street tree plan. The master list shall be prepared and adopted within six months after January 3, 1977, and thereafter shall be amended as may be required to achieve the purposes of this chapter. In preparing and amending the master list, the planning commission shall consult with those persons who by reason of training and experience have expertise in the selection, planning, planting and maintenance of trees, shrubs and ground covers that are well suited to local climatic and soil conditions. When the master list is adopted, the list shall be known as the master list of trees, shrubs and ground cover and shall be placed on file in the office of the city clerk, and shall thereafter be the official list of trees, shrubs and ground covers to be used in preparing the comprehensive plan of street trees. Revisions or changes in the master list may be made from time to time in the same manner described hereinabove for the preparation, adoption and filing of the original master list. 
(Prior code § 61-4003) 
12.24.050 - Conformance to tree plan and master list. 
    All trees, shrubs and ground covers hereinafter planted in a public street in the city shall conform as to type, species, spacing and location as prescribed by the comprehensive street tree plan and the master list of trees, shrubs and ground covers as prescribed by Sections 12.24.030 and 12.24.040. 
(Prior code § 61-4004) 
12.24.060 - Exceptions. 
    Should a person desire to plant a tree, shrub, or ground cover in a public street which is not included in the comprehensive street tree plan or master list of trees, shrubs and ground covers, such person shall first request a permit from the director of public works to do so, and the director shall issue such permit only upon first obtaining the approval therefor from the planning commission and city council. 
(Prior code § 61-4005) 
12.24.070 - Responsibility for maintenance and replacement of trees, shrubs and ground cover. 
    The responsibility for maintaining trees, shrubs and ground covers under this chapter rests with the owner of the property which abuts upon a section of public street affected by the provisions in this chapter. All affected street trees, shrubs and ground cover shall be maintained by such property owner in a good and healthy condition, including regular watering. Any tree which is removed by a property owner under the provisions of this chapter shall be replaced by the property owner in accordance with provisions of the comprehensive street tree plan. Where required, replacement shall be made at the expense of the property owner within sixty (60) days of obtaining a permit for the removal of the original tree as prescribed under Section 12.24.080. 
(Prior code § 61-4006) 
12.24.080 - Permit to remove and trim trees. 
    No person shall plant, remove, injure or interfere with any tree upon the public streets of the city without the prior written permission and approval of the director of public works. The director is hereby authorized to grant such permission at his discretion, and where in the opinion of the director it is necessary; provided, that a permit to remove a tree shall not be granted until the proposal has been reviewed by the planning commission in the manner prescribed under Section 12.24.090, and further; provided, that a removed tree shall be replaced by an approved tree in the manner prescribed under Section 12.24.070 of this chapter. A permit to remove or trim a tree shall be valid for a period not to exceed sixty (60) days after its date of issuance. 
(Prior code § 61-4007) 
12.24.090 - Trimming, pruning and removal of trees which constitute a public nuisance. 
    Any tree growing in a public street or on private property which is endangering or in any way may endanger the security or usefulness of any public street or of any underground utility or overhead utility wires, is hereby declared a public nuisance, and the director of public works may cause to have such tree pruned, thinned, cut back at the roots, or removed, or to permit any affected public utility to do so. Before taking such action, the director shall notify the planning commission, city council and affected property owner. The planning commission shall have thirty (30) days to review the proposed action of the director and may appeal such proposed action to the city council within such time period. The affected property owner may also appeal such proposed action to the city council within thirty (30) days of receipt of written notice from the director of the proposed action. The city council shall hear and have final authority over any appeal by the planning commission or property owner. The director shall have the authority to cause a street tree to be trimmed, pruned or removed when the condition of the tree is so hazardous as to constitute an immediate and significant danger to the public. Conditions warranting such action include serious damage to the tree incurred through vehicular collision, fire, explosion or other casualty, or by acts of God or the public enemy. In taking any action to cause the pruning, trimming or removal of a hazardous tree, the director shall comply with all applicable requirements of the California Environmental Quality Act, as amended. 
(Prior code § 61-4008) 
12.24.100 - Abuse and destruction of trees. 
    It shall be a violation of the provisions of this chapter to abuse, destroy or mutilate any tree in a public street, or attach or place any rope or wire (other than one used to support a young or broken tree) sign, poster, handbill or other thing to or on any tree growing in a public street, or to cause or permit any wire charged with electricity to come in contact with any such tree, or to allow any gaseous liquid or solid substance which is harmful to such tree to come in contact with its roots or leaves. 
(Prior code § 61-4009) 
12.24.110 - Liability. 
    Nothing contained in this chapter shall be deemed to impose any liability upon the city, its officers or employees, nor to relieve the owner of any private property from the duty to keep any tree, shrub or plant upon his property or under his control in such a condition as to prevent it from constituting a hazard or an impediment to travel or vision upon any public street within the city. 
(Prior code § 61-4010) 
12.24.120 - Enforcement. 
    The director of public works, or its designee, is hereby authorized to enforce the provisions of this chapter in accordance with the applicable provisions of Chapter 17.92 of Title 17 of the Kingsburg Municipal Code. 
(Prior code § 61-4011) 
(Ord. No. 2010-02, § 7, 7-21-2010) 
12.24.130 - Violations-Penalties. 
    Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction. 
(Prior code § 61-4012) 
Title 13 - PUBLIC SERVICES 
Chapters: 
Chapter 13.04 - WATER SERVICE SYSTEM 
Sections: 

13.04.010 - Definition of premises. 
    "Premises" means a lot or part of a lot, a building or part of a building, or any parcel or tract of land. 
(Prior code § 62-1000) 
13.04.020 - Public works director or designee-Duties. 
A.  The water works of the city, comprising the pumping station or stations, tank, mains, pipes, valves, meters, fire hydrants, other service appliances, grounds, buildings and appurtenances thereto, shall be under the supervision and control of the public works director or designee, subject to the direction and authority of the council. 
B.  It shall be the duty of the public works director or designee to: supervise and direct all work connected with the water works; and enforce the provisions of this code relating to the water works of the city, and report any and all violations thereof to the council; and upon a report of any violations of rules governing the use of water under a flat rate, the council may, upon his/her recommendation, replace such service with meter service at any time. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; prior code § 62-1001) 
13.04.030 - Rates. 
A.  All rates for water service shall be established and fixed by resolution of the council. 
B.  There shall be an optional flat rate service, the rates, regulations, management, and operation of which shall be fixed by resolution of the council. 
(Prior code § 62-1002) 
13.04.040 - Rules and regulations. 
    The rules and regulations set forth in the following subsections shall govern the operation and management of the waterworks of the city, and no person shall fail to comply with any such rule or regulation. 
A.  All costs of installation, connections and water service shall be charged against the property to which water is furnished and the owner thereof shall be responsible therefor. If the occupant of any property, who is not the owner thereof, fails to meet any payment for water service which may be due, or fails to notify the water department when vacating such property to discontinue water service thereon, then the owner of such property shall be charged for the amount due or for such an amount which may accrue from the continuation of water service to the property. 
B.  All unpaid delinquent water bills shall be a lien on the property serviced with said water and shall be collected and enforced in the same manner that unpaid city taxes on said property are collected and enforced. 
C.  1.  Notwithstanding any other provisions in this chapter all water service billings are due and payable on the first of each month and delinquent on the twentieth (20th) day of each month. If not paid within that time a ten percent (10%) delinquency charge shall be assessed and payable on the unpaid balance. Further, water service may be terminated as provided herein for nonpayment after said delinquency date. 
2.  All such billings shall be assessed and collected as set forth in this chapter. 
D.  No water shall be turned on or supplied to any premises where water is not now furnished, or to any premises where the present service is discontinued or changed, nor shall any connection with the mains or installation of meter be made or permitted, unless request therefore shall first have been made to the city, by the person desiring the same. 
E.  Whenever an owner or occupant of any premises desires water service to be discontinued he/she shall so notify the public works department or the city clerk, and full rates will be charged against any and all premises, for water used thereon, until such notice has been received or new application has been made for such service. 
F.  Each building and service or supply pipe must have its own independent tap unless special permit, in writing, to the contrary is first authorized by the city with the approval of the council. 
G.  The tapping of any water main shall be done only by the city or a tapper employed by the city or by a duly licensed and bonded plumber authorized by the city to do so. City water department personnel must be present during work performed on a city water main. 
H.  The service cock is the property of the city and it shall not be used by the consumer for the purpose of turning the water off or on, except in case of emergency or with special permission from the public works department. 
I.  No consumer shall provide or furnish water regularly to any premises or to any person other than the premises to which it is introduced or to the person for whose use the installation and supply is intended. For any violation of this rule, the water shall be shut off and not turned on again until the city has been paid such sum of money, as established by resolution, as the city shall properly deem due for water so used and supplied, and, a fee as established by resolution, for shutting off and turning on the water. 
J.  No person shall place upon or about any meter, hydrant, service cock, or other fixture belonging to the water works, any building material, rubbish or other substances so as to prevent free access to the same at all times. 
K.  The public works department shall have the right in emergency to turn the water off or on from the pipes of the system without notice, but effort will be made to notify consumers in advance whenever it becomes necessary to turn it off. 
L.  Any damage occurring to a meter or any fixture belonging to the waterworks, from carelessness or neglect of the consumer, as well as any damage which may result from hot water or steam from any boiler or heater, shall be paid for by the consumer responsible on presentation of a bill therefore. 
M.  No person shall willfully or carelessly break, injure, interfere with or disturb any building, machinery, meter, pipe, service cock, hydrant, or other fixture or property of the water works. 
N.  No person (other than members of the fire department and employees of the city properly authorized) shall use or in any way interfere with the public fire hydrants or wrenches therefore without permission of the proper authorities. 
O.  No person shall wastewater provided through the city water system. "Waste" under this section shall be established if a person allows said water to flow onto adjacent premises or a public street or rights-of-way. 
P.  Termination of services, disconnection, may be made for violation of these rules and regulations, including, but not limited to, nonpayment of charges or fees due. 
1.  Non-residential users may have water service terminated for nonpayment of charges after the twentieth (20th) day of the month of billing after forty-eight (48) hours' prior notice. 
2.  Residential users may have water services terminated for nonpayment of charges upon due notice and under the provisions of Public Utilities Code Sections 10010 and 10010.1. 
3.  No disconnections shall occur during the time period when the business office of the city is closed. 
4.  A reconnection fee, as established by council resolution, shall be paid before water services are reconnected. 
Q.  When the water supply to any premises has been cut off and stopped by the city for nonpayment of water rates, or because of violation of rules and regulations, and it is found turned on again without permission, the city shall have authority to see to it that the service or supply pipe is disconnected and no water shall again be supplied to said premises until all water rates, costs and damages incurred by the city in stopping and restoring the supply, together with the sum as established by resolution for the unlawful turning on of the water, shall have been paid to the city. 
R.  There shall be paid to the city, at the time of application for new water connection to the city water system for any property, a water service connection fee. The amount of such water service connection fee shall be set from time to time by resolution of the city council. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; Ord. 466, 1988: Ord. 464, 1988: prior code § 62-1003) 
13.04.050 - Outside service. 
    Service of water may be made outside the city when approved by the council, and upon the terms and conditions prescribed by the council. The other provisions of this article relating to water rates and water service shall not be deemed to apply to such service. 
(Prior code § 62-1004) 
13.04.060 - Outside service disconnected upon owner's objection to annexation. 
    Anything to the contrary notwithstanding, whenever the city council agrees in the future that water may be furnished for the benefit of a specific parcel or parcels of property outside the city limits, the furnishing of such water service outside the city limits shall be deemed subject to the condition that if the then owner of said parcel or parcels of property shall object to having his/her property annexed to the city, if it should be included in any annexation proceeding, then the water service to his/her property shall be disconnected and water service to his/her property by the city shall no longer be furnished. 
(Prior code § 62-1005) 
13.04.070 - Water service. 
A.  Water Waste: Lawn, Shrub, Tree Irrigation. No person shall allow water to run or waste from his/her property onto a city street to such an extent that water shall flow in the street gutter excessively beyond the frontage of the property occupied by such person; nor to flow excessively off of the occupied property into the street gutter; nor to continuously fall upon a public right-of-way or adjoining property such as to significantly contribute to the gutter flow; nor to excessively flow onto or continuously fall upon adjoining properties or an alley. 
B.  Lawn, Shrub, Tree Irrigation Restricted to Certain Days. Usage of water for the purposes listed in this section shall be restricted to three days per week as follows: 
    Even number addresses: Wednesday-Friday-Sunday 
    Odd number addresses: Tuesday-Thursday-Saturday 
    No watering on Monday. Drip irrigation systems will not be subject to the three-day restriction. 
    However, the city shall have the right, at any time, to implement more restrictive mandatory requirements and conservation measures for outdoor water usage including, without limitation reducing the number of watering days and specifying and limiting the hours for outdoor water usage during specific watering days. 
C.  Swimming Pool Fills and Refills. The permit fee for swimming pool initial fills and refills is hereby removed from this section and shall be set from time to time by resolution of the Kingsburg city council. 
D.  New or Replanted Yards. New and replanted yards will be exempt from the watering restrictions established pursuant to this chapter upon the owner thereof obtaining a two-week no fee permit from the city which will provide for exemption for the time period identified in the permit. 
E.  Washing Vehicles. When washing a vehicle with a garden hose, an automatic shut-off nozzle must be attached. 
F.  City System. The connection of any residence, piece of property, or premises with the water system of the city shall be presumptive evidence that the water for irrigation on said premises comes from the water system of the city. Waste of water, as defined in this chapter, is prohibited each and every day of the calendar year. Violation of this section, any provision of the city's water shortage contingency plan or any applicable federal, state or local law, rule or regulation regarding the use of water is hereby expressly declared to be a misdemeanor, except as otherwise provided in any provision of applicable federal, state or local law, rule or regulation regarding the use of water. 
G.  Construction Water. Permit to use city water during construction projects must be obtained from the Kingsburg public works department. Water used will be charged at a fee as established by resolution. Water may be taken only from fire hydrants specifically designated by the department of public works. Construction water must be utilized in a prudent manner and not allowed to be wasted. Removal of water from the city system for construction or other purposes without authorization shall be considered a violation of this section and is hereby expressly declared to be a misdemeanor. 
H.  Violation and Penalties. Any person willfully violating any provisions of this chapter, any provision of the city's water shortage contingency plan or any applicable federal, state or local law, rule or regulation regarding the use of water is guilty of a violation hereinafter provided and subject to the penalties, remedies and fines therefore as provided by this chapter, the provisions of the city's water shortage contingency plan or applicable federal, state or local law, rule or regulation regarding the use of water. In addition to the issuance of a citation for such violation, the following sanctions in addition to any other applicable penalties, remedies or fines, shall also apply: Upon determination of a violation of this chapter, the city's water shortage contingency plan or any applicable federal, state or local law, rule or regulation regarding the use of water, the department of public works shall issue to the user or consumer a notice of violation and direction to correct the condition or to discontinue the violation. If the consumer fails to comply with the direction of the department of public works, a fee as established by resolution of the city council will be added to the water bill and the city shall exercise any other remedies and impose and collect from the consumer any penalties and fines required pursuant to the city's water shortage contingency plan or any other applicable federal, state or local law, rule or regulation regarding the use of water. The city shall have the right to install a water meter at the expense of the water user or consumer on the water service line and thereupon such consumer or user shall pay for the water actually used at meter rates or water service shall be discontinued. Every person who willfully violates any provision of this chapter, or the city's water shortage contingency plan or any other applicable federal, state or local law, rule or regulation regarding the use of water or who verbally abuses, threatens, harasses or in any manner interferes with the city investigating or enforcing city water regulations is guilty of a misdemeanor except as otherwise provided in any applicable federal, state or local law, rule or regulation regarding the use of water. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; Ord. 92-03 §§ 1-2, 1993; Ord. 91-03, 1991) 
(Ord. No. 2014-04, §§ 2-5, 8-6-2014; Ord. No. 2014-05, §§ 2-5, 8-20-2014) 
13.04.080 - Water meter facilities reimbursement program. 
A.  All property owners receiving water meter facilities installed by the City of Kingsburg or its contractors shall reimburse the city the total cost of purchase and installation of the water meter facilities for their residential property. The installation of the water meter facilities will only occur in the city street right-of-way. Work that requires replacement of facilities between the new water meter and city water main (i.e. replacement of water service line from the city water main to the property owner's residential property line) will be paid by the city and will not be charged to the property owner. If any portion of the property owner's water system located on/under the property owner's residential property requires repair, replacement or improvement (collectively "water system work") as a result of installation of the water meter facilities, such water system work and the cost thereof will be the sole responsibility of the property owner. All water system work must be completed concurrently with the installation of the water meter facilities. At the request of the property owner, the city's contractors will perform the water system work (at the property owner's expense) and the cost of the water system work will be paid by the property owner pursuant to the city reimbursement options set forth in Subsection B. of this section. 
B.  After completion of installation of the water meter facilities, the property owner will receive a written billing statement ("billing statement") identifying the actual cost of purchase and installation of the water meter facilities and, if applicable, the actual cost of the water system work. The billing statement will itemize all costs subject to reimbursement and will advise property owner that the property must reimburse the city the total cost of the purchase and installation of the water meter facilities and, if applicable, the total cost of the water system work (collectively "reimbursement amount") as follows: (i) payment of the total reimbursement amount within thirty (30) days after the date of the billing statement; or (ii) payment of the total reimbursement amount plus interest at the rate of two percent (2%) per annum on the unpaid portion of the total reimbursement amount in sixty (60) equal monthly installments commencing with the city water service billing issued by the city to the property owner at least thirty (30) days after the date of the billing statement. Each monthly installment will be identified on the property owner's monthly water service bill and must be paid concurrently with the property owner's water service charge for the respective month. If someone other than the property owner pays the monthly water service bill, the city will provide the property owner with a separate billing statement. The property owner may pay the reimbursement amount in full at any time prior to the end of the sixty (60) month period. Should a property owner fail to pay the total reimbursement amount within thirty (30) days after the date of the billing statement, the city will assume the property owner has elected to pay the total reimbursement amount over the sixty-month period. 
C.  Should a property owner fail to pay any portion of the reimbursement amount on or before the date the payment or monthly installment is due, the city shall send the property owner a written notice of non-payment identifying the amount the property owner has failed to pay. If the property owner fails to pay the amount due within thirty (30) days after the date of the written notice of non-payment, the city shall proceed to exercise any and all remedies at law or equity to collect the total reimbursement amount plus interest at the rate of two percent (2%) per annum on the amount of the reimbursement amount remaining unpaid. In lieu of bringing a collection action against the property owner, the city may execute and file in the office of the Fresno County Recorder a notice of lien of substantially the following form: 
"NOTICE OF LIEN 
Pursuant to City of Kingsburg Ordinance No. 2013-02, the City of Kingsburg installed Water Meter Facilities (and performed Water System Work, if applicable) related to that certain real property commonly known as _____________, Kingsburg, California, and more particularly described in Exhibit "A", which is attached hereto and made a part hereof ("Real Property"). The owner of the Real Property has failed to reimburse the City of Kingsburg the sum of ________________________________ ($______________)("Reimbursement Amount") in accordance with the provisions of City of Kingsburg Ordinance No. 2013-02. The City of Kingsburg hereby claims a lien against the Real Property for payment of the Reimbursement Amount in the sum of $______________. The Reimbursement Amount shall be a lien upon the Real Property and accrue interest at the rate of two percent (2%) per annum until the total Reimbursement Amount is paid in full. 
Dated: This ____ day of _______________, 20__ 
      _____________________________ 
DIRECTOR OF FINANCE OF 
THE CITY OF KINGSBURG 
(ACKNOWLEDGMENT)" 
Immediately upon the recording of the notice of lien, the reimbursement amount identified therein shall constitute a lien on the real property. Such lien shall, for all purposes, be upon a parity with the lien of state and local taxes. 
(Ord. No. 2013-02, §§ 1-3, 11-6-2013) 
Chapter 13.08 - SEWER SERVICE SYSTEM 
Sections: 

13.08.010 - Definitions. 
    Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meanings of terms used in this chapter shall be as defined in the latest edition of the American Society of Civil Engineers' Manual of Engineering Practice No. 37, and the latest edition of the Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Sewage, published by the American Public Health Association. 
    The meaning of additional terms as used in this chapter shall be as follows: 
    "Applicant" means any person, group of persons or entity who applies for sewer service. 
    "Business" means all commercial uses, retail uses, industrial uses, professional offices and home occupations. 
    "City" means the city of Kingsburg and its authorized representatives acting within the scope of their assigned duties. 
    "City council" means the city council of the city of Kingsburg. 
    "City sewerage system" or "sewer system" means all facilities for collecting and transporting sanitary or industrial wastes of any nature, including all such facilities both inside and outside the city limits owned by the city and operated and maintained by the district. 
    "Commercial garbage grinder" means a mechanical unit for pulverizing large quantities of waste by a commercial user. 
    "Completion" means acceptance, in writing, by the city engineer of an addition to the city sewerage system. 
    "Connected" means the physical joinder of any plumbing or drainage system or fixture contained in structure to a sewer line. 
    "Customer" means any person, entity or governmental agency served by the city through the sewer system. 
    "District" means the Selma-Kingsburg-Fowler County sanitation district. 
    "Dwelling" or "dwelling unit" means a room or group of rooms which is occupied by one family for living and sleeping purposes, including, without limitation, a single-family residence, mobilehome unit, multi-family unit, apartment, townhouse, flat or condominium. 
    "Fee schedule" means the fee schedule as adopted from time to time by the city council by resolution whether separately or as part of a master fee schedule in a master fee resolution. 
    "Infiltration" means the water entering a sewer system, including sewer service connections, from the ground through such means as, but not limited to, defective pipes, pipe joints, connections, or manhole walls. Infiltration does not include and is distinguished from inflow. 
    "Infiltration/inflow" means the total quantity of water from both infiltration and inflow without distinguishing the source. 
    "Inflow" means the water discharged into a sewer system, including service connections, from such sources as, but not limited to, roofs, yard and area drains, foundation drains, cooling water discharges, drains from springs and swampy areas, manhole covers, cross-connections from storm sewers and combined sewers, catch basins, stormwaters, surface runoff, street wash waters, or drainage. Inflow does not include and is distinguished from infiltration. 
    "Lot" means any premises, piece or parcel of land or property, as bounded, defined or shown upon the latest map, plat or deed recorded in the office of the recorder of the county; provided, however, that in the event any building or improvements appurtenant to said building covers more area than a "lot," as herein defined, the term "lot" shall be deemed to be and include all such pieces or parcels of land upon which said building or improvements are wholly or partly located. 
    "Person" means any individual, firm, company, association, society, municipality, private corporation, institution, enterprise, governmental agency, or other entity. 
    "Sewage" means sewage as defined under the ordinances, resolutions and regulations of the district. 
    "Sewer connection fees" is the "connection charge" which may be applicable to any lot, but does not include those applicable fees charged by district. 
    "Unit," "equivalent single-family unit" or "equivalent single-family residence" are synonymous terms that mean a residential service unit as defined by the district for office, commercial, industrial, institutional, or similar uses. 
(Added during 5-08 supplement) 
13.08.020 - Connection-City rights-Infiltration/inflow limit. 
    The city has by written agreement designated the district to control the right to physically connect with the sewer system of the city and for laying laterals therefrom upon payment of applicable fees to the city and the district. The infiltration/inflow limit for all connections to the sewer system shall be as determined by the district. Applicant shall perform tests as required by the district to guarantee that inflow/infiltration does not exceed the limit as prescribed by the district. Copies of any such tests shall be filed with the city. 
(Added during 5-08 supplement) 
13.08.030 - Connection permits required. 
    No connection shall be made to the sewer system until all required permits therefore has been obtained from the city and the district. The city shall not issue a building permit until all required sewer connection permits have been issued by the city and the district. 
(Added during 5-08 supplement) 
13.08.040 - Sewer connection fees. 
A.  No connection to the sewer system shall be made unless the following charges, when applicable, have been paid: 
1.  Sewer Connection Fee. 
a.  For each new connection to the sewer system there shall be a charge ("sewer connection charge") as set forth in the master fee resolution or by separate resolution of the city. Payment to the city of the sewer connection fee or any other fees identified in this chapter or credits against payment of said fees granted by the city shall in no way limit, abrogate or relieve any obligation to pay any fees required by the district. 
b.  When the new connection is to an existing building sewer for which a sewer connection fee has been previously paid to the city, a credit equal to the amount of the previous sewer connection fee shall be made in determining the amount of the sewer connection fee to be paid. However, if the existing building is zoned to allow the existing building to be used for industrial uses, and the sewer service for the building has been disconnected for the previous twelve (12) calendar months or the building is being used for an industrial use different from the previous industrial use of the building, the city engineer will review the new industrial use to determine what credit, if any, is applicable. All such credits will be at the current sewer connection fee rate. 
B.  When land is subdivided, the owner, prior to the time the final subdivision map or parcel map is approved, shall pay or cause to be paid all applicable sewer connection fees. However, with the approval of the city engineer, which approval may be withheld in the sole and absolute discretion of the city engineer, the sewer connection fees applicable to a subdivision may be deferred and paid on a per lot basis at the time of issuance of a building permit for any structure to be constructed on a lot. Sewer connection fees applicable to existing structures will be paid at the time of issuance of building permit. 
C.  Payment of sewer connection fees does not authorize any person to perform or cause to be performed any work to the sewer system to be performed by the city or the district. 
(Added during 5-08 supplement) 
13.08.050 - Payment of sewer connection fees. 
    The amount of any sewer connection fees or other amounts to be paid to the city as required pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a debt owing to the city which, until paid, shall be a continuing obligation of the owner of the property for which the charge was incurred. Any person who makes a connection to the sewer system without having paid all such charges in full shall be liable to the city for payment of the full amount of such charges. 
(Added during 5-08 supplement) 
13.08.060 - Oversized sewer lines. 
    Whenever a person is required, as a condition of approval of a development project to construct and install a sewer line which is determined by the city to have supplemental size, length or capacity over that needed for the impacts of that development project ("oversized sewer lines") and when such construction and installation is necessary to ensure efficient and timely construction of the sewer line, the city shall provide a credit against the sewer connection fee applicable to that development, that portion of the cost of construction and installation of the oversized sewer lines resulting solely from the required oversizing ("credit amount"). If the credit amount is in excess of the sewer connection fee payable by that development the city shall issue a reimbursement agreement. The procedures and process for determining the credit amount and the provisions of the reimbursement agreement shall be established by city council resolution. Only sewer lines larger than six inches in internal diameter shall be considered oversized. However, if the person installing the oversized sewer line requires a sewer line larger than six inches for its own purposes, the oversized sewer line will be the size required to serve the development. 
(Added during 5-08 supplement) 
13.08.070 - Connection-Performance standards. 
    Connections made to the sewer system and laterals therefrom shall be made in accordance with the standard specifications of the district. Any person discharging into, or proposing to discharge into the sewer system, shall comply with the ordinances, policies, standards and regulations of the district (collectively "district ordinances"). In the event of any conflict between this chapter and the district ordinances, the district ordinances shall control. 
(Added during 5-08 supplement) 
13.08.080 - Sewer system construction. 
    Any person desiring to make an addition to the sewer system shall comply with all applicable city ordinances, policies, standards and regulations and the district ordinances. 
(Added during 5-08 supplement) 
13.08.090 - Use of city sewer system required-Restrictions on private sewage disposal facilities. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to cause, suffer or permit the discharge of sewage, including, without limitation, human excrement or other liquid wastes in any place or manner except to the sewer system. It is unlawful for any person to construct within the city any privy, privy vaults, septic tank, cesspool or other facility designed or intended to be utilized for the disposal of sewage (collectively "private sewage disposal facility"). 
B.  Any existing private sewage disposal facility, working properly, may be used and pumped. However, repairs, additions or alterations to an existing private sewage disposal facility is prohibited. At the time a repair, addition or alteration is required, the private sewage disposal system shall be abandoned and the property owner must connect to the sewer system. If a property using an existing private sewage disposal facility is located within two hundred (200) feet of the sewer system and is not connected to the sewer system, the property must connect to the sewer system upon the occurrence of any of the following: building additions or modifications requiring a building permit; changes in the use of the property; or a change in ownership of the property. Prior to connection to the sewer system, the owner must pay all fees and charges of the district and the city sewer connection fee which are in effect at the time of issuance of the sewer connection permit. 
(Added during 5-08 supplement) 
13.08.100 - Prohibited discharges designated. 
    No person shall discharge or cause, allow or permit to be discharged into the sewer system, any substance/material prohibited by the district or the city. 
(Added during 5-08 supplement) 
13.08.110 - Grease, oil and sand interceptors. 
    If required by the district or the city, grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be installed by a user of the sewer system in accordance with district ordinances. 
(Added during 5-08 supplement) 
13.08.120 - Swimming pool water and other inflow prohibited-Exception. 
    No person shall discharge, into the sewer system, any water that is included in the definition of inflow. Swimming pool water shall not be drained or discharged into the sewer system without the prior approval of the district. 
(Added during 5-08 supplement) 
13.08.130 - Enforcement. 
A.  The district is hereby authorized to enforce all of the provisions of this chapter. The provisions of this chapter shall be applicable to any building, structure or property connected to the sewer system, whether the same is owned, operated or controlled by a private party or by a public or quasi-public agency, corporation or association. Nothing in this chapter shall preclude or restrict the district, either concurrently with the city or independently from the city, from enforcing the district's ordinances at the district's sole discretion. Upon request by district, enforcement will be deferred to district on any of the matters identified in this chapter excepting those matters solely related to the city, e.g., city sewer connection fees. 
B.  In addition to such other penalties or remedies as may be prescribed for a violation of this chapter, whenever the district determines that a discharge of sewage has taken place in violation of any district ordinances or this chapter, or any effluent limitations or pretreatment standards promulgated by the district or any action resulting in a violation of the agreements between the city and the district, the district may require the violator to submit for the district's approval a detailed time schedule of specific actions which the violator shall take in order to prevent or correct such violation. Any failure to comply with such an approved time schedule shall likewise be deemed a violation of this chapter. 
C.  Any person affected by any decision, action or determination by the city, interpreting or implementing the provisions of this chapter, may file with the city clerk, within ten (10) days of the date of such decision, action or determination, a notice of appeal to the city council appealing such decision, action or determination. The notice of appeal shall set forth in detail all facts supporting the appeal. The filing of the notice of appeal shall stay all further action required under any notice of violation or cease and desist orders and accumulation of interest upon penalties thereon, pending final decision by the city council on the appeal; provided, however, that nothing stated herein shall limit the authority of the district or the city to take such action or to make such directives as the district or the city deem necessary to stop or prevent an ongoing or threatened violation of any of the provisions of this chapter including, actions or directives to prevent or stop threatened harm to the health or safety of the public. Such action shall include, without limitation, continuing to physically block the violator's access to the sewer system until the appeal is heard and decided by the city council. Upon an appeal brought to the city council by the notice of appeal, the city council shall set the matter for hearing and after said hearing may affirm, overrule or modify the decision, action or determination of the city, which is the subject of the appeal. The city council shall have the further authority to condition any penalties imposed or the corrective action required or to reduce or increase the penalties imposed. Failure of the violator to comply with the city council's decision or to make arrangements for compliance satisfactory to the district and the city within ten (10) days after the date of the city council's decision shall result in the termination of the violator's right to discharge into the sewer system. 
(Added during 5-08 supplement) 
13.08.140 - Rights of inspection. 
    The city and the district shall have the right to enter upon the premises of any person at reasonable hours to inspect and to determine whether this chapter is being violated by such person. 
(Added during 5-08 supplement) 
13.08.150 - Violation-Correction notice required. 
    Any person found in violation of any provision of this chapter shall be served by the district or the city, if applicable, with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a time period for correction thereof. The time period allowed for correction of the violation and whether the violation has been properly corrected during the time period shall be determined by the district or the city, if applicable. The violator shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations. All persons shall be held responsible for any and all acts of agents, employees or contractors who violate any provision of this chapter. 
(Added during 5-08 supplement) 
13.08.160 - Disconnection and reconnection conditions. 
    Should the violator fail to correct the violation identified in the notice of violation within the time period specified in the notice of violation, the district or the city shall have the power to disconnect the violator's property from the sewer system. Upon disconnection, the district or the city shall estimate the cost of disconnection from and reconnection to the sewer system and such violator shall deposit with the city, such cost, as estimated, before such violator is reconnected to the sewer system. The district or the city shall refund any part of the deposit remaining after payment of all costs of disconnection and reconnection. 
(Added during 5-08 supplement) 
13.08.170 - Abatement of continuing unlawful uses. 
    Continued habitation of any building or structure or continued operation of any industrial facility while in violation of this chapter, is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. The district or the city may initiate proceedings to abate the occupancy of the building or operation of industrial facility during the period of such violation. 
(Added during 5-08 supplement) 
13.08.180 - Occupation of disconnected premises deemed public nuisance-Abatement-Reconnection costs. 
    During any period of disconnection, habitation of any building or structure or operation of any industrial facility shall constitute a public nuisance, whereupon the district or the city shall initiate proceedings to abate the occupancy of said building or structure or the operation in any industrial building during the period of disconnection. In such event, and as a condition of reconnection, there is to be paid to the city reasonable attorney's fee and cost of suit arising in said action. 
(Added during 5-08 supplement) 
13.08.190 - Violation-Damage liability. 
    Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be liable to the district and the city for any expense, loss, damage and attorney fees incurred by the district or the city by reason of such violation. 
(Added during 5-08 supplement) 
13.08.200 - Tampering with or damaging sewerage works prohibited. 
    No person shall break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the sewer system. 
(Added during 5-08 supplement) 
13.08.210 - Violation of discharge requirements-Charges. 
    Any user violating any provision of this chapter or any discharge requirements issued by the city or the district shall pay the actual cost for labor, material and supplies necessary to correct the discharge violation and shall pay an administrative cost as determined by the district or city. 
(Added during 5-08 supplement) 
Chapter 13.12 - WATER AND DRAINAGE FACILITY STANDARDS* 
Sections: 

13.12.010 - Purpose. 
    To assure the city that its water and drainage systems will be constructed in sizes and capacities to meet the development needs of the community and to provide as fair and simplified a method of reimbursing those who develop or construct such facilities exceeding their own needs for individual projects. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; Ord. 99-05 § 2 (part), 1999: Ord. 467 § 2 (part), 1988: Ord. 452 § 2 (part), 1986) 
13.12.020 - Definitions. 
    The following words shall have the meanings and construction in this chapter unless expressly indicated otherwise. 
    "Benefited area" means that real property which is found and determined to receive a benefit due to the installation and construction of pipeline facilities. 
    "Frontage fee" means the rate of fees assessed based upon lineal feet of street frontage immediately adjacent to the pipeline in question. 
    "Oversize sewer" means a sanitary sewer line that is greater in size and capacity than is necessary to serve the development and must be larger than eight inches. 
    "Oversize storm drain" means a storm drain line that is greater in size and capacity than is necessary to serve the development and must be larger than fifteen (15) inches. 
    "Secondary distribution system (or SDS)" means those pipelines that connect between the TGM lines and the individual property's service pipelines for the water system. 
    "Transmission grid main (or TGM)" means the major pipelines that are required throughout the city in sizes and locations as specified for the water system. 
(Ord. 99-05 § 2 (part), 1999: Ord. 467 § 2 (part), 1988: Ord. 452 § 2 (part), 1986) 
13.12.030 - Administration. 
    The city treasurer shall maintain separate fund accounts for the water, sewer, and storm drain fees collected pursuant hereto and make reimbursements therefrom in accordance herewith. 
(Ord. 99-05 § 2 (part), 1999: Ord. 467 § 2 (part), 1988: Ord. 452 § 2 (part), 1986) 
13.12.040 - Standard specifications for water and storm drain facilities. 
A.  All water and storm drain facilities within the city shall be constructed in accordance with the minimum standards set forth in the City Standard Specifications and the Selma-Kingsburg-Fowler County Sanitation District Wastewater Sewer Design and Construction Standards. 
B.  The city engineer shall review the standards on an annual basis and submit recommended changes to the city council for consideration. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; Ord. 99-05 § 2 (part), 1999: Ord. 467 § 2 (part), 1988: Ord. 452 § 2 (part), 1986) 
13.12.050 - City's eligibility for reimbursement. 
    Where the city itself installs water, sewer, or storm drain facilities, whether standard or supplemental sizes, to encourage or promote development of benefited lands, the costs of said facilities are a proper charge on benefited lands, rather than on all taxpayers within the city. Accordingly, the city shall be reimbursed in the same manner and by the same rates for said facilities as provided in this chapter. Rather than by reimbursement agreement, city shall adopt a resolution at the time setting forth the facilities in question and lands benefited. The date of said resolution shall fix its priority for the fifteen (15) year term as with reimbursement agreements. 
(Ord. 99-05 § 2 (part), 1999: Ord. 467 § 2 (part), 1988: Ord. 452 § 2 (part), 1986) 
13.12.070 - Connection fees-Water system facilities. 
    In contemplation of adding water wells and to share in the costs of the existing system, there shall be a per residential equivalent connection fee as set forth by resolution. 
(Ord. 99-05 § 2 (part), 1999: Ord. 467 § 2 (part), 1988: Ord. 452 § 2 (part), 1986) 
13.12.080 - City-wide reimbursement district. 
    It is hereby established that for purposes of determining reimbursements for the transmission grid main water system that the entire city shall be the reimbursement district. Fees collected for the TGM lines shall be the only funds available to or for reimbursement for supplemental water system pipelines. 
(Ord. 99-05 § 2 (part), 1999: Ord. 467 § 2 (part), 1988: Ord. 452 § 2 (part), 1986) 
13.12.090 - Master plan-Storm drainage facilities. 
    All storm drainage facilities shall be constructed in accordance with the Master Plan for Storm Drainage. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; Ord. 99-05 § 2 (part), 1999: Ord. 467 § 2 (part), 1988: Ord. 452 § 2 (part), 1986) 
13.12.100 - Fees-Storm drain facilities. 
    Fees for storm drain facilities shall be set by resolution and reimbursement therefore shall be based on the number of linear feet of oversize or supplemental lines constructed multiplied by the per foot differential cost for that size line, as set forth in the fee resolution. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; Ord. 99-05 § 2 (part), 1999: Ord. 467 § 2 (part), 1988: Ord. 452 § 2 (part), 1986) 
13.12.110 - Eligible facilities. 
A.  Reimbursement for the construction of storm drain facilities shall be limited to the construction of oversize or supplemental lines, ponding basins or pumping facilities all as shown in the Master Plan for Storm Drainage, except as provided in Sections 13.12.140-13.12.160 herein. 
B.  The amount eligible for reimbursement for construction of ponding basins or pumping facilities shall be determined on the basis of the differential cost between the capacity constructed and the capacity needed to serve any particular development. 
(Ord. 99-05 § 2 (part), 1999: Ord. 467 § 2 (part), 1988: Ord. 452 § 2 (part), 1986) 
13.12.120 - Master plan. 
    All sanitary sewer facilities shall be constructed in accordance with the Collection System Sewer Master Plan for Kingsburg, prepared by Selma-Kingsburg-Fowler County Sanitation District. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; Ord. 99-05 § 2 (part), 1999: Ord. 467 § 2 (part), 1988: Ord. 452 § 2 (part), 1986) 
13.12.130 - Fees-Sanitary sewer facilities. 
    Fees for sanitary sewer collection facilities shall be set by resolution and such fees shall be for the acquisition and/or construction of oversize lines and pumping facilities as shown on the collection system sewer master plan for Kingsburg. 
(Ord. 99-05 § 2 (part), 1999: Ord. 467 § 2 (part), 1988: Ord. 452 § 2 (part), 1986) 
13.12.140 - Eligible facilities. 
A.  Reimbursement for facilities shall be based on the number of linear feet of oversize line constructed multiplied by the per foot differential cost for that size line, as set forth in the fee resolution. 
B.  The amount eligible for reimbursement for construction of pumping facilities shall be determined on the basis of the differential cost between the capacity constructed and the capacity needed to serve any particular development. 
(Ord. 99-05 § 2 (part), 1999: Ord. 467 § 2 (part), 1988: Ord. 452 § 2 (part), 1986) 
13.12.150 - Eligible line extensions-Defined. 
A.  When a person is required to construct and install water, sewer, or storm drain facilities beyond the street frontage limits of his/her site to bring such services to his/her site, whether of standard or supplemental sizes, or TGM or SDS lines, the cost of such lines shall be payable by said developer subject to reimbursement by adjacent lands benefiting from same. 
B.  Any such extensions that are oversize shall be reimbursable as set forth in other provisions of this chapter. 
C.  Any such extensions that are of standard size shall be reimbursable under the provisions of this Article. "Benefited lands" are those properties adjacent to said line extensions that are undeveloped or underdeveloped at the time the said line extensions are installed and which benefit from said installation. 
(Ord. 99-05 § 2 (part), 1999: Ord. 467 § 2 (part), 1988: Ord. 452 § 2 (part), 1986) 
13.12.160 - Benefited lands assessed by frontage fees or acreage fees. 
A.  All undeveloped or underdeveloped lands abutting the street in which the line extensions are installed are hereby found and declared to be benefited by said line extensions. 
B.  Some benefited lands shall be assessed based upon the base rate for such lines in effect at the time of the execution of a reimbursement agreement times the lineal frontage of said property. If two street frontages are benefited each side shall be assessed one-half of the pro-rata amount. 
C.  The per lineal foot base rate shall be established from current costs of such construction as from time to time set by council resolution. 
D.  Said frontage fees as assessed herein shall only be payable at the time the adjacent benefited lands are developed or seek to tie into said extension lines. 
E.  In the case of sewer or storm drainage facilities some lands may be assessed in the form of acreage fees in combination with frontage fees to account for the total benefit to the parcel as determined by the city engineer pursuant to the standards set forth in this code. 
(Ord. 99-05 § 2 (part), 1999: Ord. 467 § 2 (part), 1988: Ord. 452 § 2 (part), 1986) 
13.12.170 - Reimbursement for extension lines. 
A.  The original developer or installer of said extension lines shall enter into an agreement with the city for reimbursement. 
B.  Reimbursement shall be made only on that portion of the extension line that directly benefits undeveloped or underdeveloped property along the frontage of the extension line. 
C.  Reimbursement shall be payable only from funds received via the frontage fees assessed and collected as subsequent users connect to said extension lines within the time stated herein. The area of benefit shall be determined at the time the extension line is installed and reimbursement agreement entered into. 
D.  No credits shall be given against any other fees of the city for the cost of construction of such line extensions. 
E.  The terms of any reimbursement agreement under this chapter shall also include the provisions set forth in Sections 13.12.180-13.12.200. 
(Ord. 99-05 § 2 (part), 1999: Ord. 467 § 2 (part), 1988: Ord. 452 § 2 (part), 1986) 
13.12.180 - Agreements-General terms. 
    No person shall be eligible to enter into a reimbursement agreement under this chapter unless he/she has constructed, or contracted to construct, water, sewer, or storm drain facilities as defined in this chapter. 
    Every reimbursement agreement under this chapter shall contain the following general terms: 
A.  Period of agreement to reimburse shall be a maximum of fifteen (15) years. 
B.  No interest shall be paid on reimbursement amounts. 
C.  City shall charge an administrative fee for costs of maintaining, collecting and disbursing funds under this chapter. 
D.  Payment to those eligible shall be made on an annual basis from monies available in the respective funds on the date set forth in the fee resolution. 
E.  Priority for payment to eligible persons from said funds for oversize storm drains, sewers, or TGM lines shall be based upon the date of the specific agreement with first in time paid in full before subsequent eligible persons are reimbursed. 
F.  No credit shall be given against any other fee that may be imposed by city except by separate written agreements. 
G.  City assumes no liability for the payment of such reimbursement funds and expressly limits it to monies then available in the respective finds established under this chapter. 
(Ord. 99-05 § 2 (part), 1999: Ord. 467 § 2 (part), 1988: Ord. 452 § 2 (part), 1986) 
13.12.190 - Agreements-Oversize sewers and storm drains. 
    Every reimbursement agreement for oversize sewers or storm drains shall, in addition to the general terms above, include provisions, as follows: 
A.  The potential reimbursement for oversize sewer or storm drains shall be based on the number of lineal feet times the differential cost between the line installed and the base size main. 
B.  Except as provided in Sections 13.12.150-13.12.170 herein reimbursement for storm drainage lines shall be for oversize storm drains only. 
C.  Storm drainage fees collected by the city shall be the only source of funds to reimburse the cost of oversize storm drains. 
D.  Except as provided in Sections 13.12.180-13.12.200 herein reimbursement for sanitary sewer lines shall be for oversize sewers only. 
E.  City sewer connection fees collected by the city shall be the only source of funds to reimburse the cost of oversize sewer lines. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; Ord. 99-05 § 2 (part), 1999: Ord. 467 § 2 (part), 1988: Ord. 452 § 2 (part), 1986) 
13.12.200 - Agreements-Line extensions. 
    Every reimbursement agreement for extension lines as defined in Sections 13.12.150-13.12.170 shall, in addition to the general terms above, include the following provisions: 
A.  Frontage fees or a combination of frontage fees and acreage fees collected by city from the benefited area shall be the only source of funds for reimbursement to eligible persons. 
B.  Frontage fees shall be assessed based upon the base rate in effect at the time of executing the reimbursement agreement. Said base rate shall be for the average current cost of installation of an eight inch main for water, an eight inch main for sewer, and a fifteen (15) inch main for storm drainage and appurtenances as established by council resolution. 
C.  The potential reimbursement amount to be included in the agreement shall be the base rate, as established by resolution, multiplied by the number of lineal feet of main involved. Where the area of benefit applies to only one side of the street or easement the potential reimbursement shall be one-half the rate times the lineal feet involved. In each case, the potential reimbursement shall be reduced by the amount of the administrative fee of the city. 
D.  Subsequent agreements for other areas of benefit shall have no bearing or value to agreements executed for specific benefit areas. 
E.  To provide for maintenance costs of the city, the amount of twenty-five (25) percent of the base rate for reimbursement shall be withheld by the city for its own use. 
(Ord. 99-05 § 2 (part), 1999: Ord. 467 § 2 (part), 1988: Ord. 452 § 2 (part), 1986) 
Chapter 13.16 - BACKFLOW CONTROL* 
Sections: 

13.16.010 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is: 
1.  To protect the public water supply against actual or potential contamination through cross-connections by isolating sources of contamination that may occur within a water user's premises because of some undiscovered or unauthorized cross-connection on the premises; 
2.  To eliminate existing connections between the city water system and other sources of water; 
3.  To eliminate cross-connections between the city water system and sources of contamination; 
4.  To prevent the making of cross-connections in the future. 
    These regulations are adopted pursuant to the State of California Administrative Code, Title 17-Public Health entitled "Regulations Relating to Cross-Connections". 
    It is unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation at any time to make or maintain or cause to be made or maintained, temporarily or permanently, for any period of time whatsoever, any cross-connection between plumbing pipes or water fixtures being served with water by the city water division and any other source of water supply or to maintain any sanitary fixture or other appurtenances or fixtures, which, by reason of their construction, may cause or allow backflow of water or other substances into the water supply system of the city and/or the service of water pipes or fixtures of any consumer of the city. 
(Ord. 91-07 (part), 1991) 
13.16.020 - Definitions. 
    "Air-gap separation" means a physical break between a supply pipe and a receiving vessel. The air-gap shall be at least double the diameter of the supply pipe measured vertically above the top rim of the vessel, in no case less than one inch. 
    "Approved backflow prevention assembly" means an assembly which has passed laboratory and field evaluation tests performed by the University of Southern California Foundation for Cross-connection Control and Hydraulic Research. 
    "Approved water supply" means any water supply whose potability is regulated by the State Health Department. 
    "Auxiliary supply" means any water supply on or available to the premises other than the approved water supply. 
    "AWWA Standard" means an official standard developed and approved by the American Water Works Association (AWWA). 
    "Backflow" means a flow condition, caused by a differential in pressure, that causes the flow of water or other liquids, gases, mixtures or substances into the distributing pipes of a potable supply of water from any source or sources other than an approved water supply source. Back siphonage is one cause of backflow. Back pressure is the other cause. 
    "City" means the city of Kingsburg. 
    "Contamination" means a degradation of the quality of the potable water by any foreign substance which creates a hazard to the public health, or which may impair the usefulness or quality of the water. 
    "Cross-connection" as used in this chapter means any unprotected actual or potential connection between a potable water system used to supply water for drinking purposes and any source or system containing unapproved water or a substance that is not or cannot be approved as safe, wholesome, and potable. Bypass arrangements, jumper connections, removable sections, swivel or changeover assemblies, or other assemblies through which backflow could occur shall be considered to be cross-connections. 
    "Double check valve assembly" means an approved assembly of two internally loaded, independently acting check valves, including resilient seated shut-off valves on each end of the assembly and test cocks for testing the water-tightness of each check valve. 
    "Health agency" means the California Department of Health Services. 
    "Person" means an individual, corporation, company, association, partnership, municipality, public utility, or other public body or institution. 
    "Premises" means any and all areas on a water user's property which are served or have the potential to be served by the public water system. 
    "Public water system" means the city of Kingsburg system through which is provided piped water to the public for human consumption. 
    "Reclaimed water" means a wastewater which, as a result of treatment, is suitable for uses other than potable use. 
    "Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly" means an approved assembly incorporating two internally loaded, independently operating check valves and an automatically operating differential relief valve located between the two checks, including resilient seated shut-off valves on each end of the assembly, and equipped with necessary test cocks for testing the assembly. 
    "Service connection" refers to the point of connection of a user's piping to the water supplier's facilities. 
    "Superintendent of public works" means the superintendent of public works of the city of Kingsburg or his/her designated representative in his/her absence. 
    "Water supplier" means the city of Kingsburg which owns and operates the approved water supply system. 
    "Water user" means any person obtaining water from the approved water supply system. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; Ord. 91-07 (part), 1991) 
13.16.030 - Cross-connection protection requirements. 
A.  General Provisions. 
1.  Unprotected cross-connections with the public water supply are prohibited. 
2.  Whenever backflow protection has been found necessary, the water users shall install an approved backflow prevention assembly at the user's expense for continued services or before a new service will be granted. 
3.  Wherever a backflow protection has been found necessary on a water supply line entering a water user's premises, all water supply lines from the city's mains entering such premises, buildings, or structures shall be protected by an approved backflow prevention assembly. The type of assembly to be installed shall be in accordance with the requirements of this chapter. 
B.  Where Protection is Required. 
1.  Each service connection from the city water system for supplying water to the premises having an auxiliary water supply shall be protected against backflow of water from the premises into the public water system. 
2.  Each service connection from the city water system for supplying water to any premises on which any substance is handled in such fashion as may allow its entry into the water system shall be protected against backflow of the water from the premises into the public system. This shall include the handling of process waters and waters originating from the city water system which have been subjected to deterioration in sanitary quality. 
3.  Backflow prevention assemblies shall be installed on the service connection to any premises having: 
a.  Internal cross-connections that cannot be permanently corrected and controlled to the satisfaction of the State Health Department and the city; or 
b.  Intricate plumbing and piping arrangements or where entry to all portions of the premises is not readily accessible for inspection purposes, making it impracticable or impossible to ascertain whether or not cross-connections exist. 
C.  Type of Protection Required. 
1.  The type of protection that shall be provided to prevent backflow into the approved water supply shall be commensurate with the degree of hazard that exists on the consumer's premises. The type of protective assembly that may be required (listing in an increasing level of protection) includes: Double Check Valve Assembly (DC), Reduced Pressure Principle Backflow Prevention Assembly (RP), and Air-gap separation (AG). The water user may choose a higher level of protection than required by the city. The minimum types of backflow protection required to protect the approved water supply, at the user's water connection to premises with varying degrees of hazard are given in Table 1. Situations which are not covered in Table 1 shall be evaluated on a case by case basis and the appropriate backflow protection shall be determined by the city and State Health Department. 
Table 1-Backflow Protection Required 
Degree of Hazard Minimum Type of Backflow Prevention Sewage and Hazardous Substances. Premises where the public water system is used to supplement a reclaimed water supply. AG Premises where there are wastewater pumping and/or treatment plants and there is no interconnection with the potable water system. This does not include a single-family residence that has a sewage lift pump. An RP may be approved by the State Health Department in lieu of an AG if approved by the State Health Department and the superintendent of public works. AG Premises where reclaimed water is used and there is no interconnection with the potable water system. An RP may be approved in lieu of an AG if approved by the State Health Department and the superintendent of public works. AG Premises where hazardous substances are handled in any manner in which the substances may enter a potable water system. This does not include a single-family residence that has a sewage lift pump. An RP may be provided in lieu of an AG if approved by the State Health Department and the superintendent of public works. AG Premises where there are irrigation systems into which fertilizers, herbicides or pesticides are, or can be, injected. RP Auxiliary Water Supplies. Premises where there is an auxiliary water supply which is interconnected with the public water system. An RP may be provided in lieu of an AG if approved by the State Health Department and the superintendent of public works. AG Premises where there is an auxiliary water supply and there are no interconnections with the public water system. A DC may be provided in lieu of a RP if approved by the State Health Department and superintendent of public works. RP Fire Protection Systems. Premises where the fire system is directly supplied from the public water system and there is an auxiliary water supply on or to the premises (not interconnected). DC Premises where the fire system is supplied from the public water system and interconnected with an auxiliary water supply. An RP may be approved in lieu of an AG if approved by the State Health Department and director of public works. AG Premises where the fire system is supplied from the public water system and where either elevated storage tanks or fire pumps which take suction from the private reservoirs or tanks are used. DC  
2.  Two or more services supplying water from different street mains to the same building, structure, or premises through which an inter-street main flow may occur, shall have at least a standard check valve on each water service to be located adjacent to and on the property side of the restrictive meters. Such check valve shall not be considered adequate if backflow protection is deemed necessary to protect the city's mains from pollution or contamination; in such cases the installation of approved backflow assemblies at such service connections shall be required. 
(Ord. 91-07 (part), 1991) 
13.16.040 - Backflow prevention assemblies. 
A.  Approved Backflow Prevention Assemblies. 
1.  Only backflow prevention assemblies which have been approved by the University of Southern California Foundation for Cross-Connection Control and Hydraulic Research are acceptable for installation by a water user connected to the city's potable water system. 
2.  The city will provide, upon request, a list of approved backflow prevention assemblies. 
B.  Backflow Prevention Assembly Installation. 
1.  Backflow prevention assemblies shall be installed in a manner prescribed in Section 7603, Title 22 of the California Administrative Code. Location of the assemblies should be as close as practical to the user's connection. The superintendent of public works shall have the final authority in determining the required location of a backflow prevention assembly. 
a.  Air-Gap Separation (AG). The air-gap separation shall be located on the user's side of and as close to the service connection as is practical. All piping from the service connection to the receiving tank shall be above grade and be entirely visible. No water use shall be provided from any point between the service connection and the air-gap separation. The water inlet piping shall terminate a distance of at least two pipe diameters of the supply inlet, but in no case less than one inch above the overflow rim of the receiving tank. 
b.  Reduced Pressure Principle Backflow Prevention Assembly (RP). The approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly shall be installed on the user's side of and as close to the service connection as is practical. The assembly shall be installed a minimum of twelve (12) inches above grade and not more than thirty-six (36) inches above grade measured from the bottom of the assembly and with a minimum of twelve (12) inches side clearance. The assembly shall be installed so that it is readily accessible for maintenance and testing. Water supplied from any point between the service connection and the RP assembly shall be protected in a manner approved by the department of public works. 
c.  Double Check Valve Assembly (DC). The approved double check valve assembly shall be located as close as practical to the user's connection and shall be installed above grade, if possible, and in a manner where it is readily accessible for testing and maintenance. If a double check valve assembly is put below grade it must be installed in a vault such that there is a minimum of six inches between the bottom of the vault and the bottom of the assembly, so that the top of the assembly is no more than a maximum of eight inches below grade, so there is a minimum of twenty-four (24) inches of clearance between the side of the assembly with the test cocks and the side of the vault, and so there is a minimum of twelve (12) inches clearance between the other side of the assembly and the side of the vault. Special consideration must be given to double check valve assemblies of the "Y" type. These assemblies must be installed on their "side" with the test cocks in a vertical position so that either check valve may be removed for services without removing the assembly. Vaults which do not have an integrated bottom must be placed on a three-inch bottom layer of three quarter-inch gravel. Vaults with integrated bottoms must have adequate drain holes and be placed on a three-inch layer of three quarter-inch gravel. 
C.  Backflow Prevention Assembly Testing and Maintenance. 
1.  The owners of any premises on which, or on account of which, backflow prevention assemblies are installed, shall have their assemblies tested by a person who is certified and licensed by AWWA or ABPA to test backflow assemblies. Backflow prevention assemblies must be tested at least annually and immediately after installation, relocation or repair. The department of public works may require a more frequent testing schedule if it is determined to be necessary. No assembly shall be placed back in service unless it has been certified as functioning properly. A report in a form acceptable to the city shall be filed with the superintendent of public works each time an assembly is tested, relocated, overhauled, or replaced whenever they are found to be defective and all costs of testing, repair, and maintenance shall be borne by the water user. 
2.  The city will supply affected water users with a list of persons acceptable to the city to test backflow prevention assemblies. The city will notify affected customers by mail when annual testing of an assembly is required. Necessary forms shall be provided and filled out by the certified tester each time an assembly is tested or repaired. 
D.  Backflow Prevention Assembly Removal. 
1.  Approval must be obtained from the superintendent of public works before a backflow prevention assembly is removed, relocated, or replaced. 
a.  Removal. The use of an assembly may be discontinued and the assembly removed from service upon presentation of sufficient evidence to the department of public works to verify that a hazard no longer exists or is not likely to be created in the future. The assembly may only be removed upon receipt of written permission from the department of public works. 
b.  Relocation. An assembly may be relocated following written confirmation by the department of public works that the relocation will continue to provide the required protection and satisfy installation requirements. A re-test will be required following the relocation of the assembly. 
c.  Repair. An assembly may be removed for repair, provided the water use is either discontinued until repair is completed and the assembly is returned to service, or the service connection is equipped with other approved and tested backflow protection. A retest will be required following the repair of the assembly. 
d.  Replacement. A water assembly may be removed and replaced provided the water use is discontinued until the replacement assembly is installed, tested and certified. All replacement assemblies must be approved by the city and must be commensurate with the degree of hazard involved. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; Ord. 91-07 (part), 1991) 
13.16.050 - User supervisor. 
    At each of the premises where it is necessary in the opinion of the superintendent of public works, a user supervisor shall be designated by and at the expense of the water user. This user supervisor shall be responsible for the monitoring of the backflow prevention assemblies and for avoidance of cross-connections. In the event of contamination or pollution of the drinking water system due to a cross-connection on the premises, the department of public works shall be promptly notified by the user supervisor so that appropriate measures may be taken to overcome the contamination. The water user shall inform the department of public works in writing of the user supervisor's identity on, as a minimum, an annual basis and whenever a change occurs. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; Ord. 91-07 (part), 1991) 
13.16.060 - Administrative procedures. 
A.  Water System Survey. 
1.  All businesses shall have backflow protection. Plans and specifications must be submitted to the city upon request for review of possible cross-connection hazards as a condition of service for new service connections. If it is determined that a backflow prevention assembly is necessary to protect the public water system, the required assembly must be installed before service will be granted. 
2.  The city may require an on-premise inspection to evaluate cross-connection hazards. The city will transmit a written notice requesting an inspection appointment to each affected water user. Any water user who cannot or will not allow an on-premise inspection of his/her piping system shall be required to install the backflow prevention assembly the department of public works considers necessary. 
3.  The city may, at its discretion, require a re-inspection for cross-connection hazards of any premise to which it serves water. The city will transmit a written notice requesting an inspection appointment to each affected water user. Any water user who cannot or will not allow an on-premise inspection of his/her piping system shall be required to install the backflow prevention assembly the department of public works considers necessary. 
B.  Customer Notification-Assembly Installation. 
1.  The city will notify the water user of the survey findings, listing the corrective actions to be taken if any are required. A maximum period of sixty (60) days will be given to complete all corrective actions required, including installation of backflow prevention assemblies. A shorter period of time for corrective action may be required as the discretion of the department of public works. 
2.  A second notice will be sent to each water user who does not take the required corrective actions prescribed in the first notice within the period allowed. The second notice will give the water user a two-week period to take the required corrective action. If no action is taken within the two-week period the city may terminate water service to the affected water user until the required corrective actions are taken. 
C.  Customer Notification-Testing and Maintenance. 
1.  The city will notify each affected water user when it is time for the backflow prevention assembly installed on their service connection to be tested. This written notice shall give the water user thirty (30) days to have the assembly tested. The certified tester shall complete the necessary form and submit it to the department of public works and the State Health Department. 
2.  A second notice shall be sent to each water user which does not have his/her backflow prevention assembly tested as prescribed in the first notice within the thirty (30) day period allowed. The second notice will give the water user a two-week period to have his/her backflow prevention assembly tested. If no action is taken within the two-week period the city may terminate water service to the affected water user until the subject assembly is tested. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; Ord. 91-07 (part), 1991) 
13.16.070 - Water service termination. 
A.  General. When the city encounters water uses that represent a clear and immediate hazard to the potable water supply that cannot be immediately abated, the city shall institute the procedure for discontinuing the city water services. 
B.  Basis for Termination. Conditions or water uses that create a basis for water service termination shall include, but are not limited to, the following terms: 
1.  Refusal to install a required backflow prevention assembly; 
2.  Refusal to test a backflow prevention assembly; 
3.  Refusal to repair a faulty backflow prevention assembly; 
4.  Refusal to replace a faulty backflow prevention assembly; 
5.  Direct or indirect connection between the public water system and a sewer line; 
6.  Unprotected direct or indirect connection between the public water system and a system or equipment containing contaminants; 
7.  Unprotected direct or indirect connection between the public water system and an auxiliary water system; and 
8.  A situation which presents an immediate health hazard to the public water system. 
C.  Water Service Termination Procedures. 
1.  For conditions 1, 2, 3, or 4, the city will terminate service to a customer's premise after two written notices have been sent specifying the corrective action needed and the time period in which it must be done. If no action is taken within the allowed time period water service may be terminated. 
2.  For conditions 5, 6, 7, or 8, the city will take the following steps: 
a.  Make reasonable effort to advise water user of intent to terminate water service; and 
b.  Terminate water supply and lock service valve. The water service will remain inactive until correction of violations has been approved by the department of public works. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; Ord. 91-07 (part), 1991) 
13.16.080 - Requirements for certification as a backflow prevention device tester in the city of Kingsburg. 
    Each applicant for certification as a tester of backflow prevention assemblies in the city of Kingsburg shall provide the city with a copy of their current AWWA or ABPA Backflow Tester Certificate, and must obtain a city Business License with a fee established by the city council. Competency in all phases of backflow prevention assembly testing and repair may only be demonstrated by a current valid AWWA or ABPA Certificate for Backflow Assembly Testing. The following are the minimum requirements: 
A.  Each applicant for certification in the city as a tester of backflow prevention assemblies shall have available the necessary tools and equipment to properly test such assemblies. He/she shall be responsible for the competency and accuracy of all tests and reports prepared by him/her. Authorization as a tester in the city is valid for a period of one year and may be revoked, suspended, or not renewed by the city for improper testing, repairs, and/or reporting. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; Ord. 91-07 (part), 1991) 
Chapter 13.20 - WATER WELLS* 
Sections: 

13.20.010 - Purpose. 
    It is the purpose of this chapter to provide for the construction, repair and reconstruction of wells to the end that the ground water of this city will not be polluted or contaminated and that water obtained from such wells will be suitable for the purpose for which used and will not jeopardize the health, safety or welfare of the people of this city, for the destruction of abandoned wells, and for the abatements of wells found to be public nuisances to the end that all such wells will not cause pollution or contamination of ground water or otherwise jeopardize the health, safety or welfare of the people of the city. 
(Ord. 95-07 § 2 (part), 1995: prior code § 710-0000) 
13.20.020 - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter, the following words shall have the meaning provided in this section: 
    "Abatement" means the construction, reconstruction, repair or destruction of a well so as to eliminate a nuisance caused by a well polluting or contaminating ground water. 
    "Agricultural wells" means water wells used to supply water for irrigation or other agricultural purposes, including so-called "stock wells". 
    "Community water supply well" means a water well used to supply water for domestic purposes in systems subject to Chapter 7 of Part 1 of Division 5 of the California Health and Safety Code (commencing with Section 4010). 
    "Contamination" means an impairment of the quality of water to a degree which creates a hazard to the public health through poisoning or through spread of disease. 
    "Health officer" means the Kingsburg City water superintendent or his/her authorized representative, or the Fresno County health officer or his/her authorized representative if the city has at any time contracted with Fresno County for the Fresno County health department to perform the duties of the Kingsburg City health officer. 
    "Individual domestic well" means a water well used to supply water for domestic needs or an individual residence or commercial establishment. 
    "Industrial wells" means water wells used to supply industry on an individual basis. 
    "Order of abatement" means both mandatory and prohibitory orders requiring or prohibiting one or more acts; said term shall also include those orders effective for a limited as well as an indefinite period of time, and shall include modifications or restatements of any order. 
    "Person" means any person, firm, corporation or governmental agency. 
    "Pollution" means an alteration of the quality of water to a degree which unreasonably affects: 
1.  Such waters for beneficial uses; or 
2.  Facilities which serve such beneficial uses. 
Pollution may include contamination. 
    "Well" or "water well" means any artificial excavation constructed by any method for the purpose of extracting water from or injecting water into the ground. "Well" or "water well" shall not include: 
1.  Oil and gas wells, or geothermal wells constructed under the jurisdiction of the Department of Conservation, except those wells converted to use as water wells; or 
2.  Wells used for the purpose of de-watering excavation during construction, or stabilizing hillsides or earth embankments. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; Ord. 95-07 § 2 (part), 1995: prior code § 710-0001) 
13.20.030 - Effect of chapter upon compliance with certain state law. 
    Nothing contained in this chapter shall be deemed to release any person from compliance with the provisions of Article 3, Chapter 10, Division 7, of the Water Code of the state of California or any successor thereto. 
(Ord. 95-07 § 2 (part), 1995: prior code § 710-0002) 
13.20.040 - Permit-Required, application, issuance. 
    No person shall, within the incorporated area of the city, construct, repair, reconstruct or abandon any well unless a written permit has first been obtained from the health officer as provided in this chapter, and the work conforms to the conditions of such permit and this chapter. Applications for such permits shall be made on the forms provided for that purpose and in accordance with procedure established by the city. 
    Each such application shall be accompanied by a filing fee set by resolution of the city council. No part of the fee shall be refundable. 
    Within ten (10) business days after receipt of the application, the city shall either grant, conditionally grant or deny the permit. If the application is not acted upon within said ten (10) day period, the application shall be deemed granted. A permit shall not be issued if, in the judgment of the city, the well may jeopardize the health, safety or welfare of the people of the city. 
    Construction, reconstruction, repair and destruction of wells shall be performed by a contractor with a C-57 contracting license, or an equivalent issued by the department of professional and vocational standards; provided, however, that a property owner may construct, reconstruct, repair or destroy a well on his/her own property, which well serves or will serve said property that is neither being offered for sale nor intended to be so offered. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; Ord. 95-07 § 2 (part), 1995: prior code § 710-0003) 
13.20.050 - Inspections. 
A.  Upon receipt of an application, an inspection of the well location shall be made by the city prior to issuance of a well permit. 
B.  After work has been completed, the city shall be notified by the person performing the work and the city shall make a final inspection of the completed work to determine compliance with the well standards. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; Ord. 95-07 § 2 (part), 1995: prior code § 710-0004) 
13.20.060 - Expiration of permit. 
    Each permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall expire and become null and void if the work authorized thereby has not been completed within one year following the issuance of the permit. 
    Upon expiration of any permit issued pursuant hereto, no further work may be done in connection with construction, repair, reconstruction or abandonment of a well unless and until a new permit for such purpose is secured in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 95-07 § 2 (part), 1995: prior code § 710-0005) 
13.20.070 - Standards. 
    Standards for the construction, repair, reconstruction or abandonment of wells shall be as set forth in the current California Department of Water Resources Bulletin No. 74, "Water Well Standards, State of California", and Bulletin No. 74-1, "Cathodic Protection Well Standards" or as subsequently revised or supplemented, which are hereby incorporated by reference, with the following modification: 
 The minimum distance between all wells and subsurface sewage leaching fields or septic tanks shall be one hundred (100) feet. 
(Ord. 95-07 § 2 (part), 1995: prior code § 710-0006) 
13.20.080 - Variances. 
    The city shall have the power to allow variances from the standards referred to in Section 13.20.070 so as to prevent unnecessary hardship or injustice and at the same time accomplish the general purpose and intent of the standards. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; Ord. 95-07 § 2 (part), 1995: prior code § 710-0007) 
13.20.090 - Revocation or suspension of permit. 
A.  A permit issued hereunder may be revoked or suspended by the city as hereinafter provided if he/she determines that a violation of this chapter exists, that written notice has been directed to permittee specifying the violation and that the permittee has failed or neglected to make the necessary adjustments within thirty (30) days after receiving such notice. 
B.  A permit may be so revoked or suspended by the city if he/she determines at a hearing for such purpose that the person to whom any permit was issued pursuant to this chapter has obtained the same by fraud or misrepresentation, provided that notice of the time and place of such hearing is given to the permittee at least five days prior thereto. 
C.  The suspension or revocation of any permit shall not be effective until notice thereof in writing is mailed to the permittee, and the time for filing an appeal to the city council has expired. The notice shall advise the permittee of his/her right to appeal to the city council and to stay the suspension or revocation pending such appeal. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; Ord. 95-07 § 2 (part), 1995: prior code § 710-0008) 
13.20.100 - Investigations. 
    The city may, upon reasonable cause to believe that an abandoned well or other well is causing a nuisance by polluting or contaminating ground water, investigate the situation to determine whether such a nuisance does in fact exist. He/she shall have the power, when in the performance of his/her duty and upon first presenting his/her credentials and identifying him/herself as a duly authorized representative of the city to the person apparently in control of the premises, if available, to enter upon any such premises between the hours of eight o'clock a.m. and six o'clock p.m., to discover or inspect anything or condition which appears to indicate such a nuisance. He/she may examine such premises, things or conditions, take such samples and make such test as needed and take any other steps reasonably necessary for the proper investigation and determination of whether such a nuisance exists. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; Ord. 95-07 § 2 (part), 1995: prior code § 710-0009) 
13.20.110 - Order to abate nuisance. 
    Whenever the city determines that an abandoned or other well is causing a nuisance by polluting or contaminating ground water, he/she may issue a written order requiring that the conditions productive of the nuisance be abated within a period of ten (10) days thereafter and shall forthwith serve the order upon the person occupying the premises, if any, and if no person occupies the premises, the order shall be posted upon said premises in a conspicuous place. In addition, a copy shall be mailed to the owners of the premises as their names and addresses appear upon the last equalized assessment roll. The city may for good cause extend the time specified in the order or otherwise modify or rescind the order. 
    The order of abatement shall advise the possessors and owners of the property of their right to appeal to the city council and to stay the order of abatement pending such appeal. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; Ord. 95-07 § 2 (part), 1995: prior code § 710-0010) 
13.20.120 - Appeal from denial, revocation or suspension of permit, and from order of abatement. 
    Any person whose application for a permit has been denied or whose permit once issued has been revoked or suspended, or who has been given an order of abatement may, within ten (10) days following the receipt of abatement, file an appeal in writing to the city council. Said appeal shall be accompanied by a filing fee as established by resolution and shall specify the grounds upon which the appeal is taken. The city clerk shall then proceed to set the matter for hearing, not later than twenty (20) days thereafter, and such appeal shall stay the effect of any order or action until the council hears the appeal and issues its order either to affirm, overrule or modify the action of the city. Notice of the hearing shall be mailed to the appealing party at least five days prior to the hearing. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; Ord. 95-07 § 2 (part), 1995: prior code § 710-0011) 
13.20.130 - Abatement of nuisance by city. 
    In the event that a nuisance is not abated in accordance with an order of abatement, the city may, upon securing the approval of the city council, proceed to abate the nuisance by force account, contract or any other method deemed most expedient by the council. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; Ord. 95-07 § 2 (part), 1995: prior code § 710-0012) 
13.20.140 - Payment of cost of abatement by owner. 
    The health officer shall prepare and file with the city a clear report specifying the work done, the itemized and total cost of the work, a description of the real property upon which the well is or was located, and the names and addresses of the record owner, the holder of any mortgage or deed of trust of record, and any other person known to have a legal interest in the property. 
    A hearing shall be held on said report and any protests or objections thereto, and notice of the hearing shall be mailed to the persons with a legal interest in the property at least ten (10) days prior to the date set for the hearing. The city council shall determine at the hearing the correct charge to be made for the work. If such costs are not paid by the owner of said property within thirty (30) days of the determination by the city council, they shall be assessed upon the property involved as a special assessment. The special assessment will then be collected at the same time and in the same manner as city taxes are collected, and shall be subject to the same penalties and the same procedure and sale in case of delinquency as is provided for ordinary city taxes. All laws applicable to the levy, collection and enforcement of city taxes shall be applicable to such special assessment. 
(Ord. 95-07 § 2 (part), 1995: prior code § 710-0013) 
13.20.150 - Abatement of safety hazard. 
    This chapter shall not affect the right of the city to abate as a public nuisance pursuant to Article 9, Chapter 1, Division 1, Title 5, of the Government Code (commencing with Section 50230) any abandoned well which presents a safety hazard. 
(Ord. 95-07 § 2 (part), 1995: prior code § 710-0014) 
Chapter 13.24 - UNDERGROUND UTILITY DISTRICTS 
Sections: 

13.24.010 - Definitions. 
    Whenever in this chapter the words or phrases hereinafter in this section defined are used, they shall have the respective meanings assigned to them in the following definitions: 
    "Commission" means the Public Utilities Commission of the State of California, 
    "Underground utility district" or "district" means that area in the city within which poles, overhead wires, and associated overhead structures are prohibited as such area is described in a resolution adopted pursuant to the provisions of Section 13.24.030 of this chapter. 
    "Person" means and includes individuals, firms, corporations, partnerships, and their agents and employees. 
    "Poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures" means poles, towers, supports, wires, conductors, guys, stubs, platforms, cross-arms, braces, transformers, insulators, cutouts, switches, communication circuits, appliances, attachments and appurtenances located above-ground within a district and used or useful in supplying electric, communication or similar or associated service. 
    "Utility" includes all persons or entities supplying electric, communication or similar or associated service by means of electrical materials or devices. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; prior code § 61-3000) 
13.24.020 - Public hearing by council. 
    The council may from time to time call public hearings to ascertain whether the public necessity, health, safety or welfare requires the removal of poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures within designated areas of the city and the underground installation of wires and facilities for supplying electric, communication, or similar or associated service. The city clerk shall notify all affected property owners as shown on the last equalized assessment roll and utilities concerned by mail of the time and place of such hearings at least ten (10) days prior to the date thereof. Each such hearing shall be open to the public to the date thereof. Each such hearing shall be open to the public and may be continued from time to time. At each such hearing all persons interested shall be given an opportunity to be heard. The decision of the council shall be final and conclusive. 
(Ord. 2002-04 § 9, 2002; Prior code § 61-3001) 
13.24.030 - Council resolution. 
    If, after any such public hearing the council finds that the public necessity, health, safety or welfare requires such removal and such underground installation within a designated area, the council shall, by resolution, declare such designated area an underground utility district and order such removal and underground installation. Such resolution shall include a description of the area comprising such district and shall fix the time within which such removal and underground installation shall be accomplished and within which affected property owners must be ready to receive underground service. A reasonable time shall be allowed for such removal and underground installation, having due regard for the availability of labor, materials and equipment necessary for such removal and for the installation of such underground facilities as may be occasioned thereby. 
(Prior code § 61-3002) 
13.24.040 - Unlawful acts. 
    Whenever the council creates an underground utility district and orders the removal of poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures therein as provided in Section 13.24.030 hereof, it shall be unlawful for any person or utility to erect, construct, place, keep, maintain, continue, employ or operate poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures in the district after the date when said overhead facilities are required to be removed by such resolution, except as said overhead facilities may be required to furnish service to an owner or occupant of property prior to the performance by such owner or occupant of the underground work necessary for such owner or occupant to continue to receive utility service as provided in Section 13.24.090 hereof, and for such reasonable time required to remove said facilities after said work has been performed, and except as otherwise provided in this chapter. 
(Prior code § 61-3003) 
13.24.050 - Exception, emergency or unusual circumstances. 
    Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, overhead facilities maybe installed and maintained for a period, not to exceed ten (10) days, without authority of the council in order to provide emergency service. The council may grant special permission, on such terms as the council may deem appropriate, in cases of unusual circumstances, without discrimination as to any person or utility, to erect, construct, install, maintain, use or operate poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures. 
(Prior code § 61-3004) 
13.24.060 - Other exceptions. 
    The ordinance codified in this chapter and any resolution adopted pursuant to Section 13.24.030 hereof shall, unless otherwise provided in such resolution, not apply to the following types of facilities: 
A.  Any municipal facilities or equipment installed under the supervision and to the satisfaction of the city engineer. 
B.  Poles or electroliers used exclusively for street lighting. 
C.  Overhead wires (exclusive of supporting structures) crossing any portion of a district within which overhead wires have been prohibited, or connecting to buildings on the perimeter of a district, when such wires originate in an area from which poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures are not prohibited. 
D.  Poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures used for the transmission of electric energy at nominal voltages in excess of thirty-four thousand five hundred (34,500) volts. 
E.  Overhead wires attached to the exterior surface of a building by means of a bracket or fixture and extending from one location on the building to another location on the same building or to an adjacent building without crossing any public street. 
F.  Antennae, associated equipment and supporting structures, used by a utility for furnishing communication services. 
G.  Equipment appurtenant to underground facilities, such as surface mounted transformers, pedestal mounted terminal boxes and meter cabinets, and concealed ducts. 
H.  Temporary poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures used or to be used in conjunction with construction projects. 
(Prior code § 61-3005) 
13.24.070 - Notice to property owners and utility companies. 
    Within ten (10) days after the effective date of a resolution adopted pursuant to Section 13.24.030 hereof, the city clerk shall notify all affected utilities and all persons owning real property within the district created by said resolution of the adoption thereof. Said city clerk shall further notify such affected property owners of the necessity that, if they or any person occupying such property desire to continue to receive electric, communication, or similar or associated service, they or such occupant shall provide all necessary facility changes on their premises so as to receive such service from the lines of the supplying utility or utilities at a new location, subject to applicable rules, regulations and tariffs of the respective utility or utilities on file with the commission. 
    Notification by the city clerk under this section shall be made by mailing a copy of the resolution adopted pursuant to Section 13.24.030, together with a summary of this ordinance, to affected property owners as such are shown on the last equalized assessment roll and to the affected utilities. 
(Ord. 437, 1985: prior code § 61-3006) 
13.24.080 - Responsibility of utility companies. 
    If underground construction is necessary to provide service within a district created by a resolution adopted pursuant to Section 13.24.030 hereof, the supplying utility shall furnish that portion of the conduits, conductors and associated equipment required to be furnished by it under its applicable rules, regulations and tariffs on file with the commission. 
(Prior code § 61-3007) 
13.24.090 - Responsibility of property owners. 
A.  Every person owning, operating, leasing, occupying or renting a building or structure within a district shall perform construction and provide that portion of the service connection on his/her property between the facilities referred to in Section 13.24.080 and the termination facility on or within said building or structure being served, all in accordance with applicable rules, regulations and tariffs of the respective utility or utilities on file with the commission. If the above is not accomplished by any person within the time provided for in the resolution enacted pursuant to Section 13.24.030 hereof, the city engineer shall give notice in writing to the person in possession of such premises, and a notice in writing to the owner thereof as shown on the last equalized assessment roll, to provide the required underground facilities within ten (10) days after receipt of such notice. 
B.  The notice to provide the required underground facilities may be given either by personal service or by mail. In case of service by mail on either of such persons, the notice must be deposited in the United States Mail in a sealed envelope with postage prepaid, addressed to the person in possession of such premises at such premises, and the notice must be addressed to the owner thereof as such owner's name appears, and must be addressed to such owner's last known address as the same appears on the last equalized assessment roll, and when no address appears, to General Delivery, city of Kingsburg, California. If notice is given by mail, such notice shall be deemed to have been received by the person to whom it has been sent within forty-eight (48) hours after the mailing thereof. If notice is given by mail to either the owner or occupant of such premises, the city engineer shall, within forty-eight (48) hours after the mailing thereof, cause a copy thereof, printed on a card not less than eight inches by ten (10) inches in size to be posted in a conspicuous place on said premises. 
C.  The notice given by the city engineer to provide the required underground facilities shall particularly specify what work is required to be done, and shall state that if said work is not completed within thirty (30) days after receipt of such notice, the city engineer will provide such required underground facilities, in which case the cost and expense thereof will be assessed against the property and become a lien upon such property. 
D.  If upon the expiration of the thirty (30) day period, the said required underground facilities have not been provided, the city engineer shall forthwith proceed to do the work; provided, however, if such premises are unoccupied and no electric or communications services are being furnished thereto, the city engineer shall, in lieu of providing the required underground facilities, have the authority to order the disconnection and removal of any and all overhead service wires and associated facilities supplying utility service to said property. Upon completion of the work by the city council setting forth the fact that the required underground facilities have been provided and the cost thereof, together with a legal description of the property against which such cost is to be assessed, the council shall thereupon fix a time and place for hearing protests against the assessment of the cost of such work upon such premises, which said time shall not be less then ten (10) days thereafter. 
E.  The city engineer shall forthwith, upon the time for hearing such protests having been fixed, give a notice in writing to the person in possession of such premises, and a notice in writing thereof to the owner thereof, in the manner hereinabove provided for the giving of the notice to provide the required underground facilities, of the time and place that the council will pass upon such report and will hear protests against such assessment. Such notice shall also set forth the amount of the proposed assessment. 
F.  Upon the date and hour set for the hearing of protests, the council shall hear and consider the report and all protests, if there be any, and then proceed to affirm, modify or reject the assessment. 
G.  If any assessment is not paid within five days after its confirmation by the council, the amount of the assessment shall become a lien upon the property against which the assessment is made by the city engineer, and the city engineer is directed to turn over to the assessor and tax collector a notice of lien on each of said properties on which the assessment has not been paid, and said assessor and tax collector shall add the amount of said assessment to the next regular bill for taxes levied against the premises upon which said assessment was not paid. Said assessment shall be due and payable at the same time as said property taxes are due and payable, and if not paid when due and payable, shall bear interest at the rate of six percent per annum. 
(Prior code § 61-3008) 
13.24.100 - Responsibility of city. 
    City shall remove at its own expense all city-owned equipment from all poles required to be removed hereunder in ample time to enable the owner or user of such poles to remove the same within the time specified in the resolution enacted pursuant to Section 13.24.030 hereof. 
(Prior code § 61-3009) 
13.24.110 - Extension of time. 
    In the event that any act required by this ordinance or by a resolution adopted pursuant to Section 13.24.030 hereof cannot be performed within the time provided on account of shortage of materials, war, restraint by public authorities, strikes, labor disturbances, civil disobedience, or any other circumstances beyond the control of the actor, then the time within which such act will be accomplished shall be extended for a period equivalent to the time of such limitation. 
(Prior code § 61-3010) 
Chapter 13.28 - CABLE VIDEO SERVICES AND FEES 
Sections: 

13.28.010 - Purpose and authority. 
    Under State law effective January 1, 2007, the California Public Utilities Commission (PUC) has the sole authority to grant state franchises to provide video service. Pursuant to this state law, the city has certain rights and responsibilities with respect to state franchise holders, which include the receipt of a franchise fee and a fee for public, educational and government (PEG) purposes, and the authority to establish and enforce penalties for violations of customer services rules. The city retains authority to regulate the city's current cable franchise in accordance with this chapter and the cable franchise currently in effect until such time as the cable franchisee no longer holds a city franchise or is no longer operating under a current or expired city franchise. 
(Ord. No. 2012-08, § 1, 11-28-2012) 
13.28.020 - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this chapter, the following words shall have the following meanings: 
    "Gross revenue" shall have the meaning ascribed that term in Section 5860 of the California Public Utilities Code. 
    "Holders" shall have the meaning ascribed that term in Section 5830 of the California Public Utilities Code. 
    "State franchise" shall have the meaning ascribed that term in Section 5830 of the California Public Utilities Code. 
    "Video service" shall have the meaning ascribed that term in Section 5830 of the California Public Utilities Code. 
(Ord. No. 2012-08, § 1, 11-28-2012) 
13.28.030 - Franchise fee. 
    For any state franchise holder operating within the boundaries of the city, there shall be a fee paid to the city equal to five percent (5%) of the gross revenue of the state franchise holder. 
(Ord. No. 2012-08, § 1, 11-28-2012) 
13.28.040 - PEG fee. 
    For any state franchise holder operating within the boundaries of the city, there shall be a fee paid to the city equal to one percent (1%) of the gross revenue of that state franchise holder, which fee shall be used by the city for PEG purposes consistent with state and federal law. 
(Ord. No. 2012-08, § 1, 11-28-2012) 
13.28.050 - Audit authority. 
    Not more than once annually, the city manager or his or her designee may examine and perform an audit of the business records of a state franchise holder to ensure compliance with Sections 13.28.030 and 13.28.040 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2012-08, § 1, 11-28-2012) 
13.28.060 - Customer service penalties under state franchises. 
A.  Applicable Law. Any state franchise holder shall comply with all applicable state and federal customer service and protection standards pertaining to the provision of video service. 
B.  Penalties for Violation. The city manager or his or her designee shall monitor the compliance of the state franchise holders with respect to state and federal customer service and protection standards. The city manager shall provide the state franchise holders written notice of any material breaches of applicable customer service standards, and will allow the state franchise holder thirty (30) days from the receipt of the notice to remedy the specified material breach. Material breaches not remedied within the thirty (30) day time period will be subject to the following penalties to be imposed by the city: 
1.  For the first occurrence of violation, a fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00) shall be imposed for each day the violation remains in effect, not to exceed one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) for each violation. 
2.  For each violation of the same nature within twelve (12) months, a fine of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) shall be imposed for each day the violation remains in effect, not to exceed three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) for each violation. 
3.  For a third or further violation of the same nature within twelve (12) months, a fine of two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) shall be imposed for each day the violation remains in effect, not to exceed seven thousand five hundred dollars ($7,500.00) for each violation. 
C.  Appeal Procedure. A state franchise holder may appeal a penalty assessed by the city manager to the city council within thirty (30) days of the assessment. The city council shall hear all evidence and relevant testimony and may uphold, modify, or vacate the penalty. The city council's decision regarding the imposition of a penalty pursuant to this section shall be final. In the absence of an appeal, the imposition of the penalty shall be deemed final thirty (30) days after the assessment. 
(Ord. No. 2012-08, § 1, 11-28-2012) 
13.28.070 - City response to state franchise applications. 
A.  Applicants for the state franchises within boundaries of the city must concurrently provide copies to the city of any application or amendments to applications filed with the California Public Utilities Commissioner (PUC). One complete copy must be provided to the city manager. 
B.  Within thirty (30) days of receipt, the city manager will provide appropriate comments to the PUC regarding and application or an amendment to an application for a state franchise. 
(Ord. No. 2012-08, § 1, 11-28-2012) 
13.28.080 - City response to state franchise applications. 
A.  Applicants for state franchises within the boundaries of the city must concurrently provide copies to the city of any application or amendments to applications filed with the PUC. One complete copy must be provided to the city manager. 
B.  Within thirty (30) days of receipt, the city manager will provide any appropriate comments to the PUC regarding an application or an amendment to an application for a state franchise. 
(Ord. No. 2012-08, § 1, 11-28-2012) 
13.28.090 - PEG channel capacity and interconnectivity. 
    State franchises shall provide the PEG channels required by California Public Utilities Code Section 5870 and satisfy the interconnectivity provisions of that section. 
(Ord. No. 2012-08, § 1, 11-28-2012) 
Title 15 - BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION 
Chapters: 
Chapter 15.04 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Sections: 

15.04.010 - Building official defined. 
    As used in this title or in any code adopted by this chapter, "building inspector", "building director", or "administrative authority", means the building official of the city of Kingsburg. 
(Ord. 95-07 § 2 (part), 1995: prior code § 71-0000) 
15.04.020 - Board of appeals defined. 
    As used in this title or in any code adopted all references to the "board of appeals" shall be interpreted as references to the city council of the city of Kingsburg. 
(Ord. 95-07 § 2 (part), 1995: prior code § 71-0001) 
15.04.030 - Adopted codes and code of ordinances of the city of Kingsburg defined. 
A.  As used in this title: 
1.  Uniform Building Code may be abbreviated UBC. 
2.  Uniform Mechanical Code may be abbreviated UMC. 
3.  Uniform Housing Code may be abbreviated UHC. 
4.  Uniform Sign Code may be abbreviated USC. 
5.  Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings may be abbreviated UCADB. 
6.  National Electrical Code may be abbreviated NEC. 
7.  Uniform Plumbing Code may be abbreviated UPC. 
8.  Uniform Swimming Pool, Spa and Hot Tub Code may be abbreviated USPSHTC. 
9.  Uniform Fire Code may be abbreviated UFC. 
B.  Code of ordinances of city of Kingsburg may be referred to as municipal code, ordinance, the ordinance or this ordinance, all meaning this title as adopted by ordinance of the city council of the city of Kingsburg. 
(Ord. 99-06 § 4, 1999: Ord. 95-07 § 2 (part), 1995: prior code § 71-0002) 
15.04.040 - Owner's permit. 
    Except as provided by articles of this chapter, permits required shall be issued only to contractors licensed by the state to engage in the business or act in the capacity of a contractor in a specified field. The building official may issue a permit to the owner of a building and/or property in accordance with the provisions set forth in the California Contractors License Law and Reference Book, as set forth in the California Business and Professions Code. 
(Ord. 95-07 § 2 (part), 1995: prior code § 71-0003) 
15.04.050 - Certificate of insurance or consent to self-insure. 
    Before any permit required by this chapter can be issued, the applicant must adhere to all provisions of Section 3800, Article 3, Chapter 4, Construction Permit of the Labor Code of the State of California. 
(Ord. 95-07 § 2 (part), 1995: prior code § 71-0004) 
15.04.060 - Final approval for utility connections. 
    Notwithstanding any other provisions of this code or the Uniform Building Code, the building official shall not issue a certificate of occupancy for any building or separately occupied space within a building built pursuant to a permit issued until the director of public works has determined and stated that all required improvements and conditions pertaining to subject development, have been constructed or accomplished, unless the director of public works or the city council has authorized a waiver of public street improvements and until all conditions and requirements imposed by the Kingsburg Zoning Code or any other special approval conditions required have been completed. 
(Ord. 95-07 § 2 (part), 1995: prior code § 71-0005) 
15.04.070 - Permits and fees. 
A.  No person, firm or corporation shall commence construction of any building, structure or portions thereof including but not limited to electrical, mechanical, or plumbing fixtures therein covered by the provisions of this title without first securing a permit therefore. 
B.  Permit fees hereunder shall be paid in the amounts as set by city council resolution. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; Ord. 95-07 § 2 (part), 1995: prior code § 71-0006) 
15.04.080 - Violations. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of this title shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and punishable as elsewhere provided in this code. A civil suit may be brought to enforce the provisions of this title as provided by law. 
(Ord. 99-06 § 5, 1999: Ord. 95-07 § 2 (part), 1995: prior code § 71-0007) 
15.04.90 - Issuance of administrative citations. 
    Whenever the building official or its authorized agent ("building official") finds that a section(s) of title 15 has been violated, the building official shall issue an administrative citation and serve the same in accordance with the provision of section 15.04.091 on the landowner, if applicable, and the person who is in violation of any provision of title 15. The administrative citation shall contain the following: 
A.  If applicable and available, the street address or assessor's parcel number and location description sufficient for identification of the property associated with the violation; 
B.  A statement that the building official has determined that a violation of a section(s) of title 15 has occurred and a brief description of the violation and identification of the section(s) of title 15 or other law or regulation violated; 
C.  A statement to require the violator(s) to obtain all appropriate permits, certificates, approvals or to complete any action necessary to comply with the applicable section(s) of title 15 and correct the violation within the time period identified in the administrative citation which time period shall not exceed ten (10) days from the date of service of the administrative citation, unless the building official identifies a longer period of time on the administrative citation; 
D.  A statement advising that if the violation identified on the administrative citation is not corrected within the time specified, the building official may proceed with the issuance of an additional administrative citation. 
E.  Amount of the fine imposed for the violation as established by resolution of the city council; 
F.  Explanation of how the fine shall be paid and the consequences of failure to pay the fine; 
G.  Signature of the building official and the signature of the violator if the violator can be located. If the violator refuses or does not sign the administrative citation, the lack of such signature shall not affect the validity of the administrative citation and subsequent proceedings; 
H.  A statement advising the person or persons identified in the administrative citation that they may appeal the issuance of the administrative citation in accordance with section 15.04.095. 
(Ord. No. 2009-01, § 1, 2009) 
15.04.091 - Service of administrative citation. 
    The administrative citation and any documents related thereto shall be served by one of the following methods: 
A.  Personal service; or 
B.  First class mail, postage prepaid, to each person identified in the administrative citation. Service by mail shall be effective on the date of mailing; 
C.  If the person(s) named in the administrative citation, after diligent search, cannot be found, and the violation is associated with certain property, the administrative citation may be served by posting a copy thereof in a conspicuous place upon the property associated with violation, for a period of ten (10) days. 
D.  The failure of the person(s) named in the administrative citation to receive the administrative citation served in accordance with this section shall not affect the validity of any proceedings taken under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2009-01, § 1, 2009) 
15.04.092 - Proof of service of administrative citation. 
    Proof of service of the administrative citation shall be documented at the time of service by a declaration under penalty of perjury executed by the person effecting service, declaring the date and manner in which service was made. 
(Ord. No. 2009-01, § 1, 2009) 
15.04.093 - Extension of time. 
    Upon receipt of a written request from any person required to comply with the administrative citation, the building official may grant an extension of time within which to comply, if the building official determines that such an extension of time will not create or perpetuate a situation imminently danger to life or property and if such person has begun and is diligently attempting to correct the violation. The building official shall have the authority to place reasonable conditions on any such extensions. 
(Ord. No. 2009-01, § 1, 2009) 
15.04.094 - Fines assessed. 
A.  The city council by resolution shall establish the amount of the fine to be assessed for administrative citations issued by the building official. 
B.  If the violator fails to correct the violation, subsequent administrative citations may be issued for the same violation(s). The amount of the fine shall increase at a rate specified in the city council resolution. 
C.  Payment of the fine shall not excuse the failure to correct the violation nor shall it bar further enforcement action by the city. 
D.  All fines assessed shall be payable to the city. 
E.  The failure of any person to pay a fine assessed by administrative citation within the time specified on the administrative citation shall result in the assessment of additional fines. 
F.  The failure of any person to pay a fine assessed by administrative citation within the time specified on the administrative citation constitutes a debt to the city. To enforce that debt, the building official may file a claim with the small claims court or pursue any other legal or equitable remedy to collect the fine. 
(Ord. No. 2009-01, § 1, 2009) 
15.04.095 - Appeal of administrative citation. 
A.  Any person receiving an administrative citation may appeal the issuance of the administrative citation to the city council. The notice of appeal must be submitted on an appeal form provided by the building department, must specify the basis for the appeal in detail and must be filed with the building department within ten (10) calendar days after the date on the administrative citation. If the filing deadline falls on a weekend or city holiday, the deadline shall be extended until the next regular business day. 
B.  If the notice of appeal is filed in accordance with the provisions of paragraph A. above, the enforcement of the violations identified in the administrative citation and the requirement to pay any fine shall be stayed until the date the appeal hearing is held by the city council. Except that, if the building official determines that the violations identified in the administrative citation constitute an immediate threat to the health or safety of the occupant of the property associated with the violation or the public in general, the building official shall proceed with enforcement of the administrative citation. 
C.  As soon as possible after receiving the written notice of appeal, the building official or city clerk shall fix a date, time and place for the hearing. Written notice of the date, time and place for the hearing shall be served at least ten (10) calendar days prior to the date of the hearing to the party appealing the administrative citation by any one of the following means: 
1.  Personal service; 
2.  First class mail and, if applicable, posting the notice of hearing conspicuously on or in front of the property associated with the violation; 
The failure of any party appealing the administrative citation to receive such notice shall not affect the validity of any proceedings taken under this chapter. Service by first class mail in the manner described above shall become effective on the date of mailing. 
D.  Failure of any person to file an appeal in accordance with the provisions of this section shall constitute waiver of that person's rights to administrative determination of the merits of the administrative citation and the amount of the fine. 
E.  The city council shall conduct an orderly proceeding and accept oral and written evidence regarding the administrative citation in the following manner: 
1.  The building official shall present testimony and evidence relating to the violation and the appropriate means of correcting the violation. 
2.  The person committing the violation may present testimony or evidence concerning the violation and the means and time frame for correction. 
F.  The city council may sustain, modify or overrule the administrative citation. 
G.  The decision of the city council regarding any appeal is the final administrative order and decision. 
(Ord. No. 2009-01, § 1, 2009) 
15.04.096 - Remedies of private parties. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall not affect the rights of private parties to pursue any and all legal remedies. 
(Ord. No. 2009-01, § 1, 2009) 
15.04.097 - Alternatives. 
    Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the city council from requesting the city attorney to commence a civil or criminal proceeding regarding a violation as an alternative to the proceedings set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2009-01, § 1, 2009) 
15.04.098 - Enforcement authority. 
    Enforcement of this chapter by the city may be accomplished by the building official in any manner authorized by law. The procedures set forth in this chapter shall not be exclusive and shall not in any manner limit or restrict the city from enforcing other city ordinances and addressing violations in any other manner provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 2009-01, § 1, 2009) 
Chapter 15.06 - CALIFORNIA CODE OF REGULATIONS TITLE 24 
Sections: 

15.06.010 - California Code of Regulations Title 24 adopted. 
A.  The California Code of Regulations, Title 24, 2010 Edition, Parts 1, 2, 2.5, 3, 4, 5, 6, 8, 9, 10, 11, and 12, as approved by the California Building Standards Commission, are hereby adopted by reference as if set forth in full. Copies are on file in the office of the city building official. 
B.  The following appendix chapters to the California Building Code, Volume 2, 2010 Edition, are hereby adopted by reference as if set forth in full. Copies are on file in the office of the city building official. 
1.  Appendix Chapter 1, Administration. 
C.  The following appendix chapters to the California Residential Code, 2010 Edition, are hereby adopted by reference as if set forth in full. Copies are on file in the office of the city building official. 
1.  Appendix H Patio Covers. 
2.  Appendix E Manufactured Housing Used as Dwellings. 
3.  Appendix G Swimming pools, Spas and Hot Tubs. 
D.  The following appendix chapters to the California Plumbing Code, 2010 Edition, are hereby adopted by reference as if set forth in full. Copies are on file in the office of the City building official. 
1.  Appendix I, Installation Standards 
(Added during 5-08 supplement: Ord. 2005-09 § 1 (part), 2005; Ord. 2005-08 § 1 (part), 2005) 
(Ord. No. 2010-04, § 2, 1-5-2011) 
Chapter 15.08 - INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE* 
Sections: 

15.08.010 - International Building Code adopted. 
    The International Building Code, Volumes 1 and 2, 2009 Edition, as published by the International Code Council, 4051 West Flossmoor Road, Country Club Hills, IL 60478-5771, are hereby adopted by reference as if set forth in full. Copies are on file in the office of the city building official. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement) 
(Ord. No. 2010-04, § 3, 1-5-2011) 
Chapter 15.09 - INTERNATIONAL RESIDENTIAL CODE 
Sections: 

15.09.010 - International Residential Code adopted. 
    The International Residential Code, 2009 Edition, as published by the International Code Council, 4051 West Flossmoor Road, Country Club Hills, IL 60478-5771, is hereby adopted by reference as if set forth in full. Copies are on file in the office of the city building official. 
(Ord. No. 2010-04, § 4, 1-5-2011) 
Chapter 15.12 - UNIFORM MECHANICAL CODE 
Sections: 

15.12.010 - Uniform Mechanical Code adopted. 
    The Uniform Mechanical Code, 2009 Edition, as published by the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials, 5001 E. Philadelphia Street, Ontario, CA 91761-2816, is adopted by reference as if set forth in full. Copies are on file in the office of the city building official. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; Ord. 2003-05 § 3 (part), 2003; Ord. 99-06 § 4 (part), 1999; Ord. 95-07 § 2 (part), 1995: prior code § 73-0000) 
(Ord. No. 2010-04, § 5, 1-5-2011) 
Chapter 15.16 - UNIFORM HOUSING CODE 
Sections: 

15.16.010 - Uniform Housing Code adopted. 
    The Uniform Housing Code, 1997 Edition, as published by the International Conference of Building Officials, 5360 Workman Mill Road, Whittier, California, 90601-2298, is adopted by reference as if set forth in full except as amended hereinafter. Copies are on file in the office of the building official. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; Ord. 99-06 § 4 (part), 1999; Ord. 95-07 § 2 (part), 1995: prior code § 74-0000) 
Chapter 15.28 - NATIONAL ELECTRIC CODE* 
Sections: 

15.28.010 - National Electrical Code adopted. 
    The National Electrical Code, 2008 Edition, as published by the National Fire Protection Association, One Batterymarch Park, Quincy, MA 02169-7471, is adopted by reference as if set forth in full. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement: Ord. 2005-08 § 1 (part), 2005) 
(Ord. No. 2010-04, § 6, 1-5-2011) 
15.28.020 - Uniform Administrative Code Provisions for the National Electrical Code adopted. 
    The Uniform Administrative Code Provisions for the National Electrical Code, 2008 Edition, as published by the International Conference of Building Officials, 5360 Workman Mill Road, Whittier, California, 90601-2298, is adopted by reference as if set forth in full. Copies are on file in the office of the city building official. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement) 
(Ord. No. 2010-04, § 6, 1-5-2011) 
Chapter 15.32 - UNIFORM PLUMBING CODE* 
Sections: 

15.32.010 - Uniform Plumbing Code adopted. 
    The Uniform Plumbing Code, 2009 Edition, as published by the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials, 5001 E. Philadelphia Street, Ontario, CA 91761-2816, is adopted by reference as if set forth in full. Copies are on file in the office of the city building official. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement) 
(Ord. No. 2010-04, § 7, 1-5-2011) 
Chapter 15.36 - UNIFORM SWIMMING POOL, SPA AND HOT TUB CODE* 
Sections: 

15.36.010 - Uniform Swimming Pool, Spa and Hot Tub Code adopted. 
    The Uniform Swimming Pool, Spa and Hot Tub Code, 2006 Edition, as published by the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials, 5001 E. Philadelphia Street, Ontario, CA, 91761-2816, is adopted by reference as if set forth in full except as amended hereinafter. Copies are on file in the office of the building official. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement) 
15.36.020 - Building permit required. 
    No person, firm, or corporation shall construct any swimming pool in the city without first obtaining a building permit from the building official in accordance with the provision of this chapter. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement) 
15.36.040 - Authorized to issued permit. 
    No person, except a property owner of the premises for which the application for the permit herein required is being made or a person licensed by the state contractor's licensing board of a category permitting the construction of swimming pools, shall be issued a building permit for construction of a swimming pool. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement) 
15.36.050 - Indemnification of city. 
    A building permit required by this article shall not be issued unless the applicant has deposited with the building official a cash bond, certified check, letter of credit or a security bond payable to the city in the sum of five hundred dollars ($500.00) to indemnify the city for any damage to improvements located within the city right-of-way used by contractors. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement) 
15.36.060 - Release of bond. 
    The cash bond or any residual thereof required under this article may be released upon certification by the building official, that any city property damaged by the swimming pool contractor has been restored to as good a condition as it was prior to such damage or that city property suffered no damage incident to the construction process. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement) 
15.36.070 - Building official authority generally. 
    The building official shall have the right to inspect all trucks, tractors, excavators, and other equipment proposed to be used in the construction of a swimming pool within the city. He/she shall be the sole judge as to the hazard or danger that such equipment may impose upon curbs, gutters, sidewalks and other improvements as may be located in the city right-of-way at or near the construction site, and he/she shall be vested with full authority to prescribe measures for the protection of city improvements. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement) 
15.36.080 - Duty to repair damages caused to city improvements-Costs. 
    In the event of damage to any street, curb, gutter, sidewalk, or any other public property incident to swimming pool construction, the building official shall cause such work as may be necessary to restore the improvements to as good a condition as the same was prior to such damage, and shall charge the cost thereof to the contractor to whom the permit was issued for the particular construction job. Such work may be performed by local contract or by city forces as deemed most economical and appropriate by the building official. Such damages as occur may be recovered from the cash bond or other indemnification security as required in this chapter. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement) 
15.36.090 - Fences. 
    Every person in possession of land within the city, either as owner, purchaser under contract, lessee, tenant, or licensee, upon which is situated a swimming pool, shall at all times maintain on the lot or premises upon which such pool is located and completely surrounding such pool, lot, or premises, a fence that meets the requirements of Section 115923 of the California Health and Safety Code. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement) 
Chapter 15.40 - INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE 
Sections: 

15.40.010 - International Fire Code adopted. 
    The International Fire Code and Standards, 2009 Edition, as published by the International Code Council, 4051 West Flossmoor Road, Country Club Hills, IL 60478-5771, are hereby adopted by reference as if set forth in full. Copies are on file in the office of the city building official. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; Ord. 99-06 § 4 (part), 1999; Ord. 95-07 § 2 (part), 1995: prior code § 49-0000) 
(Ord. No. 2010-04, § 8, 1-5-2011) 
Chapter 15.44 - AUTOMATIC FIRE EXTINGUISHING SYSTEMS 
Sections: 

15.44.010 - Automatic fire-extinguishing systems. 
    Scope. The overall intent of this chapter is to reasonably provide additional fire suppression capabilities essential to safeguard life or limb, health, property and public welfare within the city. 
(Ord. 476 (part), 1989) 
15.44.020 - General provisions. 
A.  General. All fire extinguishing systems required by this ordinance shall be installed in accordance with the requirements set forth in the most recently adopted edition of the Uniform Building Code and the Uniform Fire Code as published by the International Conference of Building Officials (I.C.B.O.), Whittier, California. 
B.  Approvals. All fire-extinguishing systems shall be approved by the building official and the fire department and shall be subject to such periodic tests as may be required. The location of all fire department hose connections shall be approved by the fire department. 
C.  Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, certain terms are defined as follows: 
    "Building area" means, for the purposes of this chapter, the area under roof, measured from the outermost edge of the exterior walls, structural supports, cantilevers or similar projections. Eave over-hangs three feet or less shall not be considered as building area. 
    "Automatic fire-extinguishing system" means an approved system of devices and equipment which automatically detects a fire and discharges an approved fire-extinguishing agent onto or in the area of a fire. 
    "Occupancy" means the purpose or purposes for which a building, or part thereof, is used or intended to be used. 
    "Occupancy group and division" means a means by which the Uniform Building Code, Chapter 5, Table No. 5-A, categorically defines the occupancy or use allowed within buildings or structures. 
D.  Separations. For the purpose of this section, area separation and occupancy separation walls, or any other division partitions or separations within the building shall not be construed as constituting separate buildings. Building must be erected, constructed or moved onto separate legal parcels and be provided with separate independent public utilities in order to be considered as separate buildings for the purposes of this chapter. 
(Ord. 476 (part), 1989) 
15.44.030 - Where required. 
A.  New Construction. All buildings and structures hereafter erected, constructed or moved into, three or more stories in height, of five thousand (5,000) square feet or more in total building area shall be equipped with an approved automatic fire-extinguishing system. 
B.  Existing Buildings and Structures. Existing buildings or structures of five thousand (5,000) square feet or more in total building area are exempt from the automatic fire-extinguishing system requirements of this chapter with the following exceptions: 
1.  In existing buildings where an automatic fire-extinguishing system does not exist and a change of occupancy or use, as defined in accordance with the most recently adopted edition of the Uniform Building Code, is made and the existing building area exceeds five thousand (5,000) square feet, an approved automatic fire-extinguishing system shall be installed throughout the building. 
2.  When the floor area, where the change of occupancy or use is made, is less than ten (10) percent of the building area of the entire building, only that portion of the building where the change of occupancy or use occurs need be equipped with an approved automatic fire-extinguishing system. 
C.  Additions to Existing Buildings. All additions to existing buildings or structures hereafter erected, constructed or moved into, when the addition to the existing building results in a total combined building area of more than five thousand (5,000) square feet shall be equipped with an approved automatic fire-extinguishing system. 
1.  Exceptions. 
a.  Minor additions, defined as restrooms, mechanical rooms or similar accessory rooms with floor area less than ten (10) percent of the building area of the existing building shall not be construed to require the existing building be equipped with an automatic fire-extinguishing system. All additions will be evaluated on an individual basis by the fire and building departments. 
b.  Additions, when required by the Uniform Building Code to provide minimum standards to safeguard life or limb, health, property and public welfare, shall not be construed as to require the installation of an automatic fire-extinguishing system. 
D.  Changes, Alterations and Repairs. Changes, alterations and repairs to the interior of such building or the front thereof facing a public street may be made, provided such changes do not, in the opinion of the fire department and building official, increase the fire hazard of such building. 
E.  Drinking Establishments. In new construction, an automatic fire-extinguishing system shall be installed in rooms used by the occupants for the consumption of alcoholic beverages and unseparated accessory uses where the total building area of such unseparated rooms and assembly uses exceeds three thousand (3,000) square feet. 
(Ord. 476 (part), 1989) 
15.44.040 - Permissible sprinkler omissions. 
    Subject to the approval of the building official and with the concurrence of the chief of the fire department, sprinklers may be omitted in rooms or areas as follows: 
A.  Sprinklers shall not be installed when the application of water or flame and water to the contents may constitute a serious life or fire hazard, as in the manufacture or storage of quantities of aluminum powder, calcium carbide, calcium phosphide, metallic sodium and potassium, quick-lime, magnesium powder and sodium peroxide. 
B.  Safe deposit or other vaults of fire-resistive construction, when used for the storage of records, files and other documents, when stored in metal cabinets. 
C.  Communication equipment areas under the exclusive control of a public communication utility agency. 
(Ord. 476 (part), 1989) 
15.44.050 - Appeals. 
A.  General. In order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the building official, fire chief and/or authorized representatives relative to the application and interpretation of this chapter, there shall be created a board of appeals consisting of five members who are qualified by experience and training to pass upon matters pertaining to the provisions of this chapter and who are not employees of this jurisdiction. The building official shall be an ex officio member of and shall act as secretary to said board but shall have no vote upon any matter before the board. This board of appeals shall be appointed by the city council and shall hold office at its pleasure. 
B.  Duty. The board of appeals shall assume and be responsible for the following duties: 
1.  The board shall adopt rules of procedures for conducting its business. 
2.  The board shall render all decisions and findings, in writing, to the appellant with duplicate copy to the city council, building official and the chief of the fire department. 
3.  The board shall review all appeals as to their compliance or lack of compliance with the provisions as set forth in this chapter. 
C.  Limitations of Authority. The board of appeals shall not be empowered to lessen or waive the requirements as set forth by this chapter. The city council shall approve the board's "rules of procedures for conducting its business" but shall reserve the right to amend, delete or impose conditions to said rules. 
(Ord. 476 (part), 1989) 
Chapter 15.48 - CAPITAL FACILITIES FEES/DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2016-002, §§ 1-17, adopted March 16, 2016, amended chapter 15.48 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former chapter 15.48, §§ 15.48.010-15.48.140, pertained to capital facilities fee. See Code Comparative Table and Disposition List for complete derivation. 

15.48.010 - Title. 
    The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be known and may be cited as "The City of Kingsburg Capital Facilities Fees/Development Impact Fees Ordinance." This chapter is adopted under and pursuant to the provisions of, but no limited to, Chapter 5 (commencing with Section 6600 et seq. of Division 1 of Title 7 of the California Government Code." 
(Ord. No. 2016-002, § 1, 3-16-2016) 
15.48.020 - Findings, conclusions and interpretation. 
1.  The city council of the city has received, reviewed, considered and found to be true and correct the findings and conclusions of the "Development Impact Fee Justification Study" addressed to the city, prepared by David Taussig & Associates dated January 27, 2016 ("2016 study"). The 2016 study sets forth certain capital and public facilities needs of the city as identified in the 2016 study and Section 15.48.030, A-E, inclusive, which will be generated by new development. The city council of the city has received, reviewed, considered and found to be true and correct the findings and conclusions of the City of Kingsburg Fee Study Report addressed to the city prepared by Peters Engineering Group dated November, 2005 ("2005 study"). The 2005 study identifies certain storm drainage facilities needs of the city generated by new development. This ordinance hereby incorporates the 2016 study, the provisions dealing with storm drainage facilities in the 2005 study for all purposes by this reference as if the same was set forth fully in this chapter, including, but not limited to, assistance in interpreting, applying, construing and/or deciding any questions regarding this chapter. The 2016 study and the 2005 study addressing storm drainage facilities are collectively referred to in this chapter as the "study". The city's General Plan envisions future residential and non-residential development in many areas within the city. New residential and non-residential development will generate additional residents and employees who will require additional public facilities provided by the city. The adoption of this ordinance is statutorily exempt from the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) and the CEQA Guidelines under Section 15273(a), including Section 15273(a)(4). 
(Ord. No. 2016-002, § 2, 3-16-2016) 
15.48.030 - Purposes. 
    The purposes of the capital facilities fees/development impact fees (sometimes in this chapter collectively referred to as "fees") adopted herein are to provide for the capital facilities identified below as follows: 
A.  Provision of traffic facilities necessary to provide safe and efficient vehicular access throughout the city including new road construction and equipment as identified in the study. 
B.  Provision of public safety facilities required within the city to maintain adequate public safety services, including building expansion and equipment and vehicle replacement for police and fire as identified in the study. 
C.  Provision of general government facilities including library facilities and other facilities used by the city to provide general governmental services as identified in the study. 
D.  Provision of parks and recreation facilities including: (i) acquisition of parkland and recreational areas needed for park and recreational facilities; and (ii) construction of park and recreational facilities, including sports fields, ball fields, soccer fields, trails, restrooms and park beautification as identified in the study. 
E.  Provision of water facilities used by the city to provide basic water supply and distribution services as identified in the study. 
F.  Provision of storm drain facilities to provide basic storm drainage and distribution services as identified in the 2005 study. 
(Ord. No. 2016-002, § 3, 3-16-2016) 
15.48.040 - Reasonable relationship. 
1.  A reasonable relationship exists between the need for city public facilities and the type of development projects on which the capital facilities fees/development impact fees are imposed as indicated by the study. Capital facilities/development impact fees collected from each new development will generate revenue, which is necessary to offset development's impacts to the city's public facilities. 
2.  A reasonable relationship exists between the use of capital facilities fees/development impact fees and the type of development project on which the fee is imposed as indicated by the study. Capital facilities fees/development impact fees collected will be used for the acquisition, installation, and construction of the public facilities identified on the needs list contained in study. 
3.  A reasonable relationship exists between the amount of the capital facilities fee/development impact fee and the cost of the public facilities attributable to the development on which the fee is imposed as indicated by the study. The method of allocation of the respective fees to a particular development project bears a fair relationship, and is roughly proportional to, the development project's burden on, and benefits from, public facilities to be funded by the capital facilities fees/development impact fees. 
4.  The capital facilities fees/development impact fees collected will be placed in an individual interest bearing account established for the purpose of tracking the fee revenue and expenses separately as identified in Section 15.48.050. 
(Ord. No. 2016-002, § 4, 3-16-2016) 
15.48.050 - Deposit of fees in trust fund. 
    Each component of the capital facilities fees/development impact fees received by the city shall be deposited into separate trust funds in a manner to avoid any co-mingling of the fees with other revenues and funds of the city, except for temporary investments, and expended solely for the purposes for which the fees were collected. Any interest income earned by monies in any such trust fund shall also be deposited into such trust fund and shall be expended only for the purpose for which the fee was originally collected. 
(Ord. No. 2016-002, § 5, 3-16-2016) 
15.48.060 - Adoption of study. 
    After review and public hearing, the city council of the city hereby adopts the 2016 study and readopts the 2005 study regarding storm drainage facilities. 
(Ord. No. 2016-002, § 6, 3-16-2016) 
15.48.070 - Application. 
    Capital facilities fees/development impact fees identified in this chapter shall be effective June 1, 2016. The capital facilities fees/development impact fees are due and payable at the time of issuance of building permits. 
1.  Capital facilities fees/development impact fees shall be charged on applicable new structures or expanded square footage of existing structures. 
2.  Capital facilities fees/development impact fees shall be calculated at the time of issuance of the building permit for a structure that is triggering their collection and shall be collected prior to the final inspection of said structure. 
3.  Capital facilities fees/development impact fees shall be calculated based on the structure's use, with a best fit into one of the applicable land use type fee categories identified in the study and in instances where a unique use is presented, the city's community development director/consultant will determine which land use category is most appropriate. 
4.  Capital facilities fees/development impact fees collected on a one-family residential structures described in this Code shall be based on the applicable amount described in this chapter. 
5.  Capital facilities fees/development impact fees collected on each multi-family residential structures described in this Code shall be based on the applicable amount described in this chapter. 
6.  Capital facilities fees/development impact fees collected on structures determined to fall within the commercial zone district described in this Code shall be based on the applicable amount per square foot described in this chapter multiplied by the new enclosed square footage of the structure. 
7.  Capital facilities fees/development impact fees collected on structures determined to fall within the professional office zone district described in this Code shall be based on the applicable amount per square foot described in this chapter multiplied by the new enclosed square footage of the structure. 
8.  Capital facilities fees/development impact fees collected on structures determined to fall within the industrial zone district described in this chapter shall be based on the applicable amount per square foot described in this chapter multiplied by the new enclosed square footage of structure. 
9.  Capital facilities fees/development impact fees shall not be collected on structures accessory to, as determined by the community development director/consultant, a legally established one-family residential structure or multi-family residential structure. 
10.  Development impact fees shall not be collected on accessory buildings, to a legally established use and as determined by the community development director/consultant that are not intended for occupancy or storage such as structures housing utilities. 
(Ord. No. 2016-002, § 7, 3-16-2016) 
15.48.080 - Prior approvals. 
    Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the fees shall also be applied and collected to the maximum extent allowed by this chapter and applicable law to any prior approvals, entitlements, and discretionary and ministerial permits issued by the city (or by an officer, agent, employee or official thereof) prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter or in accordance with the previous agreements or conditions of approvals, entitlements or permits of any kind obligating parties and/or developments, and/or their successors, to pay such fees when adopted, even though such adoption has occurred subsequent to the issuance of such approval, entitlement or permit. 
(Ord. No. 2016-002, § 8, 3-16-2016) 
15.48.090 - Payment-Deferred. 
    An applicant for a multi-family residential housing project consisting of four (4) or more units ("multi-family project") may request that the payment of the applicable capital facilities fees/development impact fees be deferred: (i) for a period of three (3) years from the date of issuance of the certificate of occupancy for the multi-family project if the multi-family project is a market rental rate project; or (ii) for a period of five (5) years from the date of issuance of the certificate of occupancy for the multi-family project if the multi-family project is a very low income, low income or moderate income multi-family project as those terms are defined in the California Health and Safety Code or other applicable laws, rules, ordinances or regulations. 
    Any request for deferral of the payment of the capital facilities fees/development impact fees shall be made pursuant to an application provided by the city and submitted at the time of application for site plan review or any other land use entitlement that is required in order to construct the multi-family project. If the information set forth on the application satisfies the requirements of this section for the deferral of the payment of the capital facilities fees/development impact fees, the applicant and the owner of the real property upon which the multi-family project will be constructed shall execute an agreement in a form prepared by the city wherein the applicant and the owner of the real property upon which the multi-family project will be constructed agree to pay the applicable capital facilities fees/development impact fees on a date certain as identified in the agreement ("deferral agreement"). The deferral agreement will be processed and recorded against title to the real property upon which the multi-family project will be constructed in accordance with California Government Code Section 66007(c) as amended from time to time. 
    If the applicant and/or the owner of the real property upon which the multi-family project is to be constructed are business entities as opposed to individuals, the owners of each business entity must execute a guaranty agreement in a form prepared by the city ("guaranty agreement") wherein each individual will guaranty the applicant's and real property owner's performance under the deferral agreement, including without limitation, the payment of the capital facilities fees/development impact fees should the capital facilities fees/development impact fees not be paid by the applicant and/or the owner of the real property upon which the multi-family project is to be constructed on the payment date set forth in the deferral agreement. 
    At the time of execution of the deferral agreement and guaranty, the applicant shall pay the city an administrative fee in the amount of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). The purpose of the administrative fee is to reimburse to city the costs of document preparation and costs of administration of the deferral. 
(Ord. No. 2016-002, § 9, 3-16-2016) 
15.48.100 - Other fees-Conditions. 
    Nothing in this chapter otherwise affects, modifies, removes or repeals any other fees, assessments, costs or other conditions or entitlements, heretofore or hereafter otherwise required or imposed by any other duly adopted action of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2016-002, § 10, 3-16-2016) 
15.48.110 - No duplication. 
    Any structure for which the capital facilities fees/development impact fees are paid in accordance with this chapter and the study, which is subsequently required to be repaired, restored or rebuilt as a result of partial or complete damage or destruction by fire, earthquake, other natural disaster, or act of God, and which is not thereby increased in gross area above the gross area existing on the effective date hereof, shall not be required to pay the capital facilities fees/development impact fees upon being rebuilt. 
(Ord. No. 2016-002, § 11, 3-16-2016) 
15.48.120 - Exempt structures. 
    Any structure in existence on the effective date hereof for which the capital facilities fees/development impact fees are not paid or payable in accordance with this chapter and the study, which is subsequently required to be repaired, restored or rebuilt as a result of partial or complete damage or destruction by fire, earthquake, or act of God, and which is not thereby increased in gross area above the gross area existing on the effective date hereof, shall also not be required to of capital facilities fees/development impact fees upon being rebuilt. 
(Ord. No. 2016-002, § 12, 3-16-2016) 
15.48.130 - Increased space. 
    Regardless of cause, any expansion, enlargement or increase of any kind of any structure shall be charged and responsible for payment capital facilities fees/development impact fees in accordance with this chapter and the study. 
(Ord. No. 2016-002, § 13, 3-16-2016) 
15.48.150 - Protests. 
A.  Any party may protest the imposition of capital facilities fees/development impart fees covered by this chapter by meeting both of the following requirements: 
1.  Tendering the capital facilities fees/development impact fee payment, as determined by the community development director/consultant in full. 
2.  Serving written notice on the community development director/consultant. 
a.  A statement that the required payment is tendered under protest. 
b.  A statement informing the city of the factual elements of dispute and the legal theory or theories forming the basis for the protest. 
B.  A protest filed in accordance with this section shall be filed within ten (10) days after the date the building permit was issued that resulted in the imposition of the fee. The hearing before the city council shall be set by the city clerk within thirty (30) days after submission of the notice of protest and the hearing at the city council meeting closest to the expiration of said thirty-day period. At the hearing, oral and written evidence may be presented. The city council shall issue a written decision on the appeal or protest no later than thirty (30) days after the hearing before the city council. The written decision of the city council shall be a final administrative decision. 
(Ord. No. 2016-002, § 14, 3-16-2016) 
15.48.140 - Administration. 
A.  Administrative fee. The community development director/consultant shall be responsible for administration of the capital facilities fees/development impact fee, including the calculation and collection of the fees, tracking of deposits, and preparation of required reports. As such, the office of the community development department will retain the 3.00% administrative cost portion of the Fee described in the study for these purposes. 
B.  Annual adjustment. An annual adjustment to account for cost escalations shall be applied to all capital facilities fees/development impact fees in this chapter in the manner and time specified herein: 
1.  Prior to the end of each fiscal year, the community development director/consultant shall report to the city council his or her findings on the annual escalation for the prior twelve (12) months through May and the capital facilities fees/development impact fees shall be adjusted accordingly. 
2.  The basis for this annual adjustment shall be the percentage increase in the San Francisco Urban Consumer Price Index. The base month for application of this adjustment shall be February 2016 and the adjustment shall be applied to the capital facilities fees/development impact fees in effect on July 1 st of each fiscal year. 
3.  The city council shall cause to be posted in the community development department the annual adjustment in fees as specified in this section. 
C.  Credits and reimbursements. Upon completion to the satisfaction of the city engineer, dedication by the owner of the public facilities or improvements, and acceptance by the city of the public facilities or improvements for which the capital facilities fees/development impact fee, as may be applicable, is intended to pay the cost of construction and completion, such owner shall receive credit against such fee charged or to be charged against such owner for such public facilities or improvements. Such credit shall be administered as follows: 
1.  The credit shall be calculated by the percentage such owner completes of the total public facilities or improvements for which such fee is intended to pay for the construction and completion multiplied by the lesser of the projected cost of the facilities or improvements identified in the study with any applicable adjustments pursuant to this Section 15.48.140 B. or the actual construction costs submitted by the owner and verified by the city engineer. 
2.  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary herein, a credit may be applied only against the fee related to such credit. 
3.  When the owner has exhausted all credit, as determined by the city engineer, the owner may elect to receive cash reimbursement from the city for the remaining credit. Such cash reimbursement shall only be made from the city trust fund containing that component of the capital facilities fee/development impact fee that is related to such remaining credit to the extent such funds are available in such trust fund. Any such elected cash reimbursement remaining unpaid one hundred eighty (180) days after a written request has been made by the owner shall earn interest at the city's current pooled interest rate. 
D.  Annual findings. The community development director/consultant shall prepare once each fiscal year for the city council, a report of any portion of the capital facilities fees/development impact fees remaining unexpended or uncommitted five (5) or more years after deposit of the Fee and which identifies the purpose to which the fee is to be used and to demonstrate a reasonable relationship between the fee and the purpose for which it was charged. 
E.  Refund of unexpended revenues. Except as provided by this Section 15.48.150 F., the city shall refund to the then current record owner or owners of each unit of development on a prorated basis the unexpended or uncommitted portion of the capital facilities fees/development impact fees, and any interest accrued thereon, for which need cannot be demonstrated under this Section 15.48.150 D. Such refund of unexpended or uncommitted revenues may be made by direct payment, by providing a temporary suspension of fees, or by any other means consistent with the intent of Government Code Section 66001. 
F.  Reallocation of remaining revenues. If the administrative costs of refunding unexpended or uncommitted revenues under this Section 15.48.150 E. exceed the amount to be refunded, the city, after a public hearing, notice of which has been published under Government Code Section 6061 and posted in three (3) prominent places within the area of the city, may determine that the revenues shall be allocated for some other purpose for which fees are collected subject to Chapter (commencing with Section 66000) of Division 1 of Title 7 of the Government Code. 
(Ord. No. 2016-002, § 15, 3-16-2016) 
15.48.160 - Enforcement. 
A.  Misdemeanor. Violation of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor. The city attorney may institute criminal proceedings hereunder. Any violator, upon conviction, shall be fined not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), imprisoned for a period not exceeding six (6) months, or both fined and imprisoned. 
B.  Civil proceedings. The city attorney may institute civil proceedings to enforce this chapter, including without limitation, actions for injunction and civil penalties. Construction without the authorization required by this chapter may be suspended by a court of competent jurisdiction. Violation of this chapter interferes with provision of public services, and shall constitute a public nuisance. 
C.  Civil penalties. Any violator of this chapter shall be liable, in addition to payment of the amount of any fees due, for civil penalties not to exceed: One thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each day during which construction proceeds in violation of this chapter plus fifteen (15) percent of the amount of any fees not paid when due. 
D.  Lien. In the event of failure of the owner of a development project to pay in full a fee or fees payable under this chapter, city may place and record a lien upon the property on which the development is constructed in the amount of the unpaid fee. The city council shall adopt rules concerning imposition of such liens, including notice of the imposition of such lien and an opportunity for hearing. 
E.  Costs of securing compliance. Any person or entity not in compliance with this chapter shall be liable, in addition to other amounts provided herein, for attorneys' fees, and all other reasonable costs of securing compliance, including the cost of collection. 
F.  Interest. Interest shall accrue on all fees not paid when due pursuant to this chapter at the rate prescribed by law for interest on judgments, from the date when payment was due until the date payment is received in full. 
(Ord. No. 2016-002, § 16, 3-16-2016) 
15.48.170 - Invalidity. 
    If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase of this chapter is for any reason held to be unconstitutional and invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portion of this chapter. The city council hereby declares that it would have passed this chapter and every section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact any one (1) or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases be declared unconstitutional. 
(Ord. No. 2016-002, § 17, 3-16-2016) 
Chapter 15.52 - EASEMENTS 
Sections: 

15.52.010 - Imposing easements by recorded covenant. 
A.  Any landowner(s) may create an easement for parking, ingress, egress, emergency access, light and air access, landscaping or open space purposes by submitting a properly executed covenant signed by all owners of the property to be benefitted, and burdened, by said easement. 
B.  All the real property benefitted or burdened by the covenant shall be in common ownership. 
C.  The covenant shall be effective when recorded and shall act as an easement pursuant to Chapter 3 (commencing with Section 801) of Title 2 of Part 2 of Division 2 of the Civil Code, except that it shall not merge into any other interest in the real property. Section 1104 of the Civil Code shall be applicable to conveyance of the affected real property. 
D.  Owner shall provide the city with detailed maps and legal description of the respective areas of benefit or burden satisfactory to the city engineer and designating the city's project or approval number for same. City shall be provided with conformed copies of all recorded documents involved. 
E.  Covenants executed and recorded pursuant hereto shall be enforceable by the successors in interest to the real property benefitted by the covenant. 
(Ord. 453, 1986) 
Chapter 15.56 - DEDICATIONS FOR PARKS AND RECREATION FACILITIES* 
Sections: 

15.56.010 - Purpose. 
    This chapter is enacted pursuant to Section 66477 of the Government Code of the State of California to provide the city with the authority to require the dedication of land or payment of fees in lieu thereof, or a combination of both, for park or recreational purposes as a condition to the approval of any tentative subdivision map or parcel map and to provide definite standards for determining the proportion of a subdivision to be dedicated and the amount of any fee to be paid in lieu thereof. The park and recreation areas and facilities for which land dedication and/or fees are required by this chapter shall be in accordance with the policies and standards of the Kingsburg general plan and the North Kingsburg specific plan. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 1 (part), 2007) 
15.56.020 - General provisions. 
    As a condition of approval of any tentative subdivision map or any parcel map, the applicant shall dedicate land or pay a fee in lieu thereof, or a combination of both, at the option of the city, to be used only for the purpose of developing new or rehabilitating existing neighborhood or community park or recreational facilities to serve the subdivision. The amount and location of land to be dedicated or the fees to be paid shall bear a reasonable relationship to the use of the park and recreational facilities by the future inhabitants of the subdivision. The city shall develop a schedule specifying how, when, and where it will use the land or fees, or both, to develop park or recreational facilities to serve the residents of the subdivision. All fees collected pursuant to this chapter shall, within five years after the payment of the fees or the issuance of building permits on one-half of the lots created by the subdivision, whichever occurs later, be committed for expenditure for the development of new or the rehabilitation of existing neighborhood or community parks or recreational facilities to serve the inhabitants of the subdivision. If the fees are not so committed, such fees, without any deductions, shall be distributed and paid to the then record owners of the subdivision in the same proportion that the size of their lot bears to the total area of all lots within the subdivision. Only the payment of fees may be required in subdivisions containing fifty (50) parcels or less, except that when a condominium project, stock cooperative, or community apartment project, as those terms are defined in Section 1351 of the Civil Code, exceeds fifty (50) dwelling units, dedication of land may be required notwithstanding that the number of parcels may be less than fifty (50). Park and recreation purposes shall include land and facilities for the activity of "recreational community gardening," which actively consists of the cultivation by persons other than, or in addition to, the owner of the land, of plant material not for sale. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 1 (part), 2007) 
15.56.030 - Land dedication and fee determinations. 
    The amount of land dedicated or fees paid shall be established by resolution of the city council and shall be based upon residential density determined on the basis of the approved or conditionally approved tentative map or parcel map and the average number of persons per household. The average number of persons per household by units in a structure shall be the same as that disclosed by the most recent available federal census. The dedication of land, or the payment of fees, or both, shall not exceed the proportionate amount necessary to provide three acres of park area per one thousand (1,000) persons residing within a subdivision unless the amount of existing neighborhood and community park area, as calculated pursuant to this chapter exceeds that limit, in which case the city council may adopt the calculated amount as a higher standard not to exceed five acres per one thousand (1,000) persons residing within a subdivision. The park area per one thousand (1,000) members of the population of the city, shall be derived from the ratio that the amount of neighborhood and community park acreage bears to the total population of the city, as shown in the most recent available federal census. The amount of neighborhood and community park acreage shall be the actual acreage of existing neighborhood and community parks of the city, as shown on its records, plans, recreational element, maps, or reports as of the date of the most recent available federal census. If the subdivider provides park and recreational improvements to the dedicated land, the value of the improvements together with any equipment located thereon shall be a credit against the payment of fees or dedication of land required by this chapter. Common interest developments, as defined in Section 1351 of the California Civil Code, shall be eligible to receive a credit, as determined by the city council against the amount of land required to be dedicated, or the amount of the fee imposed, pursuant to this section, for the value of private open space within the development which is usable for active recreational uses. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 1 (part), 2007) 
15.56.040 - Exemptions. 
    This chapter shall not apply to the following land divisions: 
A.  Subdivisions containing fewer than five parcels and not used for residential purposes. However, a condition may be placed on the approval of a parcel map that if a building permit is requested for construction of a residential structure or structures on one or more of the parcels within four years after the date of recordation of the parcel map, the fee may be required to be paid by the owner of each parcel as a condition of the issuance of the permit; 
B.  Commercial or industrial subdivisions; 
C.  Condominium projects or stock cooperatives that consist of the subdivision of airspace in an existing apartment building that is more than five years old when no new dwelling units are added. 
(Ord. 2007-05 § 1 (part), 2007) 
Chapter 15.57 - URBAN GROWTH MANAGEMENT DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEE 
Sections: 

15.57.010 - Purpose. 
    In order to provide efficient and effective transportation facilities within the North Kingsburg specific plan area for the citizens of the city of Kingsburg, the city council of the city of Kingsburg has determined that an urban growth management (UGM) development impact fee is needed in order to finance right-of-way acquisition and construction of certain transportation facilities by the city of Kingsburg public works department such as to ensure that new development pays its share of the costs of said facilities. In establishing the development impact fee described in the following sections, the city council has found the development impact fee to be consistent with the city's general plan. 
(Ord. 2005-10 § 1 (part), 2005) 
15.57.020 - Urban growth management development impact fee. 
    An urban growth management development impact fee is hereby established for development projects in the city of Kingsburg located within the North Kingsburg specific plan area to pay the finance right-of-way acquisition and construction of certain transportation facilities. In order to establish the actual amount of the impact fee or any subsequent change thereto, the city council shall, at a duly noticed public hearing, by separate city council resolution, identify the purpose of the fee, identify the use to which the fee is to be put, identify the specific amount of the fee, identify the estimated cost of the transportation facilities, determine the reasonable relationship between the fee's use and the type of development project on which the fee is imposed, determine the reasonable relationship between the need for the facilities and the type of development project on which the fee is imposed, and determine the reasonable relationship between the amount of the fee and the cost of the facilities attributable to the development project on which the fee is imposed. The separate city council resolution shall identify when the development impact fee shall be paid by each developer. On an annual basis, in accordance with Government Code Section 66066(b), the city council of the city of Kingsburg shall hold a regularly scheduled public meeting to review the annual report pertaining to urban growth management development impact fee. 
(Ord. 2005-10 § 1 (part), 2005) 
15.57.030 - Exemptions. 
    The following shall be exempted from payment of the urban growth management development impact fee: 
A.  Alterations of an existing building where no additional square footage is constructed, where the use is not changed, and where the need for refuse or recycling services is not increased over and above the refuse or recycling needs of the existing use; 
B.  The construction of accessory buildings or structures which will not produce the need for additional vehicular trips associated with the principal building or from the existing use of the land; 
C.  The replacement of a destroyed or partially destroyed building or structure with a new building or structure of the same size and use provided such replacement does not result in an increase in vehicular trips over and above the original use of the building or structure; 
D.  The installation of a replacement mobilehome on a lot or other such site where a mobilehome legally existed on such site on or prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
    Any claim of exemption must be made no later than the time of application for a building permit or permit for mobilehome installation. Any claim not so made shall be deemed waived. 
(Ord. 2005-10 § 1 (part), 2005) 
15.57.040 - Limited use of fees. 
    The revenues raised by payment of this development impact fee shall be placed in a separate and special account and such revenues, along with any interest earnings on that account, shall be used solely to: 
A.  Pay for the action of rights-of-way and construction of facilities identified in the separate city council resolution described in Section 15.57.020 of this chapter, or to reimburse the city for funds advanced by the city or from other sources for the acquisition of rights-of-way and construction of said facilities. 
(Ord. 2005-10 § 1 (part), 2005) 
15.57.050 - Fee adjustments. 
    A developer of any project subject to the development impact fee identified in the separate city council resolution described in Section 15.57.020 of this chapter, may apply to the city for an adjustment of that development impact fee by completing an "independent fee calculation study." 
(Ord. 2005-10 § 1 (part), 2005) 
15.57.060 - Effective date. 
    The urban growth management development impact fee established hereunder shall apply to the issuance of any building issued on or after the date identified in the separate city council resolution. 
(Ord. 2005-10 § 1 (part), 2005) 
15.57.070 - Annual engineering cost index. 
    The urban growth management development impact fee established hereunder may be adjusted by resolution of the city council of the city of Kingsburg on or before July 1st of each fiscal year by a percentage no greater than the engineering cost index as published by the Engineer News Record for the preceding twelve (12) months. 
(Ord. 2005-10 § 1 (part), 2005) 
Chapter 15.58 - GRADING PERMIT AND SITE IMPROVEMENT REQUIREMENTS 
Sections: 

15.58.010 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to establish procedures and requirements for the issuance of grading permits, safeguard and protect water resources and related habitats and control and reduce erosion, reduce sediment delivered to drainage and provide for sediment management practices by regulating grading, site improvements and related activities on private and public property. 
(Ord. 2007-02 § 1 (part), 2007) 
15.58.020 - Scope. 
    This chapter sets forth rules and regulations to control excavation, grading, site improvements and earthwork construction, including fills and embankments and erosion and sedimentation controls. This chapter also establishes the administrative procedure for issuance of grading permits and provides for approval of plans and inspection of grading and construction of site improvements. 
(Ord. 2007-02 § 1 (part), 2007) 
15.58.030 - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter, the following words shall have the meaning provided in this section: 
    "Approval" means the building official has determined that the proposed work or completed work complies with the provisions of this chapter. 
    "As-graded" means the extent of surface conditions on completion of grading. 
    "Bench" means a relatively level step excavated into earth material on which fill is to be placed. 
    "Best management practices (BMPs)" means physical and managerial practices that, when used separately, or in combination, prevent or reduce erosion, sedimentation, or pollution of water. An example of a guide for BMPs is the State Water Resources Control Board Best Management Practices Construction Handbook. 
    "Borrow" means earth material acquired from an off-site location for use in grading on a site. 
    "Civil engineer" means a professional engineer registered in the state of California to practice in the field of civil works and is qualified in accordance with Section 6730 et seq. of the California Business and Professions Code, or successor provisions. 
    "Civil engineering" means the application of the knowledge of the forces of nature, principles of mechanics and the properties of materials in the evaluation, design and construction of civil works. 
    "Clearing" means the destruction or removal of vegetation by manual, mechanical, or chemical methods resulting in exposed soils. 
    "Compaction" means the densification of a fill by mechanical means. 
    "City engineer" means the person or firm selected and appointed by the city of Kingsburg to act as its city engineer. 
    "Construction activities-Excavation and earth moving" means activities that are an integral and necessary part of a construction project undertaken to prepare a site for construction of structures, landscaping, or other land improvements, including the related excavation, grading, compaction, or the creation of fills, road cuts, and embankments. 
    "Earth material" means any rock, natural soil or fill or any combination thereof. 
    "Engineering geologist" means a registered geologist experienced and knowledgeable in engineering geology and certified by the state of California to practice as a "certified engineering geologist." 
    "Engineering geology" means the application of geologic knowledge and principles in the investigation and. evaluation of naturally occurring rock and soil for use in the design of civil works. 
    "Erosion" means the wearing away of the ground surface as a result of the movement of wind, water or ice. 
    "Excavation" means the mechanical removal of earth material. 
    "Fill" means a deposit of earth material placed by mechanical means. 
    "Grade" means the vertical location of the ground surface. 
1.  "Existing grade" means the grade prior to grading. 
2.  "Finish grade" means the final grade of the site which conforms to the approved plans. 
3.  "Rough grade" means the stage at which the grade approximately conforms to the approved plans. 
    "Grading" means filling, land contouring, clearing and grubbing, drainage activities, site preparation, and road building. 
    "Key" means a designed compacted fill placed in a trench excavated in earth material beneath the toe of proposed fill slope. 
    "Land disturbance activity" means any activity that result in a change in the soil cover or the soil topography. 
    "Plans, preliminary" means drawings which are drawn to scale, and in sufficient detail to indicate the anticipated areas of impact resulting from grading and related activities. Preliminary plans shall include the proposed methods of mitigating the impacts of stormwater runoff to a level of less than significant through the use of best management practices or equivalent techniques. 
    "Plans, final" means drawings provided in sufficient detail for use in the control of construction or related activities and for use in the issuance of permits and approval of improvement plans. The final plans shall be accompanied by supporting calculations. 
    "Professional inspection" means the inspection required by this chapter to be performed by a civil engineer, soils engineer or engineering geologist or by persons supervised by such engineers or geologists and sufficient to form an opinion relating to the conduct of the work that is the subject of the inspection. 
    "Registered geotechnical engineer" means an engineer experienced and knowledgeable in the practice of geotechnical (soils) engineering and licensed by the state of California to practice as a geotechnical engineer. A registered civil engineer may prepare the required geotechnical engineering (soils) report if the civil engineer has at least fifteen (15) years of experience in preparing such reports for private or public projects, such reports have been accepted for use by public agencies, and civil engineer maintains the qualifications required by Section 6736.1 of the California Business and Professions Code, or successor provisions. 
    "Registered geologist" means a geologist experienced and knowledgeable in geology and certified by the state of California to practice in the field of geology. 
    "Sedimentation" means the process of deposition of fragmented rock, soils, or organic particles displaced, transported, and deposited by erosive processes. 
    "Site" means any lot or parcel of land or contiguous combination thereof, under the same ownership, where grading is performed or permitted. 
    "Site improvements" means any physical improvements to a site, such as, but not limited to, asphalt or concrete surfacing, curb and gutter, valley gutters, sidewalks, utility extensions, drainage systems and landscaping. 
    "Slope" means an inclined ground surface the inclination of which is expressed as a ratio of horizontal distance to vertical distance. 
    "Slope, determination of cross slope" means the measurement, at fifty (50) foot intervals, of the average slope perpendicular to the contour lines. 
    "Soil" means naturally occurring superficial deposits overlying bedrock. 
    "Soils engineer (geotechnical engineer)" see "Registered Geotechnical Engineer." 
    "Soils engineering (geotechnical engineering)" means the application of the principles of soils mechanics in the investigation, evaluation and design of civil works involving the use of earth materials and the inspection or testing of the construction thereof. 
    "Stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP)" means a plan required for various construction and industrial activities pursuant to the Federal Clean Water Act and related federal, state or local regulations. 
    "Terrace" means a relatively level step constructed in the face of a graded slope surface for drainage and maintenance purposes. 
    "Vegetation maintenance" means lawn and yard maintenance, brush and tree pruning, home gardening, removal of exotic (non-native) plant species, and other land maintenance activities involving cutting, removal, or planting of non-exotic vegetation by manual, mechanical, or chemical methods. 
(Ord. 2007-02 § 1 (part), 2007) 
15.58.040 - Grading permit required. 
A.  Permit Required. Except as specified in subsection B of this section, no person shall perform any grading or site improvements without first obtaining a grading permit from the building official. 
B.  Exempt Work. A grading permit is not required for the following: 
1.  Grading in a self-contained area so long as there is not the likelihood of: (i) damage to private or public property; (ii) damage to the environment; (iii) effects on fisheries habitat or other aquatic resources; or (iv) runoff concerns or indications of wet areas, as determined by the building inspector; 
2.  An excavation below finished grade for basements and footings of a building, retaining wall or other structure, the construction of which is permitted by a current building permit; 
3.  Routine road and drainage facility maintenance including culvert maintenance; 
4.  Cemetery graves; 
5.  Solid waste disposal sites regulated by the State Integrated Waste Management Act; 
6.  Excavations for wells, tunnels or utilities, not associated with site improvements; 
7.  Exploratory excavations under the direction of a soil engineer, geologist or engineering geologist; 
8.  Routine tilling and field preparation activities associated with agricultural and livestock operations; 
9.  Routine vegetation maintenance; 
10.  Any grading or related activity conducted as a part of a city project, such as new road, bridge or trail construction, or landfill activities, or activities related to maintenance or repair of existing city facilities. 
(Ord. 2007-02 § 1 (part), 2007) 
15.58.050 - Grading permit procedure. 
A.  Permit Procedure. In order to obtain a grading permit, the applicant must complete the procedure identified in this section. Except as exempted pursuant to Section 15.58.040 of this chapter, no person shall perform any grading or site improvements without first obtaining a grading permit from the building official. 
B.  Application. The applicant must complete the grading permit application required by the city. In addition to any city requirements and standards, the application standards set forth in California Building Code Section 106.3.1 are applicable to a grading permit application submitted to the city. In addition, the application shall state the estimated quantities of work involved. 
C.  Grading Application Requirements. Application for a grading permit shall be accompanied by two sets of plans and specifications. The plans and specifications shall be prepared and signed by an individual licensed by the state to prepare such plans or specifications. The plans shall contain the following: 
1.  Specifications shall contain information covering construction and material requirements; 
2.  Plans shall be drawn to scale upon substantial paper and shall be of sufficient clarity to indicate the nature and extent of the work proposed and show in detail compliance to the provisions of this chapter and all applicable federal, state and local laws, ordinances, rules and regulations. The first sheet of each set of plans shall give location of the work, the name and address of the owner and the person by whom they were prepared; 
3.  The plans shall include the following information: 
a.  Location of the proposed site, 
b.  Property limits and accurate contours of existing ground and details of area drainage, 
c.  Limiting dimensions, elevations or finish contours to be achieved by the grading, and proposed drainage channels and related construction, 
d.  Detailed plans of all surface and subsurface improvements and drainage devices and other protective devices to be constructed with, or as a part of, the proposed work together with a map showing the drainage area and the estimated runoff of the area served by any drains. The plans shall show or provide by narrative the location of discharge points to the nearest drainage basin, 
e.  Detailed plans of all physical site improvements including, but not limited to, asphalt or concrete surfacing, curb and gutter, valley gutters, sidewalks, utility extensions, drainage systems and landscaping improvements, 
f.  Location of any buildings or structures on the site where the work is to be performed and the location of any buildings or structures on land of adjacent owners which are within fifteen (15) feet of the site property lines or which may be affected by the proposed grading operations, 
g.  Recommendations included in any required soils engineering report and engineering geology report shall be incorporated in the grading plans or specifications. When approved by the building official, specific recommendations contained in the soils engineering report and the engineering geology report, which is applicable to grading, may be included by reference, 
h.  The dates of the soils engineering and engineering geology reports together with the names, addresses and phone numbers of the firms or individuals who prepared the reports. 
D.  Soils Engineering Report. When a soils engineering report is required, it shall include data regarding the nature, distribution and strength of existing soils, conclusions and recommendations for grading procedures and design criteria for corrective measures, including buttress fills, when necessary, and opinion on adequacy for the intended use of sites to be developed by the proposed grading as affected by soils engineering factors, including the stability of slopes. 
E.  Issuance. The building official may require that grading operations and project designs be modified if delays occur, including, without limitation, weather-generated delays which create problems or issues not considered at the time the permit was issued. The building official may also require professional inspection and testing by a soils engineer. When the building official has cause to believe that adverse geologic factors may be involved, the grading will be required to conform to engineered grading. 
(Ord. 2007-02 § 1 (part), 2007) 
15.58.060 - Grading fees. 
A.  General. Fees for the issuance of grading permits shall be set in accordance with the provisions of the annual fee resolution adopted by the city. 
(Ord. 2007-02 § 1 (part), 2007) 
15.58.070 - Bonds. 
A.  The building official may require bonds in such form and amounts as may be deemed necessary by the building official to assure that the work is completed in accordance with the grading permit and associated approved plans and specifications. 
B.  In lieu of a surety bond the applicant may file a cash deposit with the city or instrument of credit in a form acceptable to the city in the amount required by the building official. 
(Ord. 2007-02 § 1 (part), 2007) 
15.58.080 - Grading standards. 
A.  General. All grading activities shall conform to the provisions of this section, unless the soils engineering report, approved by the city, requires procedures different than those set forth in this section. 
B.  Cut Slope. The slope of cut surfaces shall be no steeper than is safe for the intended use, as determined by the building official and shall be no steeper than one unit vertical in two units horizontal (fifty percent (50%) slope) unless the applicant furnishes a soils engineering or an engineering geology report, or both, stating that the site has been investigated and establishing that a cut at a steeper slope will be stable and not create a hazard to property or the environment. 
C.  Fill Slope and Preparation. 
1.  Preparation of Ground. Fill slopes shall not be constructed on natural slopes steeper than one unit vertical in two units horizontal (fifty percent (50%) slope). The ground surface shall be prepared to receive fill by removing vegetation, non-complying fill, topsoil and other unsuitable materials, scarifying the exposed surface to provide better bonding with the new fill and, where slopes are steeper than one unit vertical in five units horizontal (twenty percent (20%) slope) and the height is greater than five feet, by benching, into sound bedrock or other competent material as determined by a geotechnical engineer or a certified engineering geologist retained by the applicant. The bench under the toe of a fill on a slope steeper than one unit vertical in five units horizontal shall be at least ten (10) feet wide. The area beyond the toe of fill shall be sloped for sheet overflow or a paved drain shall be provided. When fill is to be placed over a cut, the bench under the toe of fill shall be at least ten (10) feet wide but the cut shall be made before placing the fill and acceptance by the soils engineer or engineering geologist or both as a suitable foundation for fill. 
2.  Fill Material. Amounts of organic material detrimental to structural integrity shall not be permitted in fills. Except as permitted by the building official, no rock or similar irreducible material with a maximum dimension greater than twelve (12) inches (0.31 m) shall be buried or placed in fills. 
D.  Maintenance Required. The property owner shall be responsible for adequately maintaining all drainage facilities installed pursuant to this section. 
E.  Grading Inspection. 
1.  General. Grading activities for which a grading permit is required shall be subject to inspection by the building official. The city shall have the right to retain the services of a civil engineer, soils engineer, or engineering geologist, as applicable, to provide inspection services for engineered grading, and as required by the building official for regular grading. The applicant will reimburse the city any and all inspection costs and fees. 
2.  Civil Engineer. If a civil engineer provides professional inspection, the civil engineer shall do so within such engineer's area of technical specialty, which shall include, without limitation, observation, review and approval of line, grade and surface drainage of the development area. If revised plans are required during the course of the work they shall be prepared by the applicant's civil engineer. 
3.  Soils Engineer. If a soils engineer provides professional inspection, the soils engineer shall do so within such engineer's area of technical specialty, which shall include, without limitation, observation during grading and testing for required compaction. The soils engineer shall provide sufficient observation during preparation of the natural ground and placement and compaction of the fill to verify that such work is being performed in accordance with the approved plan and the appropriate requirements of this chapter. Recommendations by the soils engineer which differ from the approved soils engineering and engineering geology reports shall be submitted to the applicant, the building official and the applicant's civil engineer and soils engineer. 
4.  Applicant. The applicant shall be responsible for all work to be performed in accordance with the approved plans and specifications and in compliance with the provisions of this chapter. The applicant shall be responsible for informing the building official of any changed conditions and shall provide revised plans for review and approval. 
5.  Building Official. The building official shall inspect the project at the various stages of work to verify that adequate control is being exercised by applicant's professional consultants. 
6.  Notification of Noncompliance. If, in the course of fulfilling their respective duties under this chapter, the civil engineer, the soils engineer or the engineering geologist finds that the work is not being performed in compliance with the provisions of this chapter or the approved grading plans, the discrepancies shall be reported immediately in writing to the applicant and to the building official. 
7.  Transfer of Responsibility. If applicant's civil engineer or the soils engineer is changed during grading, the work shall be stopped until the replacement has agreed in writing to accept responsibility within the area of technical competence. It shall be the duty of the applicant to notify the building official in writing of such change prior to the re-commencement of such grading. 
F.  Erosion and Sedimentation Control. 
1.  Administration. 
a.  The administration of this section, as it affects erosion and sediment control and related activities, is the responsibility of the city engineer. 
b.  The administration of this section as it affects other building, grading, and related activities is the responsibility of the building official. 
2.  Relationship to Other Regulations. 
a.  The city's subdivision ordinance, requires the submission of a grading permit as a part of the subdivision map process. The city engineer shall be responsible for the administration of these regulations where a grading permit application is submitted as a part of a subdivision map. 
b.  Any soils or geologic reports prepared for any project where a grading permit is required as a part of a tentative subdivision map application, or related environmental document, shall be placed in the records of the building official. 
3.  Erosion and Sedimentation Control. These minimum erosion and sedimentation control standards shall apply to all projects requiring building, grading, and/or development permits to control sedimentation and prevent damage to on-site and off-site property. These standards shall be incorporated into the project design and shall be adhered to during project construction: 
a.  General Standards. 
i.  Minimize soil exposure during the rainy season by proper timing of grading and construction. 
ii.  Retain trees and natural vegetation to stabilize hillsides, retain moisture, reduce erosion, minimize siltation and nutrient runoff and preserve scenic qualities. 
iii.  Vegetate and mulch denuded areas to protect them from winter rains. 
iv.  Divert runoff away from steep, denuded slopes or other critical areas with barriers, berms, ditches or other facilities. 
v.  Design grading to be compatible with adjacent areas and result in minimal disturbance of the terrain and natural land features. 
vi.  Limit construction, clearing of vegetation and disturbance of the soil to areas of proven instability. Mitigate geologic hazards and adverse soil conditions when they are encountered. 
vii.  Reduce sediment transport off the site to the maximum extent feasible through the use of best management practices (BMPs). 
viii.  Propose a new or modified erosion and sediment control technique if the technique is preferred and meets the intent of these regulations. Obtain approval from the city prior to implementation. 
ix.  Conduct frequent site inspections to ensure that control measures are working properly and to correct problems as needed. 
x.  Employ other means of erosion and sediment control as required by the city engineer or public works director as applicable. 
b.  Sediment Control. 
i.  Use sediment basins, silt traps, or similar measures to retain sediment transported by runoff water on-site. 
ii.  Collect and direct surface runoff at non-erosive velocities to the common natural watercourse of the drainage area. 
iii.  Avoid concentrating surface water anywhere except swales or watercourses. 
iv.  Prevent mud from being tracked onto the public roadway by traveling over a temporary gravel construction entrance or washing off vehicle tires before entering a public or private driveway. 
c.  Slope Construction. 
i.  Minimize length and steepness of slopes by benching, terracing or constructing diversion structures. 
ii.  Preserve, match, or blend cuts and fills with the natural contours and undulations of the land. 
iii.  Round sharp angles at the top and sides of cut and fill slopes. 
iv.  Maintain cut and fill slopes at less than two-to-one (2:1, run:rise) slope unless a geological and engineering analysis indicates that steeper slopes are safe and erosion and sediment control measures can successfully prevent erosion. 
v.  Where a cut or fill slope occurs between two lots, make the slope a part of the downhill lot if possible. 
d.  Protection of Watercourses and Drainage Inlets. 
i.  Prepare drainageways to handle concentrated or increased runoff from disturbed areas by using appropriate lining materials or energy absorbing devices to reduce the velocity of runoff water. 
ii.  Deposit or store excavated materials away from watercourses. 
iii.  Protect all existing or newly installed storm drainage structures from sediment clogging. 
iv.  Use straw bales, filter fabric wraps and drainage inlet protections in a manner that does not cause additional erosion or flooding of a roadway. 
e.  Disposal of Excavated Materials. 
i.  Stockpile topsoil on the site for use on areas to be revegetated. 
ii.  Place stockpiled soil in locations, so that if erosion occurs, it will not contribute to offsite sediment discharge. 
iii.  Protect stockpiled soil promptly through the use of appropriate best management practices to reduce the risk of erosion and sediment transport. Apply mulch or other protective coverings on stockpiled material that will be exposed through the winter season. 
iv.  Dispose of excavated material not used at the site at a location approved by the city. 
f.  Dust Control. 
i.  All construction areas, including disposal sites, shall be treated and maintained as necessary to minimize the emission of dust. Maintenance shall be conducted as necessary to prevent a nuisance to off-site properties. 
ii.  All construction sites, including driveways, shall be maintained as necessary to minimize the emission of dust and prevent the creation of a nuisance to adjacent properties. 
g.  Re-vegetation. 
i.  Apply temporary seeding and mulching to disturbed areas prior to October 15 unless the project is conditioned otherwise. 
ii.  Establish a permanent vegetative cover on denuded areas not otherwise stabilized. Permanent vegetation ground cover must control soil erosion satisfactorily and survive severe weather conditions. 
iii.  Retain a vegetative barrier whenever possible around property boundaries. 
iv.  Use self-sustaining, non-invasive plants that require little or no maintenance and do not create an extreme fire hazard. 
v.  Use native plant species whenever feasible. 
4.  Erosion and Sediment Control Plan Requirements. 
a.  Preparation. A site-specific erosion and sediment control plan shall be prepared and submitted with any grading and/or development application which involves grading or related activities which has any one of the following characteristics: 
i.  The total area of grading and related activities is one acre or more; 
ii.  The slope is fifteen percent (15%) or steeper (of the area to be developed); 
iii.  The grading is located within an area of moderate or high geologic instability; 
iv.  The grading is within a floodplain; 
v.  The grading is for a driveway or road which exceeds three hundred (300) feet in length; 
vi.  The grading is proposed to occur during winter land disturbing operations (15 October through 15 April). 
    In addition, the city engineer may require, at any time during design or construction of any project, an erosion and sediment control plan prepared by a qualified professional at the owner's expense. 
    The plan shall be prepared by a person or firm qualified by training and experience to have expert knowledge of erosion and sediment control methods. The professionally qualified person or firm may be a duly licensed or registered architect, civil engineer, engineering geologist, landscape architect, professional forester, professional soil erosion and sediment control specialist, or a soil conservation service employee working under the direction of a qualified professional. When approved by the city engineer, such plan shall be implemented by the owner. Costs incurred by the city for the checking of plans or calculations or for inspection as a result of preparation of an erosion and sediment control plan shall be borne by the owner per the adopted city fee schedule. 
b.  Implementation Measures. The proposed measures shall be based on recommendations contained in the latest edition of the State California Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook or State Water Resources Control Board Best Management Practice Construction Handbook or equivalent best management practices erosion and sediment control guides. 
c.  Contents. The plan shall conform to the requirements found in this section. 
i.  General. 
A.  Identify the owner, plan preparers, project location and activity. 
B.  Include a statement that the plan was prepared by a person or firm qualified by training and experience to have expert knowledge of erosion and sediment control methods. If the plan is not prepared by a licensed or registered professional, state the justification for selection of the person or firm who prepared the plan. 
C.  Identify best management practices guide(s) used for plan preparation. 
D.  Outline the construction schedule and provide specific deadlines for implementation of erosion control features, specific grading and erosion control activities that will occur subsequent to final map recordation or final project approval. 
E.  Include a schedule for inspection and maintenance of erosion control features by date, project milestone or rainfall event. Specify the individuals responsible for the inspection and their reporting requirements. 
F.  Identify temporary sediment detention basins necessary to retain sediment transported by surface water on-site, including: 
(1)  Location, dimensions and design; 
(2)  Design criteria and hydraulic sizing calculations; 
(3)  Construction method; 
(4)  Maintenance requirements and schedule; 
(5)  Methods to prevent vehicle tracking of mud onto public roadways. 
G.  Dust Control. 
d.  Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plans (SWPPP). For projects subject to the requirement to prepare a SWPPP, a preliminary SWPPP may be submitted in lieu of the erosion and sediment control plan required by the provisions of this section, so long as the SWPPP addresses all the standards and conditions contained in this section. 
(Ord. 2007-02 § 1 (part), 2007) 
15.58.090 - Completion of work. 
A.  Final Reports. Upon final completion of the work, the following reports and drawings and supplements thereto are required for engineered grading, or when professional inspection is performed for regular grading, as applicable and shall be provided to the city: 
1.  A set of record drawings prepared by the civil engineer retained to provide such services shall show the original ground surface elevations, as-graded ground surface elevations, lot drainage patterns, and the locations and elevations of surface drainage facilities and of the outlets of subsurface drains. As constructed locations, elevations and details of subsurface drains shall be shown as reported by the soils engineer. 
2.  Civil engineers shall submit a written statement that to the best of their knowledge the work within their area of responsibility was done in accordance with the final approved grading plan and applicable provisions of this chapter. 
3.  A report prepared by the soils engineer retained to provide such services shall include the locations and elevations of field density tests, summaries of field and laboratory tests, other substantiating data, and comments on any changes made during grading and their effect on the recommendations made in the approved soils engineering investigation report. Soils engineers shall submit a statement that, to the best of their knowledge, the work within their area of responsibilities is in accordance with the approved soils engineering report and applicable provisions of this chapter. 
4.  The grading contractor shall submit in a form prescribed by the building official, a statement of conformance to said as-built plan and the specifications. 
5.  Notification of Completion. The applicant shall notify the building official when the grading operation is ready for final inspection. Final approval shall not be given until all work, including installation of all drainage facilities and their protective devices, and all erosion-control measures have been completed in accordance with the final approved grading plan, and the required reports have been submitted to the city. 
(Ord. 2007-02 § 1 (part), 2007) 
Title 16 - SUBDIVISIONS 
Chapters: 
Chapter 16.04 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Sections: 

16.04.010 - Short title-Purposes and objectives. 
    Title 16 shall be known as and may be cited as the Subdivision Ordinance (or code) of the city of Kingsburg. The subdivision ordinance is adopted to preserve, protect and promote the public health, safety, convenience, prosperity and general welfare. More specifically, the subdivision ordinance is adopted in order to achieve the following objectives: 
A.  To implement the general plan of the city of Kingsburg, and elements thereof, as adopted by the city council. 
B.  To provide lots and parcels of sufficient size and appropriate design for the purposes for which they are to be used. 
C.  To provide streets of adequate capacity for the anticipated vehicle traffic which would utilize them, and to ensure that they are designed to promote a safe and uncontested traffic circulation system. 
D.  To accommodate new development in a manner which will preserve and enhance the city's living environment, and to create attractive areas of development through skilled subdivision design. 
E.  To provide for water supply, sewage disposal, storm drainage, solid waste pickup and other utilities and facilities which are required by conditions of living and working in an urban environment. 
F.  To ensure that the costs of providing public and private rights-of-way, street and alley improvements, utilities and public areas and facilities needed to serve new developments are borne fairly and equitably by the subdivider and property owners in direct benefit rather than by property owners of the city-at-large. 
G.  To protect and enhance real property values. 
H.  To coordinate development policies and regulations with those of the county of Fresno to ensure the unimpeded annexation and development of such land that is logical, desirable and in accordance with goals, policies, standards and proposals of the Kingsburg general plan. 
(Ord. 94-05 § 1 (part), 1994) 
16.04.020 - Authority to regulate. 
    Pursuant to the authority conferred by Title 7, Division 2 of the California Government Code cited as the Subdivision Map Act and amendments thereto, and in addition to any other regulations provided by law, the regulations contained in this code are established herewith and shall apply to all subdivisions or parts of subdivisions wholly or partly within the city, and to the preparation, filing and approval of maps. 
    The provisions of this code are supplemental to the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and as said Map Act may be amended. Except as otherwise provided, all terms used herein which are defined in the Subdivision Map Act shall have the same meaning as described thereto in the Act, and as the Act may hereafter be amended. 
(Ord. 94-05 § 1 (part), 1994) 
16.04.030 - Advisory agency. 
    The planning commission of the city of Kingsburg, state of California, is hereby designated as the advisory agency referred to in the Subdivision Map Act, and is charged with the duty of making investigations and reports on the design and improvement of proposed subdivisions. The commission shall have such additional powers and duties with respect to subdivisions and parcel maps, and the procedure relating thereto as are prescribed by the Subdivision Map Act and by this code. 
(Ord. 94-05 § 1 (part), 1994) 
16.04.040 - Relationship to general plan, specific plans and official plan lines. 
A.  A subdivision map or parcel map shall conform to the principles and standards of the general plan, and the elements thereof, with respect to population and housing densities and distribution, locations and sizes of public areas, rights-of-way and improvement of streets and ways, and such other applicable provisions of the general plan. In the absence of a specific plan or official plan line, the alignments of arterial and collector streets shall conform approximately with those alignments shown on the general plan diagram and as may be described in the transportation and circulation section of the community development element thereof. 
B.  A subdivision or parcel map shall conform with plans for streets, public areas and other projects adopted by the city council as a specific plan. A subdivision or parcel map shall conform with plans for the widening or extension of streets adopted by the city council as official plan lines. 
(Ord. 94-05 § 1 (part), 1994) 
16.04.050 - Relationship to environmental assessment. 
    No tentative map or tentative parcel map submitted to the city pursuant to the provisions of this code shall either be considered as having been accepted as complete, or reviewed or acted upon by the planning commission or city council, until the requirements of the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) Guidelines for environmental assessment have been met. 
(Ord. 94-05 § 1 (part), 1994) 
16.04.060 - Relationship to zoning ordinance. 
    Subdivision maps shall conform to the zoning ordinance of the city with respect to uses of land, lot sizes and dimensions, and other applicable regulations. When a proposed use or development of land requires a zoning reclassification, conditional use permit, variance, or other similar permit or entitlement under the zoning ordinance, the application for such permit or entitlement shall be considered prior to, or concurrently with, the tentative map or the tentative parcel map. 
(Ord. 94-05 § 1 (part), 1994) 
16.04.070 - Applicability. 
A.  The provisions of this code shall not apply to any lot or lots forming a part of a subdivision created and recorded prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title unless those lots are hereafter proposed for further subdivision. It is not intended by this code to repeal, abrogate, annul, or in any way impair or interfere with existing provisions of other laws or ordinances or with private restrictions placed upon the property be it by deed, covenant, or other private agreements, or with restrictive covenants running with the land. Only those improvement standards, applicable at the time a tentative subdivision or parcel map is first approved or later extended, shall be imposed. 
B.  The provisions of this code shall not be applicable to: 
1.  The financing or leasing of apartments, offices, stores or similar space within apartment buildings, industrial buildings, commercial buildings, mobile home parks or trailer parks; 
2.  The financing or leasing of any parcel of land, or any portion thereof, in conjunction with the construction of commercial or industrial buildings on a single parcel, unless the project is not subject to review under other local agency ordinances regulating design and improvement; 
3.  The financing or leasing of existing separate commercial or industrial buildings on a single parcel; 
4.  Mineral, oil or gas leases; 
5.  Land dedication for cemetery purposes under the Health and Safety Code of the state of California; 
6.  Activities of the State Energy Resources Development and Conservation commission established pursuant to Division 15 (commencing with Section 25000) of the Public Resources Code. 
7.  Any separate assessment under Section 2188.7 of the Revenue and Taxation Code. 
8.  A lot line adjustment between two or more existing adjacent parcels, where the land taken from one parcel is added to an adjacent parcel, and where a greater number of parcels than originally existed is not thereby created, provided the lot line adjustment is approved by the planning commission. 
    This section shall not apply to the construction, financing, or leasing of dwelling units pursuant to Section 65852.1 or second units pursuant to Section 65852.2 of the Government Code, but this division shall be applicable to the sale or transfer, but not leasing, of those units. 
(Ord. 94-05 § 1 (part), 1994) 
16.04.080 - Merger of contiguous parcels. 
A.  Two or more contiguous parcels or units of land which have been created under the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act or city ordinance enacted pursuant thereto, or which were not subject to such provisions at the time of their creation, shall not merge by virtue of the fact that such contiguous parcels or units are held by the same owner. No further proceedings under the Subdivision Map Act or this code shall be required for the purpose of sale, lease or financing of such contiguous parcels or units, or any of them. 
B.  Two or more contiguous parcels held by the same owner shall be deemed merged if any one of the parcels does not conform to standards for minimum parcel size under the city's zoning ordinance, and if all the following requirements are satisfied: 
1.  At least one of the affected parcels is undeveloped by any structure for which a building permit was issued or for which a building permit was not required at the time of construction, or is developed only with an accessory structure or accessory structures, or is developed with a single structure, other than an accessory structure, that is also partially sited on a contiguous parcel or unit. 
2.  With respect to any affected parcel, one or more of the following conditions exists: 
a.  Comprises less than five thousand (5,000) square feet in area at the time of the determination of the merger. 
b.  Was not created in compliance with applicable laws and ordinances in effect at the time of its creation. 
c.  Does not meet current standards for sewage disposal and domestic water supply. 
d.  Has no legal access which is adequate for vehicular and safety equipment access and maneuverability. 
e.  Its development would create health or safety hazards. 
f.  Is inconsistent with the applicable general plan and any applicable specific plan, other than minimum lot size or density standards. 
3.  For purposes of determining whether contiguous parcels are held by the same owner, ownership shall be determined as of the date that notice of intention to determine status is recorded. This subdivision shall not apply if one of the following conditions exist: 
a.  On July 1, 1981, one or more of the contiguous parcels or units of land is located within two thousand (2,000) feet of the site on which an existing commercial mineral resource extraction use is being made, whether or not the extraction is being made pursuant to a use permit issued by the city. 
b.  On July 1, 1981, one or more of the contiguous parcels or units of land is located within two thousand (2,000) feet of a future commercial mineral extraction site as shown on a plan for which a use permit or other permit authorizing commercial mineral resource extraction has been issued by the city. 
c.  For purposes of paragraphs 3a and 3b, above, "mineral resource extraction" means gas, oil, hydrocarbon, gravel, or sand extraction, geothermal wells, or other similar commercial mining activity. 
C.  The procedure for determining when a merger becomes effective, qualification for exceptions, determination of merger status, and other procedures required shall be in accordance with the provisions of Sections 65411.11 through 65451.21 of the Subdivision Map Act. 
(Ord. 94-05 § 1 (part), 1994) 
16.04.090 - Separate maps-When required. 
    A separate map shall be prepared for each subdivision where land is separated from other land in a parcel or holding by division other than a street, highway, approved private road, alley, railroad right-of-way, flood control right-of-way, canal, or public utility right-of-way. 
(Ord. 94-05 § 1 (part), 1994) 
16.04.100 - Jurisdiction over design and improvement and approval of maps. 
    Control of the design and improvements required for parcel maps and authority to approve tentative parcel maps is vested with the planning commission. Jurisdiction to approve tentative and final subdivision maps and final parcel maps is vested with the city council. 
(Ord. 94-05 § 1 (part), 1994) 
16.04.110 - Delegation of powers and duties. 
    Whenever, by the provisions of this code, a power of authority is given to, or where duty is imposed upon any public officer, it may be exercised or performed by any deputy or departmental employee authorized by him/her pursuant to law unless it is expressly provided that it shall be exercised in person. 
(Ord. 94-05 § 1 (part), 1994) 
16.04.120 - Avoiding preemption. 
    The ordinance codified in this title is intended to comply with all the mandatory requirements of the Subdivision Map Act. Accordingly, the ordinance codified in this title shall be interpreted and applied to meet said mandatory requirements as presently adopted or hereafter amended to avoid invalidating any of its provisions due to preemption. 
(Ord. 94-05 § 1 (part), 1994) 
Chapter 16.08 - CONSTRUCTION AND DEFINITIONS 
Sections: 

16.08.010 - Construction. 
    The following rules of construction shall apply unless inconsistent with the plain meaning of the context of this chapter: 
A.  Tense. Words used in the present tense include the future tense. 
B.  Number. Words used in the singular include the plural, and words used in the plural include the singular. 
C.  Shall and May. The word "shall" is mandatory; the word "may" is permissive. 
D.  Gender. The masculine shall include the feminine and the neuter. 
E.  Headings. In the event that there is any conflict or inconsistency between the heading of an article, section or paragraph of this ordinance and the context thereof, the said heading shall not be deemed to affect the scope, meaning or intent of such context. 
F.  Oath. The word "oath" shall mean affirmation. 
(Ord. 94-05 § 1 (part), 1994) 
16.08.020 - General terminology. 
    The word "city" means the city of Kingsburg, California. The words "city council" and "council" mean the city council of the city of Kingsburg. The words "planning commission" and "commission" shall mean the planning commission of the city of Kingsburg. The words "secretary to the planning commission" and "secretary" mean the secretary to the planning commission of the city of Kingsburg. The words "city administrator", "city manager", "city clerk", "planning director", "city engineer", "building official", "public works director", "fire chief" and "police chief" mean the city administrator, city manager, city clerk, planning director, city engineer, building official, public works director, fire chief and police chief of the city of Kingsburg. 
(Ord. 94-05 § 1 (part), 1994) 
16.08.030 - Definitions. 
    Alley means a public way permanently dedicated or reserved as a secondary means of access to the rear or side of abutting property. 
    Block means the properties abutting on one side of a street and laying between the two nearest intersecting or intercepting streets, railroad rights-of-way, unsubdivided land or watercourse. 
    Condominium means an estate in real property consisting of an undivided interest in common in a portion of a parcel of real property together with a separate interest in space in a residential, industrial, or commercial building on such real property, such as an apartment, office or store. 
    Cul-de-sac means a road which terminates in a permanent turn-around and which by design is not intended to continue beyond its terminal point. 
    Dedication means a transfer by a subdivider to the city or county of Fresno of title to real property or any interest therein, or of an easement or right in real property, the transfer of facilities, or the installation of improvements, or any combination thereof. 
    Frontage means that portion of a parcel of property or lot which abuts on a public street or road or on an approved private street. 
    Frontage road means a road which parallels a freeway, expressway, highway or Arterial street, providing for access to abutting property or for circulation, and which is separated from the freeway, expressway, highway or Arterial street by a median or dividing strip. 
    Lot means a parcel of subdivided land under one or a common ownership used or susceptible to be used in accordance with the regulations of the zoning ordinance and this ordinance that are applicable to the area in which the parcel is located. 
    Lot, double frontage (or through lot) means a lot having frontage on two roads and having the right of access to either one or both of those roads, but excluding corner lots. 
    Lot, reversed corner means a corner lot, the street side line of which is substantially a continuation of the front line of the lot upon which it rears. A corner lot is not a reversed corner lot where it is separated by an alley from the lot upon which it rears. 
    Original parcel means a contiguous area of land at the time of division, in one or a common ownership, any portion or all of which is proposed to be divided under this code. 
    Outlot means a lot designated alphabetically on the subdivision map for specific use or non-use. 
    Official plan line means a precise location for the right-of-way of a future street or the future expansion of an existing street as shown on any specific plan or map adopted as such by the city or by the county of Fresno. 
    Person means any individual, firm, co-partnership, joint venture, association, corporation, estate, or any group or combination acting as a unit, including the plural as well as the singular number. 
    Planting strip means any strip of land within a public right-of-way intended to be planted with trees, shrubs, groundcover, lawn or other type of ornamental vegetation. 
    Remaining parcel means that portion of a subdivision designated on the tentative subdivision map or tentative parcel map, which is not being subdivided for the purpose of sale, lease, or financing. such parcels are commonly designated as being "not a part" of the tentative map. 
    Reserve strip means a strip of property not less than one foot in width and contiguous to a public right-of-way for the purpose of regulating access to part-width and dead-end or stubbed streets until such time as such streets may be completed or extended. Procedurally, such offer of dedication is rejected by the city in approving a tentative map until adjacent right-of-way is acquired by the city through subsequent action of development. 
    Specific plan means a plan adopted by action of the city council in accordance with the provisions of Title 7, Division 1, Chapter 3, Article 8 of the California Government Code, referred to as the planning and zoning law. 
    Standard specifications means specifications of the city of Kingsburg established by recommendation of the planning commission and adopted by resolution of the city council pertaining to the design and installation of public improvements applicable at the time of approving a tentative subdivision or tentative parcel map. Such standards are set forth in the manual of standard specifications as maintained for the city by the city engineer. 
    Street, arterial means a street designated as an arterial street by the Kingsburg general plan or an element thereof, or by a specific plan, which, because of its design and location with respect to other streets, comprises part of the principal network for cross-town traffic flow within the community and connects areas of major traffic concentration. 
    Street, collector means a street providing for traffic movement between arterial and minor streets and for traffic movement within major centers of activity. A collector street also provides for access to abutting properties. 
    Street, minor means a street which provides for direct access to abutting properties and for very localized traffic movements within residential, commercial and industrial areas. 
    Street, stubbed means a street having only one outlet for vehicular traffic and which is intended to be extended or continued to serve future subdivisions or developments on adjacent land. 
    Subdivision means the division by any subdivider of any unit or units of improved or unimproved land, or any portion thereof, shown on the latest assessment roll of Fresno County as a unit or as contiguous units, for the purpose of sale, lease or financing, whether immediate or future except for leases of agricultural land for agricultural purposes. Property shall be considered as contiguous units, even if it is separated by roads, streets, utility easement or railroad rights-of-way. "Subdivision" includes a condominium project, as defined in Section 1351(f) of the Civil Code, a community apartment project, as defined in Section 11004 of the Business and Professions Code, or the conversion of five or more existing dwelling units to a stock cooperative, as defined in Section 11003.2 of the Business and Professions Code. As used in this section, "agricultural purposes" means the cultivation of food or fiber or the grazing or pasturing of livestock. 
    Tentative map means a map for the purposes of showing the design and improvements intended for a proposed subdivision, prepared in accordance with the provisions of this code. 
    Tentative parcel map means a map for the purposes of showing the design and improvement for a proposed division of land as a parcel map, prepared in accordance with the provisions of this code. 
    Wherever a word or phrase used in the subdivision ordinance is not defined in the Subdivision Map Act or in this code, and unless it appears otherwise from the context in which such word or phrase is used, it shall be construed to be harmonious with the definition or construction of such word or phrase as it may be used in the zoning ordinance in effect at the time. 
(Ord. 94-05 § 1 (part), 1994) 
Chapter 16.09 - GROWTH MANAGEMENT SYSTEM 
Sections: 

16.09.010 - Purpose. 
A.  This chapter implements a growth management system that will manage regulating residential development so that it is compatible with the character and service capabilities of the city and other service providers within the city. This chapter implements the growth management amendment to the city charter passed by the voters of the city in the election of November 2, 2004. 
B.  This chapter establishes a growth management system to limit the rate of residential growth in the city to a level compatible with the size, financial limitations, resource constraints, and services capabilities of the city and service providers within the city. This chapter also seeks to maintain aesthetic goals of the city. This chapter implements fundamental policies of the general plan including particular provisions of the land use and housing elements of the general plan. The growth management system will assist the city in addressing its responsibility to share in the provision of housing for households of various income levels as determined by the regional housing needs allocation plan prepared by the council of Fresno County governments and approved by the State Department of Housing and Community Development. 
(Ord. 2006-09 § 1 (part), 2006: Ord. 2005-05 § 2 (part), 2005) 
16.09.020 - Allocations for housing units. 
A.  One hundred fifteen (115) new allocations of housing units will become available at the beginning of each calendar year. Allocation is defined as the right to apply for a building permit to construct one single-family residence or one multi-family residential housing unit. The allocations are divided between two categories of housing: multiple-family housing units with thirty-five (35) allocations (less any allocations issued to multi-family small projects as defined in Section 16.09.050 of this chapter) per year (thirty percent (30%)) and single-family housing units, with eighty (80) allocations per year (seventy-percent (70%)). Of the eighty (80) allocations (less any allocations issued to small projects as defined in Section 16.09.050 of this chapter) per year of single-family housing units, twenty (20) allocations shall be reserved for large lot development on parcels of at least ten thousand (10,000) square feet. 
B.  Allocations which are issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter are issued to the specific residential development project identified and described in the application for allocations. Allocations are not issued to any person or entity. Allocations cannot be assigned, transferred or conveyed to another residential development project 
C.  Except as otherwise set forth in this subsection, if after allocations are awarded, a residential housing project receiving allocations is modified or changed in any way, the allocations awarded to that residential housing project shall automatically terminate and become unused allocations subject to reallocation at the time of the next award of allocations. In order to obtain allocations, the modified or changed residential housing project must apply for allocations as a new residential housing project. Except that, a residential housing project may file an application with the city requesting that the allocations not terminate but remain with the changed or modified residential housing project. The city council may grant such application only if the city council can make all of the following findings: 
1.  The city council determines that: (i) any modification or change in the type (i.e., single-family, multi-family, senior, etc.) of residential housing; or (ii) any modification or change in any aspect of the residential housing project which is subject to the rating and ranking criteria set forth in Section 16.09.070 of this chapter, identified in the original application for allocations, satisfies a current specific housing need in the city of Kingsburg; 
2.  Any modification or change: (i) in the number of residential housing units; or (ii) any modification or change in any aspect of the residential housing project which is subject to the rating and ranking criteria set forth in Section 16.09.070 of this chapter, identified in the original application for allocations, results solely from a modification or change identified in subsection (C)(1) of this section and does not result in a need to increase the allocations initially issued to the residential housing project identified in the original application; 
3.  The competitive points the modified or changed residential housing project receives as determined by city staff's reevaluation of the modified or changed residential housing project pursuant to the competitive allocation process identified in Section 16.09.060 of this chapter, does not result in a competitive points ranking different from the residential housing project identified in the original application and does not effect the competitive points ranking of any other residential housing project that competed for allocations with the residential housing project identified in the original application; 
4.  No entitlements have been approved or issued for the residential housing project prior to its application seeking to retain the awarded allocations. 
D.  After allocations are issued as provided in this chapter, all development entitlements (i.e., parcel maps, subdivision maps, environmental review, etc.) associated with said allocations are required by the city or applicable law, rule or regulation must be approved by the city in order to use the issued allocations. If any required development entitlements are denied, or expire, the issued allocations related thereto shall automatically expire. The city will not accept any application for development entitlements unless allocations have been approved and issued for said development entitlements. Also for issued allocations to remain effective, complete development entitlement applications (including the payment of any and all required fees) for all required development entitlements must be submitted to the city within one hundred eighty (180) days after the date of issuance of the allocations and construction of off-site improvements, including, without limitation, installation of utilities and construction and installation of streets, must commence within three hundred sixty-five (365) days after the date of approval of all required development entitlements ("construction start date"). No fees paid by an applicant to the city as part of the entitlement process will be reimbursed by the city should the applicant fail to satisfy the requirements of this chapter. 
E.  An applicant may request an extension of the construction start date by submitting a written application for such extension on the form required by the city. In order to grant an extension request, the city council, upon recommendation by the planning commission, must find that the failure of the applicant to commence construction of off-site improvements on or before the construction start date was beyond the reasonable control of the applicant. 
F.  The city council, may, in its discretion, allow unused allocations to be carried over for a period of up to three years and allocated to first allocations and/or second allocations or both (as those terms are defined in Section 16.09.060 of this chapter). Unused allocations are allocations: (i) which were never issued; or (ii) previously issued and expired because of denial of development entitlements, failure to commence construction of off-site improvements on or before the construction start date or any extension thereof; or (iii) failure of the applicant to comply with the provisions of this chapter. 
G.  In order to meet the housing needs of persons who will reside in mobilehome parks or multi-family housing developments, an applicant seeking to develop a mobilehome park with more than fifteen (15) spaces and/or multi-family housing development with more than fifteen (15) units may request issuance of allocations which would otherwise be issued over a three-year period. The purpose of this three-year allocation is to satisfy the housing needs of persons who wish to reside in mobilehome or multi-family developments, through the development of a project which is larger than would otherwise be allowed with only one year of allocations. An applicant may request a three-year allocation by submitting a written application to the city on the form required by the city. 
(Ord. 2007-06 § 1, 2007: Ord. 2006-09 § 1 (part), 2006: Ord. 2005-05 § 2 (part), 2005) 
16.09.030 - Senior housing allocations. 
    Demand for senior housing in the city exceeds the supply of senior housing within the city. As a result, and in order to address this need for more senior housing, allocations for a senior housing project shall be issued on the basis of one-half of one allocation for each senior housing unit to be constructed. Senior housing is defined as residential housing which requires that at least one person in residence in each dwelling unit be fifty-five (55) years of age or older. The residential dwelling units must include each of the following elements: 
A.  Entryways, walkways, and hallways in the interior common areas of the development, and doorways and paths of access to and within the housing units, shall be as wide as required by current laws applicable to new multi-family housing construction for provision of access to persons using a standard-width wheelchair. 
B.  Walkways and hallways in the common areas of the development shall be equipped with standard height railings or grab bars to assist persons who have difficulty with walking. 
C.  Walkways and hallways in the common areas shall have lighting conditions which are of sufficient brightness to assist persons who have difficulty seeing. 
D.  Access to all common areas and housing units within the development shall be provided without use of stairs, either by means of an elevator or sloped walking ramps. 
E.  The development shall be designed to encourage social contact by providing at least some common open space. 
F.  Refuse collection shall be provided in a manner that requires a minimum of physical exertion by residents. 
G.  The development shall comply with all other applicable requirements for access and design imposed by law, including, but not limited to, the Fair Housing Act (42 U.S.C. Section 3601 et seq.), the Americans with Disabilities Act (42 U.S.C. Section 12101 et seq.), and the regulations promulgated at Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations that relate to access for persons with disabilities or handicaps. If a senior housing project includes the seven elements listed previously in this section and one of the three enhancements listed in subsection (G)(1) through (3) which follow in this section, allocations for that senior housing project shall be issued on the basis of one-third of one allocation for each senior housing unit to be constructed. If a senior housing project includes the seven elements listed previously in this section and two of the three enhancements listed in subsections (G)(1) through (3) which follow in this section, allocations for that senior housing project shall be issued on the basis of one-fourth of one allocation for each senior housing unit to be constructed. If a senior housing project includes the seven elements listed previously in this section and all three of the enhancements listed in subsections (G)(1) through (3) which follow in this section, allocations for that senior housing project shall be issued on the basis of one-fifth of one allocation for each senior housing unit to be constructed. Enhancements are: 
1.  Development of congregate housing at a density that would meet the medium or high density residential standard in the general plan, at least seven dwelling units per net acre. 
2.  Provision of support services that would enable senior citizens who are otherwise able to live independently to remain in their homes for a longer time. Examples of such services are provision of community meals, transportation, laundry services and cleaning services. 
3.  Meeting the housing element inclusionary housing goal by making at least fifteen percent (15%) of the housing units affordable to households of low or very low income (less than eighty percent (80%) of the local median income for households of the same size). 
(Ord. 2006-09 § 1 (part), 2006: Ord. 2005-05 § 2 (part), 2005) 
16.09.040 - Exemption to allocation requirements. 
    The following types of residential housing may be constructed without the issuance of allocations: 
A.  Residential housing units constructed upon parcels that were previously fully developed and which have adequate infrastructure to service the new residential development as determined by the city. 
B.  Second housing units added to lots with single-family homes in conformance with the city zoning ordinance and applicable California law. 
C.  Residential housing projects which received all required development entitlements prior to enactment of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2006-09 § 1 (part), 2006: Ord. 2005-05 § 2 (part), 2005) 
16.09.050 - Small projects. 
    New multi-family or single-family residential developments of four or fewer dwelling units ("small projects") will automatically receive allocations and will not be required to participate in the competitive allocation process identified in Section 16.09.060 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2006-09 § 1 (part), 2006: Ord. 2005-05 § 2 (part), 2005) 
16.09.060 - Competitive allocations. 
A.  Allocations for residential projects consisting of five or more dwelling units will compete for allocations in accordance with the process identified in this section. Each calendar year, the maximum number of allocations that can be issued through the competitive process for any one application for development entitlements to construct residential housing units is twenty-five (25) allocations for single-family housing or multiple-family housing, or thirty-five (35) allocations for mixed-density projects which include at least ten (10) single-family homes and at least ten (10) multiple-family dwelling units. 
B.  Applications for competitive allocations must be filed with the planning and development department on or before four o'clock p.m. on September 30th of each calendar year. If September 30th falls on a Saturday, Sunday or holiday when the city offices are closed, the time for filing applications for competitive allocations shall be extended to four o'clock p.m. on the next business day. The development proposals identified in the applications shall be rated and ranked in accordance with the rating and ranking criteria identified in this chapter by planning staff during the month of October and the planning staff shall make its recommendations for competitive allocations to the planning commission. 
C.  An application may not identify more than five model homes to be constructed for each group of twenty-five (25) allocations issued. At the election of the applicant, the model homes will or will not be counted as part of the allocations issued to the applicant. If the applicant elects not to include model homes as part of the allocations issued to the applicant, no certificate of occupancy will be issued for the model homes until allocations are issued for the model homes in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
D.  At its first meeting each November, the planning commission will conduct a public hearing to review staff's rating and ranking recommendations for the competitive allocations and make recommendations to the city council regarding the competitive allocations. At its first regular meeting in December, the city council will consider the recommendations of the planning commission and will issue allocations for the next calendar year ("first allocations"). 
E.  If not all available allocations are issued in December, then at its first meeting in February of the next year, the city council may authorize staff to conduct a second competitive allocation process ("second allocations"). If a second allocation is authorized by the city council, the application process shall be the same as for the first allocations, except that all applications must be received by the planning and development department by four o'clock p.m. on March 31st. If March 31st falls on a Saturday, Sunday or holiday when the city offices are closed, the time for filing applications for second allocations shall be extended to four o'clock p.m. on the next business day. City staff will perform its ranking and rating process during the month of April and a public hearing will be held by the planning commission at its first regular meeting in May to review staff's rating and ranking recommendations for the second allocation and make recommendations to the city council regarding the second allocation. At its first regular meeting in June, the city council will consider the recommendations of the planning commission and determine the number of second allocations to be issued, if any. 
F.  If there is only one application for second allocations, the city council may authorize the issuance of all allocations available in the second allocation to the sole applicant, even though the allocations available in the second allocation exceed the maximum annual number of allocations available for issuance under this section of this chapter and even though the sole applicant for the second allocations received first allocations. 
(Ord. 2006-09 § 1 (part), 2006: Ord. 2005-05 § 2 (part), 2005) 
16.09.070 - Rating and ranking criteria. 
    Projects seeking allocations will be rated using a one hundred (100) point scoring system and then ranked. Rating and ranking will be based on information submitted by the applicants in their application materials, backup documentation provided by applicants and other documents and information the city deems relevant to each respective project. Lists of supporting materials likely to be included in a typical application are found at the end of the description of each scoring category. Applicants are encouraged to submit any other materials that are relevant in supporting their applications. The scoring system will be based on the following criteria: 
A.  Suitability of Location (Twenty-five (25) Points). The city promotes compact and efficient development. Concentric patterns of growth are preferred. Infill development within the urban limit boundary is encouraged. Leapfrog development and irregular boundaries are discouraged. Islands or corridors of unincorporated territory are to be avoided. Projects will not be considered if the property identified in the application is not sufficiently contiguous to the city limits to allow for a logical and reasonable extension of the city limits as determined by the city. Scoring for this category is as follows: 
25 points The property proposed for development is already within the city limits. 20 points An infill project sufficiently surrounded by urban development as determined by the city. 15 points The property is bordered by the city on more than one side. 10 points The property is adjacent to the city limits and within the urban limit boundary, allowing for a logical and reasonable extension of the city limits, as determined by the city. 5 points The property is adjacent to the city limits, allowing for a logical and reasonable extension of the city limits as determined by the city, but the property is outside of the urban limit boundary. 0 points The property is outside of the sphere of influence and annexation to the sphere is required.  
    Documentation may include a map and verbal description. 
B.  Inclusionary Housing (Fifteen (15) Points). The adopted housing element of the Kingsburg general plan has an inclusionary housing policy calling for at least fifteen percent (15%) of the housing units provided by each project to be affordable to low-income or very low-income households. If the affordable units are not incorporated into the project, the developer may be able to comply with the policy by assisting the city in providing an equal number of affordable housing units elsewhere in the city by dedicating appropriate land or paying an in-lieu fee. For each percentage point of affordable housing included in or provided for by a project, one scoring system point will be awarded up to a maximum of fifteen (15) points. Documentation must include a detailed written commitment to provide the affordable housing described in the application. It must include calculation of the probable rental or mortgage costs of the housing units in the project proposed; calculation of the housing costs a low-income household can afford (which can be based on eighty percent (80%) of the median household incomes for Fresno County for the current year as provided by the California Department of Housing and Community Development); and an explanation of how any "gap" between the two calculations will be eliminated. The "gap" is the basis for determining an appropriate in-lieu fee, or an appropriate value for land to be dedicated for affordable housing purposes. If third-party subsidies are proposed through use of governmental grant funds or partnership with non-profit affordable housing organizations, the commitment on the part of any third-party entity must be documented in writing. 
C.  Meeting Special Needs, Demonstrated Market Demands and Community Objectives (Twenty (20) Points). City's adopted housing element emphasizes the accommodation of special-needs populations. Points will be awarded for projects that provide housing for populations that are underserved or have special needs that are not generally met in other projects. Examples include, without limitation, handicapped-accessible units or housing for senior citizens or large families. Points will be awarded to projects that: 
1.  Provide housing for populations that are underserved or have special needs that are not generally met in other projects, such as handicapped-accessible units or housing for senior citizens or large families; 
2.  Expand the range of housing choices available in the community by offering configurations, densities and/or price ranges that are not otherwise readily available; 
3.  Satisfy demonstrated market demands (e.g., large lots, senior housing); and 
4.  Utilize properties that have been bypassed because they are challenging to develop. 
    Documentation may include descriptions of existing housing inventory and market conditions, demographics, explanations of challenges confronted by the developers, description or drawings of proposed housing features, etc. 
D.  Infrastructure and Services (Twenty-five (25) Points). Preference will be given to projects that have the most positive impacts and/or the least negative impacts on infrastructure and services provided by the city and other service entities that operate within or provide services to the city. Scoring shall be based on the following criteria: 
1.  Proximity to existing infrastructure systems; 
2.  The extent of extension or expansion needed to increase the capacity of existing infrastructure to serve the proposed development and, if appropriate, future development; 
3.  The willingness of the developer to enter into a reimbursement agreement if the project involves construction of master-planned facilities and such an agreement is appropriate; 
4.  Agreement to construct and install new oversized infrastructure and/or construct and install new infrastructure that extends beyond the developer's project in order to service future growth, with reimbursement to developer pursuant to a reimbursement agreement providing for reimbursement by future development connecting to the oversized and/or extended infrastructure; 
5.  Dedication of real property to the city to improve systems and services, including, without limitation, rights-of-way for streets, alleys or green belts, or sites for water wells, lift stations, drainage basins, parks, and schools sites, etc; 
6.  Incorporation of resource conservation features, including, without limitation, active or passive solar systems, water conservation features, drought-tolerant landscaping and energy-efficient appliances. 
    Documentation of infrastructure considerations and property dedications can take the form of written descriptions and commitments, maps and diagrams. Conservation features can also be documented with industry or manufacturer data and literature. 
E.  Architectural Design and Aesthetic Considerations (Fifteen (15) Points). Kingsburg continues to project an image as "the Swedish Village" which gives the city a unique identity. Residential housing should include distinctive design, quality construction and accompanying amenities. Features that will receive points through the scoring system include: 
1.  Custom homes or customized features on tract homes that prevent houses in the same development from appearing repetitious; 
2.  Fostering of neighborhood character; 
3.  Compatibility with neighboring developments (e.g., lot sizes and square footage of homes); 
4.  Utilization of alleys for garage access from the rear; 
5.  Variable front yard setbacks; 
6.  Landscaping of street medians and parkways; 
7.  Green belts with pathways for pedestrians, skaters and bicyclists; 
8.  Pedestrian-friendly design; 
9.  Bicycle lanes in appropriate locations; 
10.  Preservation of existing trees; 
11.  Open space and recreation facilities. 
    In addition to written descriptions, diagrams and maps, such documentation as elevations, renderings, floor plans and photographs of similar developments may help to illustrate the proposed project. 
    In the case of walled and gated communities, aesthetics and amenities that are generally viewed by and available to residents and selected guests exclusively will not be considered in scoring in this architectural design and aesthetic considerations category. Only those features that are visible to the general citizenry outside of the walled and gated community will be evaluated. 
(Ord. 2006-09 § 1 (part), 2006: Ord. 2005-05 § 2 (part), 2005) 
16.09.080 - Phased projects. 
    Projects having more residential units than the maximum allocation allowable or available in a single allocation period may be phased. Allocations for phased projects may include allocations for the calendar year and allocations for up to two years thereafter. Approval of allocations for a phased project shall identify the number of allocations that will be issued by the city and used by the applicant during each phase of the project. A separate final map is not required for each phase of a residential subdivision project. Phasing requirements, including, without limitation, number of allocations available for use in each phase, numbers of units that can be constructed and timing of construction, will be enforced as conditions of approval of the tentative tract map and final tract map and as provisions of the subdivision agreement. If a multiple-family residential project includes phasing, phasing requirements including those identified in this section will be enforced through conditions of approval of the site plan or planned unit development and as provisions of the development agreement if one is required by the city. 
(Ord. 2006-09 § 1 (part), 2006: Ord. 2005-05 § 2 (part), 2005) 
16.09.090 - Exceptions and changes. 
A.  The provisions of Chapter 16.40 of this title shall not apply to this chapter. 
B.  The city council shall have the power to increase, decrease, change or reallocate allocations by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. 2006-09 § 1 (part), 2006: Ord. 2005-05 § 2 (part), 2005) 
Chapter 16.12 - MAPS GENERALLY 
Sections: 

16.12.010 - Examination and field check. 
    Pursuant to the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act, the planning director and city engineer shall make such detailed examination of tentative and final subdivision maps and tentative and final parcel maps and such field checks as may be necessary to enable them to make the required certifications and to prepare reports and recommendations thereon to the planning commission and city council. 
(Ord. 94-05 § 1 (part), 1994) 
16.12.020 - Filing requirements fulfilled. 
    No tentative map shall be considered as filed with the city until all of the fees and charges required by the city as pertains to the subdivision of land have been paid, and all applicable requirements of this code have been fulfilled. No tentative map shall be accepted for filing if the map is inconsistent with the general plan. 
    A final subdivision map or parcel map shall not be considered as filed until all fees, bonds, and deposits then due have been made, all corrections have been made as required by the city engineer to the maps and improvement plans, if any, and the property has been annexed to the city and to any service areas or districts other than the city which are to provide necessary services. 
(Ord. 94-05 § 1 (part), 1994) 
16.12.030 - Rejection. 
    The city shall deny a map if it makes any of the following findings: 
A.  That the proposed subdivision is not consistent with any general plan elements. 
B.  That the design or improvement of the proposed subdivision is not consistent with the general plan or any applicable specific plan. 
C.  That the site is not physically suitable for the type of development. 
D.  That the site is not physically suitable for the proposed density of development. 
E.  That the design of the subdivision or the proposed improvements are likely to cause substantial environmental damage or substantially and avoidably injure wildlife or their habitat. 
F.  That the design of the subdivision or the type of improvements is likely to cause serious public health problems. 
G.  That the design of the subdivision or the type of improvements proposed will conflict with easements acquired by the public-at-large, for access through or use of property within the proposed subdivision. In this connection, the city may approve a map if it finds that alternate easements for access or for use will be provided and that these will be substantially equivalent to the ones previously acquired by the public. 
(Ord. 94-05 § 1 (part), 1994) 
Chapter 16.16 - SUBDIVISION CONFERENCE 
Sections: 

16.16.010 - Letter of intent to subdivide. 
A.  Prior to the filing of a tentative subdivision map, a subdivider shall submit a letter to the secretary to the planning commission indicating an intention to subdivide. Such letter of intention is required to alert city officials and interested public and private agencies of such intention so that they may have the opportunity to inform the subdivider of physical conditions, facts, policies and environmental concerns which are or may be pertinent to the preparation of the tentative map. 
B.  The subdivider shall submit twenty (20) copies of a letter of intention to subdivide to the secretary. The secretary shall transmit one copy to each member of the planning commission and city council, and to the planning director, city engineer, public works director, building official, fire chief, police chief, general manager of the S-K-F sanitation district and the superintendents of the Kingsburg Elementary and High School Districts. 
C.  The letter of intent shall be accompanied by a preliminary map, sketch or concept plan, drawn to an appropriate scale, as an aid to the review and discussion of the applicant's proposals. The number of copies and method of distribution shall be as described for the letter of intent under subsection B. of this section. 
(Ord. 94-05 § 1 (part), 1994) 
16.16.020 - Information required. 
    A letter of intent to subdivide shall contain at least the following information: 
A.  Location of the proposed subdivision with reference to the names of any streets which bound or traverse the property, the assessor's parcel number for the affected property and a preliminary title report on the property. 
B.  Name, address and telephone number of the record owner and of the subdivider. 
C.  The area of the property in acres, existing general plan and zoning district designations, and the range of lot sizes and uses contemplated. 
D.  Means of vehicular access. 
E.  Proposed methods or means of utility service. 
(Ord. 94-05 § 1 (part), 1994) 
16.16.030 - Subdivision conference. 
    The subdivider is encouraged to request a subdivision conference with the planning commission as an agenda item at the earliest possible regular meeting of the commission, with attendance invited by representatives of all agencies and persons having received a letter of intent to subdivide. Such request is especially important to the interests of the city where a planned unit development (PUD) is being proposed, where a general plan and/or zoning district reclassification is required, or where annexation will be necessary. Parties which cannot attend the conference are to be invited to submit letters in response to the letter of intent as they may deem appropriate. The discussion and recommendations provided to the subdivider at the conference are to be considered as advisory preparatory to the filing of a tentative subdivision map under the provisions of this code. 
(Ord. 94-05 § 1 (part), 1994) 
Chapter 16.20 - TENTATIVE MAPS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2, adopted Mar. 7, 2012, amended the former Ch. 16.20, §§ 16.20.010-16.20.080 in its entirety. 

16.20.010 - Filing procedure. 
A.  Prior to the filing of a tentative map or vesting tentative map, the subdivider shall submit the tentative map to the site plan review committee for review in accordance with Section 17.72 of this code. 
B.  The tentative map shall be prepared in accordance with the subdivision map act and the provisions of this chapter and shall be filed with the secretary of the planning commission. Such filing shall be made prior to the initiation of any construction work within the proposed subdivision which might be affected by changes in the tentative map. 
C.  The subdivider shall file with the secretary of the planning commission twenty (20) copies of the tentative map and such additional copies as the secretary may require. The subdivider shall further file one or more copies of the map at a size of either 8-1/2? x 11?, or 11? x 17? for purposes of review by parties not receiving scaled copies of the map under the provisions of subsection F. of this section. 
D.  At the time of filing a tentative map the subdivider shall pay the secretary a fee as established by resolution of the city council to defray the expenses incidental to the processing of the map. No part of the fee shall be returned to the subdivider regardless of whether the subdivider withdraws the tentative map prior to action by the planning commission or prior to the recording of a final map. 
E.  The time for filing a tentative map shall be construed to be the time when the map is accepted officially by the secretary of the planning commission. The secretary shall examine the tentative map upon presentation to the city and shall not accept the map unless the tentative map is in full compliance with the provisions of the ordinance codified in this title as to form and as to the information required to be shown thereon and in the statements required to be furnished therewith. In making this determination, the secretary shall seek the recommendations of the city engineer and planning director. The determination of compliance shall be made by the secretary within ten (10) days of the receipt and dating of the map by the secretary. 
F.  Within three days after the filing of the tentative map and accompanying statements, the secretary of the planning commission shall transmit copies as follows: One copy each to the city engineer, planning director, building official, public works director, fire chief, police chief, the general manager of the S-K-F Sanitation District, and the superintendents of affected local school districts, any other affected local special districts, the Fresno County Public Works and Development Services Department, Caltrans (if the proposed subdivision affects a state highway), the California Real Estate Commission, the Southern California Gas Company and the Pacific Gas & Electric Company, together with requests for recommendations on the proposed subdivision. The secretary may transmit copies of the tentative map and accompanying statements to all other public and private agencies affected by the proposed subdivision, together with requests for recommendations thereon. 
(Ord. 95-09 § 1 (part), 1995) 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2(exh. A), 3-7-2012) 
16.20.020 - Form and scale of tentative map. 
    Every tentative map of a subdivision filed with the planning commission shall be clearly and legibly drawn. The size of the sheet shall be twenty-four (24) inches by thirty-six (36) inches unless otherwise authorized by the city engineer. The scale of the map shall be one inch equals one hundred (100) feet, except that subdivisions with lots of two and one-half acres or greater may use a scale of one inch equals two hundred (200) feet. 
(Ord. 94-05 § 1 (part), 1994) 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2(exh. A), 3-7-2012) 
16.20.030 - Information on tentative map. 
A tentative map shall contain the following information and data: 
A.  A tract number assigned by the Fresno County Recorder, as such numbers are assigned in consecutive order throughout Fresno County, and a tract name (if any). If the tentative map is a vesting tentative map, the words "Vesting Tentative Map" shall be printed conspicuously on the face of the map. 
B.  Name, address and telephone number of the record owner of the property to be subdivided, and name, address and telephone number of the subdivider if the owner is not the subdivider. 
C.  Name, address and telephone number of registered civil engineer, licensed surveyor, licensed landscape architect or other person who prepared the map. 
D.  Date of preparation, north point, and scale. 
E.  A legal description sufficient to define the boundaries of the subdivision, and the approximate acreage. 
F.  Boundary lines. 
G.  The location, names, present width, and approximate grades of adjacent roads, streets, highways, or ways. 
H.  The location, names, width, and curve radii of all roads, streets, highways and ways in the proposed new subdivision. 
I.  The location, name and caliper of all trees. 
J.  Approximately accurate contour lines drawn to intervals of one foot, and spot elevations shown on a maximum grid of one hundred (100) feet in each direction. 
K.  The width and approximate locations of all existing or proposed easements or rights-of-ways, whether public or private, for roads, drainage, sewers, public utilities or flood control purposes. 
L.  Lot lines and approximate dimensions, and lot numbers, including lot lines and property lines of adjacent parcels. 
M.  Locations and approximate dimensions of proposed public areas. 
N.  Limitation on rights of access to and from streets, lots and other parcels of land, and locations and widths of reserve strips. 
O.  Location and widths of watercourses and areas subject to inundation. 
P.  Locations of structures, irrigation ditches, pipelines, railroads and other physical features. Any existing features which are to remain in place shall be noted. 
Q.  Locations of city boundary lines and boundary lines of any other public district which lay within five hundred (500) feet of the exterior boundary lines of the proposed subdivision. 
R  A tentative drainage plan including provisions for the disposal of storm water. 
S.  The proposed use of each lot within the subdivision. 
T.  key map showing the proposed subdivision and surrounding subdivisions and streets located within one-quarter mile radius of the boundaries of the proposed subdivision. 
U.  An outline of the areas of the tentative map proposed for the partial recording of a final map thereon. 
(Ord. 94-05 § 1 (part), 1994) 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2(exh. A), 3-7-2012) 
16.20.040 - Statements to accompany tentative map. 
    The tentative map shall be accompanied by reports and written statements from the subdivider giving essential information regarding the following matters: 
A.  Legal description of the property.* 
B.  Source of water supply.* 
C.  Proposed method of sewage disposal.* 
D.  Proposed means of surface water drainage.* 
E.  Type of street improvements.* 
F.  Protective covenants to be recorded. 
G.  The relative proportions of the total area of the subdivision proposed to be devoted to each use classification, in acres.* 
H.  Other improvements proposed to be made or installed.* 
I.  The time when improvements are proposed to be made or installed. 
J.  Description and location of community facilities, which would serve the proposed subdivision. 
K.  Minimum, maximum and average lot size.* 
L.  A preliminary title report describing all rights-of-way and easements to which the property to be subdivided is subject. 
M.  Justification and reasons for any exceptions to the provisions of this ordinance. 
N.  A preliminary soil report if requested by the city engineer. 
As an alternate procedure, the information required by those paragraphs of this section which are also identified by an asterisk [*] may be provided on the face of the tentative map(s). 
(Ord. 94-05 § 1 (part), 1994) 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2(exh. A), 3-7-2012) 
16.20.050 - Planning commission public hearing, review and action. 
A.  The secretary of the planning commission shall set a date for a public hearing and consideration of the tentative map by the planning commission, which date shall be within fifty (50) days after the map was filed unless the time limit for review and action on the map is extended by mutual agreement of the planning department and the subdivider. The planning director shall prepare a report for submittal to the planning commission, the report shall include the comments and conditions from the site plan review committee and all other commenting agencies. The director's report shall be transmitted to the subdivider at least three days before the public hearing. The secretary of the planning commission shall notify other public and private agencies to which copies of the tentative map are transmitted, of the date set for consideration of the map by the planning commission, in order that such agencies may submit reports on the tentative map to the commission. The public hearing shall be noticed in the manner prescribed by, Title 7, Division 1, Chapter 2.7 of the California Government Code. 
B.  After the close of the public hearing, the planning commission shall determine whether the tentative map is in conformity with the provisions of law and of the ordinance codified in this title. Upon that basis, the commission shall, within fifty (50) days after the filing of the tentative map, unless such time shall have been extended by mutual agreement with the subdivider, by resolution, approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove the proposed subdivision. Within fifteen (15) days of commission action on the tentative map, the secretary of the planning commission shall report such action in writing directly to the subdivider, to the city engineer and to the county planning commission. If the map is disapproved, reasons therefore shall be set forth in the report. 
C.  If no action is taken within these time limits the tentative map as filed shall be deemed to be approved, insofar as it complies with all applicable requirements of the ordinance codified in this title, and it shall be the duty of the city clerk to certify his/her approval thereof. 
(Ord. 94-05 § 1 (part), 1994) 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2(exh. A), 3-7-2012) 
16.20.060 - City council review and action. 
A.  If the subdivider, or any interested person affected, is dissatisfied with any action of the planning commission with respect to the tentative map, he/she may, within ten (10) calendar days of such action, appeal to the city council for review of the action. The first day of the appeal period shall be the day following the final action of the planning commission. An appeal shall be filed with the city clerk and shall state specifically wherein it is claimed there was an error or abuse of discretion by the planning commission. 
B.  Upon the filing of an appeal, the city council shall set the matter for public hearing. The council shall hold the hearing within thirty (30) days after the date of filing the appeal. Within ten (10) days following the conclusion of the hearing, the city council shall render its decision on the appeal. A decision to disapprove a map for failure to meet or perform any of the requirements or conditions imposed by this ordinance shall be accompanied by a finding identifying the requirements or conditions which have not been met or performed. This requirement for a finding may be waived by the council when the failure of the map is the result of a technical and inadvertent error which, in the determination of the planning commission or city council, does not materially affect the validity of the map. Upon the filing of an appeal and the conclusion of the hearing, the city council shall render its decision within seven days, declaring its findings based upon the testimony and documents produced before it. 
(Ord. 94-05 § 1 (part), 1994) 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2(exh. A), 3-7-2012) 
16.20.070 - Expiration of tentative map approval. 
A.  Failure to record a final map within twenty-four (24) months of the date of approval or conditional approval of the tentative map shall terminate all proceedings; provided, however, that upon application of the subdivider in writing, an extension not exceeding one year may be granted by the planning commission, except as provided under subsections B and C of this section. In the event the commission denies the subdivider's application for extension, the subdivider may appeal to the city council. Where proceedings have terminated because of failure to record a final map or failure to receive extension by the planning commission or city council, a new tentative map shall be filed in accordance with the provisions of this article before a final map may thereafter be recorded or any lot sold. 
B.  If the subdivider is required to expend the sum of one hundred twenty-five thousand dollars ($125,000.00) or more to construct, improve or finance public improvements wholly outside of and not abutting the boundaries of the tentative map, each filing of a final map authorized by this ordinance shall extend the expiration of the approved or conditionally approved tentative map by thirty-six (36) months from the date of its expiration, or the date of the previously filed final map, whichever is later, up to a maximum period of ten (10) years from the original approval. The number of phased final maps shall be determined by the planning commission at the time of initial tentative map consideration. 
C.  Upon application of the subdivider filed prior to the expiration of the approved or conditionally approved tentative map, the time at which the map expires may be extended by the commission or council for a period or periods not exceeding three years in total. 
D.  The date of approval of the tentative map shall be deemed to be the date of adoption of the resolution of the planning commission declaring approval or conditional approval of the tentative map, provided that if the planning commission shall fail to act on the tentative map and the approval thereof is certified by the clerk, the date of such approval shall be deemed to be upon the last day of the maximum period of time as would be allowed for action by the planning commission as provided in the ordinance codified in this title. If the tentative map is appealed to the city council, the date of approval shall be deemed to be the date of the adoption of the resolution of the city council. The date of such approval of the tentative map shall be certified by the clerk on the face of the tentative map. 
E.  Pursuant to Section 66452.11 of the Government Code, if a tentative map had not expired on or before September 13, 1993, said map shall be automatically extended by two years in addition to any other extension. 
F.  The period of time allowed for the recording of a final map shall not include any period of time during which a development moratorium, imposed after approval of the tentative map is in existence, provided however, that the length of the moratorium does not exceed five years. Once a moratorium is terminated, the map shall be valid for the same period of time as was left to run on the map at the time the moratorium was imposed. However, if the remaining time is less than one hundred twenty (120) days, the map shall be valid for one hundred twenty (120) days following the termination of the moratorium. 
G.  For purposes of this section, a development moratorium shall include a water or sewer moratorium, as well as other actions of public agencies which regulate land use, development, or the provision of services to the land, other than the public agency with the authority to approve or conditionally approve the tentative map, which thereafter prevents, prohibits, or delays the approval of a final or parcel map. 
H.  The rights conferred by a vesting tentative map as provided by this ordinance shall last for an initial time period one year beyond the recording of the final map. Where several final maps are recorded on various phases of a project covered by a single vesting tentative map, the one year initial time period shall begin for each phase when the final map for that phase is recorded. The initial time period shall be automatically extended by any time used by the city for processing a complete application for a grading permit or for design or architectural review, if the time used by the city to process the application exceeds thirty (30) days, from the date that a complete application is filed. Any time period to the expiration of the initial time period provided by this section, the subdivider may apply for a one-year extension. If the extension is denied by the planning commission, the subdivider may appeal that denial to the city council within fifteen (15) days. 
I.  The granting of an extension of a tentative map is discretionary under the provisions of Section 66452.6(e) of the Government Code. Such discretion is limited to questions of time, and the city shall not add new conditions to the tentative map extension except as provided under subsection J. of this section. 
J.  Nothing in this section prevents a subdivider from agreeing to a new condition imposed by the city for a tentative map extension. If the subdivider so agrees, the subdivider cannot later challenge the validity of that condition. If, however, the subdivider does not agree to a new condition, the planning commission may deny the extension if it can make findings, based on justifying evidence, that unless the condition is imposed, the development will be injurious to public health, safety and general welfare. In such instance, the tentative map shall expire and the subdivider shall be required to apply for a new tentative map to which new conditions could be attached by the city. 
K.  Unless an earlier expiration appears on the face of a permit, any permit issued in conjunction with a tentative subdivision map for a planned unit development shall expire no earlier than the approved tentative map, or any extension thereof, whichever occurs first. 
(Ord. 94-05 § 1 (part), 1994) 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2(exh. A), 3-7-2012) 
16.20.080 - Vesting tentative maps. 
    Whenever a provision of this section requires that a tentative map be filed, a vesting tentative map may instead be filed. 
A.  Whenever the city approves or conditionally approves a vesting tentative map, that approval shall confer a vested right to proceed with development in substantial compliance with only those ordinances, policies, and standards of the city in effect at the date when the city first determined that the application for a vesting tentative map was determined to be complete and accepted for filing and processing by the city. 
B.  Whenever a subdivider files a vesting tentative map for a subdivision whose intended development is inconsistent with the zoning ordinance, that inconsistency shall be noted on the map. The city may deny such a vesting tentative map or approve it conditioned on the subdivider, or his/her designee obtaining the necessary change in the zoning ordinance to eliminate the inconsistency. If the change in the zoning ordinance is obtained, the approved or conditionally approved vesting tentative map shall confer the vested right to proceed with the development in substantial compliance with the change in the zoning ordinance and the map, as approved. The rights conferred by this section shall be for the time periods set forth in Section 16.20.070. 
C.  A property owner or his/her designee may seek approvals or permits for development which depart from the ordinances, policies, and standards described under subsections A and B of this section, and the city may grant these approvals or issue these permits to the extent that the departures are authorized under applicable law. 
D.  If a subdivider does not seek the rights conferred by this subsection, the filing of a vesting tentative map shall not be a prerequisite to any approval for any proposed subdivision, permit for construction, or work preparatory to construction. 
E.  This subsection does not enlarge, diminish, or alter the types of conditions which may be imposed by the city on a development, nor in any way diminish or alter the power of the city to protect against a condition dangerous to the public health, safety, or welfare. The rights conferred by this section shall relate only to the imposition by the city, of conditions or requirements created and imposed by ordinances. Nothing in this subsection removes, diminishes, or affects the obligation of any subdivider to comply with the conditions and requirements of any state or federal laws, regulations, or policies and does not grant the city the option to disregard any state or federal laws, regulations, or policies. 
(Ord. 94-05 § 1 (part), 1994) 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2(exh. A), 3-7-2012) 
Chapter 16.24 - FINAL MAPS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2, adopted Mar. 7, 2012, amended the former Ch. 16.24, §§ 16.24.010-16.24.190 in its entirety. 

16.24.010 - Filing procedure. 
A.  Within twenty-four (24) months after the date of approval, or conditional approval, of the tentative map by the planning commission or the city council, or any extension thereof, the subdivider may cause the subdivision or any part thereof to be accurately surveyed and a final map to be prepared and filed. The final map shall substantially conform to the tentative map, as approved, and shall comply with all applicable provisions of this code. 
B.  The final map shall be submitted to the city clerk not less than sixty (60) days prior to the date by which the map must be recorded in order to permit the actions by the city engineer, the city council, and the county recorder as required. 
C.  The final map may be filed when it is completed and all required improvement plans and certificates, except the approval certificate of the city council, have been signed and acknowledged where necessary. A final map shall not be considered as filed until the city engineer has reviewed and certified the map in accordance with procedures specified in this code. The date the map shall be deemed filed with the city council is the date of the meeting at which the city clerk receives the map. 
D.  Documents shall be filed to include the following: 
1.  One complete set of original drawings and ten (10) copies; 
2.  Evidence of title, acceptable to the county recorder, secured from a title company indicating that, as shown by the public records, the parties whose signatures appear on the map and consent to the recordation of the map are all the parties having a record title interest in the land being subdivided and whose signatures are required by the Subdivision Map Act; 
3.  A memorandum to the city engineer containing the following data: 
a.  The total area of the tract submitted; 
b.  The total area in roads and the total lineal length of roads; 
c.  The total area in lots; 
d.  The total number of lots; 
e.  The area in parks, school sites, or other lands offered for dedication or reserved for future public or quasi-public uses; 
f.  The proposed use of the lots; and 
g.  Total areas for each of the proposed uses. 
4.  Two copies of the protective covenants and deed restrictions, if any, that are to be recorded; 
5.  Improvement plans showing all of the improvements required herein, and all others proposed to be installed by the subdivider, in, on, over or under any road, way, right-of-way, easement or parcel of land dedicated by the map; 
6.  All notes, sheets, and drawings showing traverse closure and the computation of all distances, angles, and courses shown on the final map and ties to existing and proposed monuments, and adjacent subdivisions shall accompany the map when required by the city engineer; 
7.  A statement from the county tax collector showing that there are no liens against the subdivision or any part thereof for unpaid taxes or special assessments collected as taxes, except taxes or special assessments not yet payable; 
8.  A statement from the county auditor-controller giving his/her estimate of the amount of taxes and assessments which are a lien but which are not payable; and 
9.  All necessary agreements or contracts, bonds, and deposits as required by the ordinance codified in this title. 
E.  Fees shall be paid to the city clerk at the time of submitting the final map in amounts and for the purposes as established by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. 94-05 § 1 (part), 1994) 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2(exh. A), 3-7-2012) 
16.24.020 - Preliminary soil report and geologic reports. 
A.  A preliminary soil report shall be prepared by a geo-technical engineer registered by the state, for any residential, commercial, industrial or institutional development, based upon adequate test borings or excavations, as determined by the city engineer. If the report indicates the presence of critically expansive soils, or other soil problems which, if not corrected, would lead to structural defects, the subdivider shall provide for and submit the findings of a soil investigation of each building site proposed. The soil investigation shall be prepared by a state-registered civil engineer and shall recommend corrective action likely to prevent structural damage to each building site proposed. 
B.  A preliminary geologic report prepared by a state-certified engineering geologist, based on adequate test borings, shall be submitted to the building official for every subdivision, and shall provide the same kinds of information with respect to geologic conditions as is required for soil conditions under subsection A of this section. 
C.  When a soil report, a geologic report, or soil and geologic report have been prepared specifically for the subdivision, such fact shall be noted on the final map together with the date of such report or reports, the name of the engineer making the soil report and engineering geologist making the geologic report and a statement indicating that the reports are on file for public inspection with the city clerk. 
(Ord. 94-05 § 1 (part), 1994) 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2(exh. A), 3-7-2012) 
16.24.030 - Preparation-Licensed personnel. 
    The final map shall be prepared by or under the direction of a state-registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor. All data, profiles, and other engineering drawings submitted with the final map shall be prepared and signed by a registered civil engineer. 
(Ord. 94-05 § 1 (part), 1994) 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2(exh. A), 3-7-2012) 
16.24.040 - Property description. 
    A property description shall be provided below the title of the map. The description shall cover all the property being subdivided, by reference to such map or maps of the property shown thereon as previously recorded or filed in the county recorder's office or as previously filed with the county recorder pursuant to a final judgment in any action in partition, or as previously filed in the office of the Fresno County recorder under authority of Chapter 3, Part 2 of Division 4 of the Business and Professional Code, or by reference to the plat of any United States Survey. Each reference in such description to any tract or subdivision shall be spelled out and worded identically with the original records and must show a complete reference to the book and page of records of the county recorder. The description shall also include reference to any abandonment with the date, book, and page of records of the Fresno County recorder. 
(Ord. 94-05 § 1 (part), 1994) 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2(exh. A), 3-7-2012) 
16.24.050 - Form of the final map. 
The final map shall conform to all of the following provisions: 
A.  It shall be clearly and legibly drawn, printed or reproduced by process guaranteeing permanent record in black on tracing cloth or polyester base film (provided that if ink is used on polyester base film, the ink surface shall be coated with a substance to assure permanent legibility), including certificates and acknowledgements which may also be legibly stamped upon the map with opaque ink. 
B.  The size of each sheet shall be eighteen (18) inches by twenty-six (26) inches. A marginal line shall be drawn completely around each sheet, leaving an entirely blank margin of two inches along the left margin and one inch along the other three margins. 
C.  The exterior boundary of the land included within the subdivision shall be indicated by a one-sixteenth inch bold line. 
D.  The scale of the map shall be one inch equals one hundred (100) feet or a decimal fraction or a multiple of one hundred (100) feet as directed by the city engineer. 
E.  Each sheet shall be numbered, the relation of one sheet to another clearly shown, and the total number of sheets used shall be set forth on each sheet. 
F.  The tract number, scale and north point shall be shown on each sheet. 
G.  The map shall show the definite location of the original parcel, or parcels, and particularly its relation to surrounding surveys. 
(Ord. 94-05 § 1 (part), 1994) 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2(exh. A), 3-7-2012) 
16.24.060 - Certificates and acknowledgements. 
    Certificates and acknowledgements as required by this code and the Subdivision Map Act shall appear on the title sheet of the final map, unless their omission is permitted by the Subdivision Map Act. 
    In the event that an owner's development lien has been created pursuant to the provisions of Article 2.5 (commencing with Section 39327) of Chapter 3 of Part 23 of the Education Code on the real property or portion thereof subject to the final map, a notice shall be placed on the face of the final map specifically referencing the book and page in the county recorder's office in which the resolution creating the owner's development lien was recorded. The notice shall state that the property subdivided is subject to an owner's development lien and that each parcel created by the recordation of the final map shall be subject to a prorated amount of the owner's development lien on a per acre or portion thereof basis. 
(Ord. 94-05 § 1 (part), 1994) 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2(exh. A), 3-7-2012) 
16.24.070 - Information on final map. 
The final map shall show the following: 
A.  Tract number, tract name (if any), date of preparation, north point and scale. 
B.  The locations and names of streets and highways; the centerlines of streets; the lengths, tangents, radii, central angles and radial bearings of curves; the total width of each street and the width on each side of centerlines; the width of any portion of a street being dedicated and the width of the existing dedication (if any). 
C.  The locations and dimensions of public areas and their net acreage to the nearest one-tenth of an acre. 
D.  The centerlines, widths and sidelines of all easements to which the lots are subject, the date on which the easement was created and the book and page number of the county recorder's records in which the easement appears. If the easement is not definitely located of record, a statement as to the easement shall appear on the title sheet. Easements for storm drains, sewers and other utilities and facilities shall be denoted by broken lines. Easements shall be clearly labeled and identified; if easements are already of record, precise reference shall be given. Easements being dedicated shall be so indicated in the certificate of dedication. 
E.  Locations and widths of drainage channels, utility rights-of-way, reserve strips, railroad rights-of-way, and of streets, alleys and pedestrianways. 
F.  Names of streets adjacent to the proposed subdivision. 
G.  Location of city boundary lines and the boundary lines of any special districts. 
H.  The net dimensions of each lot. Sufficient data shall be shown to determine readily the bearings and lengths of each lot line. For lots containing one acre or more, net acreage shall be shown to the nearest one-tenth of an acre. 
I.  All lots shall be numbered consecutively, commencing with the number "1", with no omissions or duplications, except as provided under Section 16.24.130B of this chapter. 
J.  All dimensions in feet and decimals to the nearest one hundredth (.01). 
K.  The following survey data: 
1.  The radius, tangent, arc, length and central angle of curves. 
2.  Suitable primary survey control points, including section corners and monuments existing outside the boundaries of the proposed subdivision. 
3.  The location of all permanent monuments within the proposed subdivision. 
4.  Ties to and names of adjacent subdivisions, and ties to any city and county boundary lines involved. 
(Ord. 94-05 § 1 (part), 1994) 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2(exh. A), 3-7-2012) 
16.24.080 - Survey procedures and monuments. 
A.  The procedure and practice of all survey work done on any subdivision in the preparation of a final map, shall conform to the accepted standards of the engineering profession. The accuracy of all boundary surveys done in connection with any subdivision shall have a precision of one in ten thousand (10,000). 
B.  In the event the city engineer, the state highway engineer, or the county director of public works has established the centerline of any street or alley in or adjoining a subdivision, the final map shall show the centerline and the monuments which determine its position. If determined by ties, that fact shall be stated upon the final map. 
C.  Each final map shall fully and clearly show and identify such monuments or other evidence determining the boundaries of the subdivision as were found on the ground, together with sufficient corners of adjoining subdivisions, by lot and block number, tract number and place of record, or by section, township, and range, or other proper designation as may be necessary to locate precisely the limits of the subdivision and to permit the survey to be retraced. 
D.  The location, size, and depth of all monuments placed in making the survey shall be shown and, if any were reset by ties, that fact shall be shown. The monuments on the exterior boundary of the subdivision, except those within construction zones, shall be placed prior to the approval of the final map. All interior monuments shall be set subsequent to the completion of the subdivision improvements, and security shall be presented by the subdivider as provided for in Section 66496 of the Subdivision Map Act. 
E.  Notice of setting final monuments shall be given and payment to the engineer or surveyor for setting of final monuments shall be made as provided by the Subdivision Map Act. 
F.  Monuments shall be placed and shall be of the type specified by the latest version of the city's standard specifications. 
G.  The city engineer may allow the use of off-set monuments, properly tied to reference monuments, when necessary due to terrain, waterways, or other monuments other than those specified under subsections D and E of this section. 
H.  Before street improvements are accepted, all existing monuments disturbed by the placement of any improvements shall be reset. 
I.  Bench marks shall be set at locations required by the city engineer. The datum for the area within the city shall be based upon datum established by the United States Coast and Geodetic Survey Sea Level Datum 1929, as amended. 
J.  Identification of monuments and bench marks shall be through the use of a standard plaque. Descriptions of all monuments and bench marks shall be furnished for inclusion in the official records of the city engineer. 
K.  All surveys required by this code, or necessary to the subdivision of land, shall conform to the California Coordinate System when required. Each final map shall show the California coordinate of every monument, and all California coordinates shall be used and shown on all traverse closure sheets, and other notes and ties which are required by this code. 
L.  The blocks and lots of each final map or approved map of record shall have a mathematical accuracy of closure to one in ten thousand (10,000). 
(Ord. 94-05 § 1 (part), 1994) 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2(exh. A), 3-7-2012) 
16.24.090 - Land subject to inundation. 
A.  If any portion of the land within the subdivision shown on any final map is subject to inundation or flood hazard by storm waters, such fact and portion shall be clearly shown by a prominent note on each sheet of such final map. 
B.  If any portion of such land is or will be subject to periodic sheet overflow, or ponding of local or foreign storm water, the city engineer, after consulting with the design engineers, shall so inform the State Real Estate Commissioner. 
C.  The location of any watercourse, channel, stream or creek which functions as a drainage facility shall be shown on the final map. In the event said watercourse, channel, stream, or creek is to be relocated, only the new location need be shown on the final map. 
(Ord. 94-05 § 1 (part), 1994) 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2(exh. A), 3-7-2012) 
16.24.100 - Subdivision shown in phases. 
    The recordation of the final map and the construction of subdivision improvements may be performed in two or more phases, provided that each phase must have a separate tract number and further provided that the subdivider, at the time the tentative map was filed with the secretary of the planning commission, indicated on the subdivider's statement that is required pursuant to Section 16.20.040, his/her intention to file multiple final maps or after the filing of the tentative maps, the city and the subdivider concur in the filing of multiple final maps. Final maps for all phases shall be filed with the council within the time limits set forth in this title for the filing of a final map. 
(Ord. 94-05 § 1 (part), 1994) 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2(exh. A), 3-7-2012) 
16.24.110 - Dedications and public utility requirements. 
A.  All parcels of land shown on the final map as intended for public use shall be offered for dedication for public use at the time the map is filed, except those parcels which are intended for the exclusive use of lot owners in the subdivision, their licensees, visitors, tenants and servants. 
B.  All streets, alleys, pedestrianways, drainage channels and ponding basins, easements and other rights-of-way shown on the final map as intended for public use shall be offered for dedication for public use at the time the final map is filed. 
C.  All rights of access to and from streets, lots and parcels of land shown on the final map as intended to be surrendered shall be offered for dedication at the time the final map is filed. 
D.  Letters shall be submitted with the final map from the public utilities that will serve the subdivision certifying that satisfactory arrangements have been made with said public utilities for providing utility service and necessary easements therefore to serve each lot within the subdivision. 
(Ord. 94-05 § 1 (part), 1994) 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2(exh. A), 3-7-2012) 
16.24.120 - Passage of title. 
    Title to dedicated property shall pass upon its acceptance by the city council and recordation of the final map. The responsibility for maintenance of improvements shall not pass to the city until the improvements have been accepted by the city council pursuant to applicable provisions of the California Streets and Highways Code. 
(Ord. 94-05 § 1 (part), 1994) 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2(exh. A), 3-7-2012) 
16.24.130 - Offers of dedication-Rejection. 
A.  If at the time the final map is approved, any streets, paths, alleys, right-of-way for local transit facilities such as bus turnouts, benches, shelters, landing pads and similar items, which directly benefit the residents of a subdivision, reserve strips or storm drainage easements are rejected, the offer of dedication shall remain open and the council may by resolution at any later date, and without further action by the subdivider, rescind its action and accept any open streets, paths, alleys, rights-of-ways for local transit facilities such as bus turnouts, benches, shelters, landing pads and similar items, which directly benefit the residents of a subdivision, or storm drainage easements for public use, which acceptance shall be recorded in the office of the county recorder. 
B.  One foot reserve strips provided across the end of stubbed streets or along partial streets adjoining unsubdivided land shall be designated by a capital letter, provided however that such reserve strip lots shall be exempt from all other provisions of the ordinance codified in this title governing the size, shape or area of lots, or which are otherwise applicable to lots. These reserve strips shall be offered to the city for dedication at the time the final map is recorded. However, the city shall reject the offer until such time as additional right-of-way is required to allow the extension of a stubbed street or completion of a partial street. All rights of vehicular access across said reserve strips shall be abandoned until such time as said reserve strips are accepted by the city for street purposes. 
(Ord. 94-05 § 1 (part), 1994) 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2(exh. A), 3-7-2012) 
16.24.140 - Offers of dedication-Termination and abandonment. 
A.  Offers of dedication may be terminated and abandoned in the same manner as prescribed for the abandonment or vacation of streets by the streets and highways code. 
B.  Except as provided by the Subdivision Map Act, if a resubdivision or reversion to acreage of the tract is subsequently filed for approval, any offer of dedication previously rejected shall be deemed to be terminated upon the approval of the map by the city council. 
(Ord. 94-05 § 1 (part), 1994) 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2(exh. A), 3-7-2012) 
16.24.150 - Drainage plan. 
    A final map shall be accompanied by a drainage plan showing street grades, curbs, gutters, catch basins, storm sewers, drainage channels, natural drainageways, detention ponds and other drainage works in sufficient detail to enable the city engineer to determine the adequacy of provisions for drainage and the disposal of surface and storm waters. 
(Ord. 94-05 § 1 (part), 1994) 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2(exh. A), 3-7-2012) 
16.24.160 - Improvements. 
A.  The subdivider shall improve or agree to improve all lands dedicated for streets, pedestrianways, drainage channels, easements and other rights-of-way as a condition precedent to acceptance thereof and approval of the final map, subject to the exceptions prescribed under Chapter 16.36 [of this title]. 
B.  Improvements shall conform with the requirements for design and materials provided in the city's standard specifications as adopted by the city council. 
C.  Improvements shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the city engineer. Written notice shall be given by the subdivider to the city engineer prior to commencing construction of improvements. 
D.  Improvements shall be installed to grades specified by the city engineer. 
E.  The city engineer shall have the right to enter upon the sites of improvements for the purpose of inspecting them, and the subdivider shall furnish the city engineer with soils and materials tests by a competent laboratory as may be required to determine the acceptability of such materials. 
F.  Whenever this ordinance requires that a subdivider install sewer, water, and drainage facilities, or related facilities, as a condition precedent to the acceptance of the final map, and where, in the opinion of the city council it is necessary that laterals or other facilities be constructed or be of a larger size than is necessary to serve the subdivision, for the benefit of property not within the subdivision, the city council may, by contract with the subdivider, agree to reimburse the subdivider for such oversized facilities. Such contract shall provide that the city may collect a reasonable charge from any person using the oversized facility for the benefit of property not within the subdivision. 
G.  Upon the completion of the required improvements by the subdivider, the city engineer shall make a final inspection of the subdivision. If upon inspection it is found that all improvements have been installed in accordance with approved plans and specifications, the city engineer shall transmit a letter indicating such findings to the city council and secretary of the planning commission. 
(Ord. 94-05 § 1 (part), 1994) 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2(exh. A), 3-7-2012) 
16.24.170 - Review by city engineer and planning director. 
A.  Upon receipt of the final map, the city clerk shall refer five copies of the map, together with all pertinent documentation submitted by the subdivider, to the city engineer for review. 
B.  The city engineer shall refer all easements for public utilities, including anchorage easements, to the proper public utility for review and recommendation. 
C.  The city engineer shall check and determine the correctness of surveying data, plans, profiles, and specifications of improvements, certificates of dedication, acceptances of dedication and acknowledgements, and such other matters as require checking to insure compliance with this code. 
D.  If the final map conforms to the tentative map as approved by the planning commission, and no changes have been made which have not been approved by the commission, the planning director shall certify the original tracing of the final map on behalf of the commission. If the final map does not so conform, the planning director shall report such fact to the city engineer and shall not certify the map until the map is made to conform. 
E.  If the final map and all accompanying materials are in the correct form prescribed by this code, and the matters shown thereon are sufficient, their correctness shall be certified on the map by the city engineer by signature within sixty (60) days of receipt. If any part of the final map or accompanying materials is incorrect or incomplete, one copy of the map and relevant materials shall be returned to the subdivider with notations as to errors or omissions. Certification by the city engineer shall not be provided until the subdivider resubmits the map and materials free of errors or omissions previously noted by the city engineer. 
F.  The city engineer shall transmit the original or corrected map and materials, together with a report, to the city clerk for review with the city council. 
(Ord. 94-05 § 1 (part), 1994) 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2(exh. A), 3-7-2012) 
16.24.180 - Procedure-Action by the city council. 
A.  The city council shall, at the meeting at which it receives the map, or at its next regular meeting after the meeting at which it receives the map, approve said map by resolution if it is in conformity with all the requirements of this ordinance and the Subdivision Map Act applicable at the time of approval or conditional approval of the tentative map and any rulings made thereunder. If the map does not so conform, the council shall disapprove the map. 
B.  The council shall, at the time it approves a final map, accept or reject any or all offers of dedication and shall, as a condition precedent to the acceptance of any roads or easements, require that the subdivider agree to improve the roads and easements. If at the time the final map is approved, any streets, paths, alleys or storm drainage easements are rejected, the offer of dedication shall remain open, and the city council may by resolution at any later date, and without further action by the subdivider, rescind its action and accept and open the streets, paths, alleys, or storm drainage easements for public use, which acceptance shall be recorded in the office of the county recorder. 
C.  When the subdivider shall have filed with the city clerk the agreement and bond, or made the deposit, as described under Section 16.24.190 of this code, and when such agreement and financial instrument shall have been approved by the city attorney as to form, and by the city engineer and city council as to sufficiency, the city clerk shall deliver the map duly certified to the county recorder for recordation. 
D.  If the city council determines either that the map is not in conformity with the requirements of this ordinance, the Subdivision Map Act or the approved tentative map, or the proposed improvements do not meet city standard specifications, the city council shall by resolution disapprove such final map, specifying its reason or reasons therefore, and the city clerk shall, in writing, advise the subdivider of such disapproval and reasoning based thereon. 
E.  Within thirty (30) days after the city council has disapproved a final map, the subdivider may file a new final map with the city clerk, altered to conform to all the requirements of this ordinance and the Subdivision Map Act. 
F.  No final map shall have any force or effect until the same has been approved by the city council, and no title to any property described in any offer of dedication shall pass until the recordation of the final map. 
(Ord. 94-05 § 1 (part), 1994) 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2(exh. A), 3-7-2012) 
16.24.190 - Agreement and security for improvements. 
A.  Prior to the approval of the final map by the city council, the subdivider shall execute and file an agreement between him/herself and the city, specifying the period within which the subdivider shall cause all work to have been completed, and providing that if the subdivider shall fail to cause all improvement work to be completed within such time period, the city may cause the same to be completed and recover the full cost and expense therefrom from the subdivider. The agreement shall provide for the inspection of all improvements by the city engineer. The agreement may provide for the following: 
1.  For the construction of improvements in units; 
2.  For an extension of time under conditions therein specified; and 
3.  For progress payment. 
To assure full and faithful performance, the subdivider shall file with the aforesaid agreement, a bond, cash, letter of credit or other form of improvement security allowed by the Subdivision Map Act in an amount equal to one hundred fifty (150) percent of the sum estimated by the city engineer to be sufficient to cover the cost of said improvements and incidental expenses, and to cover replacement and repair of existing streets and other improvements that may be damaged in the development of the subdivision. A bond offered as security shall be executed by a surety company authorized to transact surety business in the state of California and must be approved by the city attorney as to form and by the city engineer as to sufficiency. 
B.  In the event the subdivider shall fail to complete all improvement work in accordance with the provisions of the ordinance codified in this title, and the city shall have completed same, or if the subdivider shall fail to reimburse the city for the cost of incidental expenses, or to cover the cost of replacement and repair of existing streets or other improvements damaged in the development of the subdivision, the city shall call on the surety for reimbursement. In any such case, if the amount of surety bond, cash deposit, letter of credit or other security shall exceed all cost and expense incurred by the city, it shall release the remainder of such security. If the amount of the security shall be less than the cost and expense incurred by the city, the subdivider shall be liable to the city for such difference. 
(Ord. 94-05 § 1 (part), 1994) 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2(exh. A), 3-7-2012) 
Chapter 16.28 - PARCEL MAPS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2, adopted Mar. 7, 2012, amended the former Ch. 16.28, §§ 16.28.010-16.28.170 in its entirety. 

16.28.010 - Filing procedure. 
    The filing procedure for a parcel map shall be the same as that for a subdivision under the provisions of Section 16.20.010 of this title. 
(Ord. 94-05 § 1 (part), 1994) 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2(exh. A), 3-7-2012) 
16.28.020 - Form and scale of tentative map. 
    Every tentative parcel map shall be clearly and legibly drawn. The size of the sheet shall be eighteen (18) inches by twenty-six (26) inches unless otherwise authorized by the city engineer. The scale of the map shall be one inch equals one hundred (100) feet, except that parcel maps with parcels of two and one-half acres or greater may use a scale of one inch equals two hundred (200) feet. 
(Ord. 94-05 § 1 (part), 1994) 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2(exh. A), 3-7-2012) 
16.28.030 - Information on tentative map. 
    The information required on a tentative parcel map shall be the same as that required under the provisions of Section 16.20.030 of this code. 
(Ord. 94-05 § 1 (part), 1994) 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2(exh. A), 3-7-2012) 
16.28.040 - Statements to accompany tentative map. 
    The statements to accompany the tentative map shall be the same as those required under Section 16.20.040 of this code. 
(Ord. 94-05 § 1 (part), 1994) 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2(exh. A), 3-7-2012) 
16.28.050 - Planning commission public hearing, review and action. 
    The requirements for planning commission public hearing, review and action shall be the same as those required under Section 16.20.050 of this code, subject to the following exceptions: 
A.  The decision of the planning commission shall be final unless appealed to the city council in accordance with the procedure set forth in Section 16.20.010B of this title. 
(Ord. 94-05 § 1 (part), 1994) 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2(exh. A), 3-7-2012) 
16.28.060 - City council review and action on an appeal. 
    The requirements for city council review and action on an appeal shall be the same as those required for a subdivision under Section 16.20.060 of this title. 
(Ord. 94-05 § 1 (part), 1994) 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2(exh. A), 3-7-2012) 
16.28.070 - Expiration of a tentative map. 
    Provisions concerning the expiration of tentative map approval shall be the same as those provided under Section 16.20.070 of this title. 
(Ord. 94-05 § 1 (part), 1994) 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2(exh. A), 3-7-2012) 
16.28.080 - Vesting tentative maps. 
    Provisions concerning vesting tentative maps shall be the same as those provided under Section 16.20.080 of this title. 
(Ord. 94-05 § 1 (part), 1994) 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2(exh. A), 3-7-2012) 
16.28.090 - Waiver of parcel map. 
A.  At the time of filing of a tentative parcel map, a subdivider may file a request for waiver of the requirement for a parcel map. Such a request shall be filed with the secretary of the planning commission in the form of an application therefore as furnished by the city. 
B.  The planning commission shall waive the requirement for the filing of a parcel map if, after consideration of the tentative parcel map and information submitted therewith, it finds that all of the following conditions have been met: 
1.  That the subdivider has complied with the provisions of Sections 16.28.020, 16.28.030 and 16.28.040 of this chapter; 
2.  That adequate monuments exist in the field which appear of record in the office of the county recorder to permit the retracing of boundaries for each parcel to be created; 
3.  That no dedications of right-of-way or easements are offered or required; 
4.  That all onsite and offsite improvements as required for parcel maps have been completed; and 
5.  That the proposed division of land complies with requirements as to area, design, floodwater and drainage control, sanitary disposal facilities, water supply availability, environmental protection and other requirements of the Subdivision Map Act and this code. 
C.  The instrument evidencing the planning commission's waiving the requirement for a parcel map shall be known as a "waiver certificate" which shall be prepared by the subdivider and shall consist of the following as to form, matters and attachments: 
1.  A description of the boundary of the property proposed to be subdivided; 
2.  A property plat map prepared by or under the direction of a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor and legibly drawn, printed or reproduced by a process guaranteeing a permanent record in black ink; 
3.  The location of all division lines and the exterior boundary of the land included within the subdivision shall be indicated by distinctive lines and clearly so designated; 
4.  The map shall be signed and sealed by the registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor; 
5.  A certificate shall be signed and acknowledged by the parties having record title interest, consenting to the preparation and recordation of the waiver certificate; and 
6.  The size of each sheet shall be eight and one-half inches by eleven (11) inches or thirteen (13) inches. An entirely blank margin of two inches shall be left at the top of each sheet. 
D.  The waiver certificate shall be submitted for examination by the city clerk prior to filing, together with all necessary fees for the recordation of the waiver certificate and evidence that all fees as hereinafter required have been paid. The city clerk shall examine the certificate of waiver, and if the clerk finds the same to be substantially in the form required by this code, and in conformity with the conditions imposed by the planning commission in connection with the approval of the tentative parcel map, the clerk shall accept the same for filing and shall then transmit the same to the city engineer. 
E.  Within twenty (20) days after receiving the waiver certificate or with such additional time as may be reasonably necessary, the city engineer shall determine whether the waiver certificate is technically correct and conforms with the approved tentative parcel map. If approved, the city engineer shall so certify upon the waiver certificate. 
F.  After affixing his/her signature upon the waiver certificate, the city engineer shall deliver the certificate to the city clerk who shall present the certificate to the county recorder for filing. When the certificate is presented to and accepted by the county recorder, the recorder shall file and index the same in the official records of the county. 
G.  Waiver of the parcel map shall not preclude the payment of fees as provided by Section 16.20.010 of this title. Said fees shall be calculated in the same manner as though a parcel map had been required and shall be paid prior to the filing of the waiver certificate with the city clerk. 
(Ord. 94-05 § 1 (part), 1994) 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2(exh. A), 3-7-2012) 
16.28.100 - Parcel map withdrawal. 
A.  In the event the applicant wishes to terminate his/her application prior to the recordation of the parcel map, the applicant's request shall be transmitted in writing to the secretary of the planning commission. Where an agreement to construct improvements has been executed, the city council, at their option, may release the applicant from the agreement to improve and release to the applicant any surety bond or cash deposit which the applicant may have posted upon completion of necessary abandonment proceedings. 
B.  In the event the parcel map has been recorded with the county recorder, a revised parcel map may be prepared in the manner prescribed in this code for an original parcel map, and the revised parcel map shall supersede any previous parcel map. 
(Ord. 94-05 § 1 (part), 1994) 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2(exh. A), 3-7-2012) 
16.28.110 - Form and content of final map. 
    The subdivider shall file five copies of the parcel map with the city clerk not less than sixty (60) days prior to the date on which the map must be recorded. The format and content of the final map shall be as prescribed under Sections 16.24.050, 16.24.060 and 16.24.070 of this title, subject to the following exceptions: 
A.  The size of each sheet shall be eighteen (18) inches by twenty-six (26) inches. 
B.  When the parcel map consists of more than two sheets, a key map drawn to a scale of one inch equals one thousand (1,000) feet shall be placed on sheet number 1 indicating the relationship among all sheets. The particular number of each sheet and the total number of sheets comprising the map shall be stated on each of the sheets, and its relation to each adjoining sheet shall be clearly shown. 
(Ord. 94-05 § 1 (part), 1994) 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2(exh. A), 3-7-2012) 
16.28.120 - Survey procedures and monuments. 
    The survey procedures and provisions for monuments shall be the same as required under Section 16.24.080 of this title. A parcel map may be compiled from available record or filed data when sufficient survey information exists on filed maps and when the location of any boundary of the parcel map either by monuments or possessory lines is certain. If there is not sufficient survey information on filed maps, and when the location of the boundary of the parcel map is uncertain, a field survey shall be made. 
(Ord. 94-05 § 1 (part), 1994) 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2(exh. A), 3-7-2012) 
16.28.130 - Dedications, public utility requirements, passage of title and offers of dedication. 
    Requirements for dedications, letters received from public utilities and the passage of title shall be the same as required under Sections 16.24.110 and 16.24.120 of this title. Requirements with respect to offers of dedication shall be the same as those required under Sections 16.24.130 and 16.24.140 of this title. 
(Ord. 94-05 § 1 (part), 1994) 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2(exh. A), 3-7-2012) 
16.28.140 - Improvements. 
    Improvements shall be provided in the same manner as required under Section 16.24.160 of this title. 
(Ord. 94-05 § 1 (part), 1994) 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2(exh. A), 3-7-2012) 
16.28.150 - Review by city engineer and planning [director]. 
    Review of the final parcel map by the city engineer and planning director or designee shall be as provided under Section 16.24.170 of this title. 
(Ord. 94-05 § 1 (part), 1994) 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2(exh. A), 3-7-2012) 
16.28.160 - Procedure-Action by city council. 
    The city council shall review the final map and take such actions as are required under Section 16.24.180 of this title. 
(Ord. 94-05 § 1 (part), 1994) 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2(exh. A), 3-7-2012) 
16.28.170 - Agreement and security for improvements. 
    An agreement between the subdivider and the city shall be made, and provision of security for improvements shall be satisfied as required under Section 16.24.190 of this title. 
(Ord. 94-05 § 1 (part), 1994) 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2(exh. A), 3-7-2012) 
Chapter 16.32 - IMPROVEMENTS 
Sections: 

16.32.010 - Rights-of-way and street improvements. 
A.  Street rights-of-way, paving, curbs, gutters and sidewalks, catch basins, manholes, planting strips, street lights, traffic signals, street signs, ornamental walls and other street improvements shall be designed and constructed to the standard specifications for construction as adopted by the city council and on record at the time of planning commission approval of the tentative map. 
B.  No subdivision shall be recorded unless public access is provided from the subdivision to a city, county, state or federally maintained road. Such public access shall be provided to the standards of improvements set forth in the city's standard specifications. 
C.  The planning commission and city council may require the subdivider to improve previously dedicated roads, alleys, easements or other rights-of-way either adjacent to or traversing the subdivision, or offsite, to the degree required by subsection A of this section. 
(Ord. 94-05 § 1 (part), 1994) 
16.32.020 - Alleys. 
    Existing alleys shall be paved to their full width. Alleys shall not otherwise be required unless approved as part of a planned unit development under provisions of the zoning ordinance or any applicable adopted specific plan. 
(Ord. 94-05 § 1 (part), 1994) 
16.32.030 - Drainage works. 
    The subdivider shall provide such drainage structures, including storm sewers, drainage channels, detention basins and pumping stations as may be necessary for adequate drainage of surface and storm waters, and further including means for the disposal of surface and storm waters generated by the subdivision. Disposal of surface and storm waters into drainage wells or sewer lines shall not be permitted. 
A.  Where facilities for the disposal of surface and storm waters are not available immediately within or adjacent to the proposed subdivision, the planning commission and city council may require the construction of off-site drainage lines and appurtenances as may be necessary to permit connection to the city's storm drainage system. 
B.  Where facilities for the disposal of surface and storm waters are not available within or adjacent to the proposed subdivision, the planning commission and city council may require the provision of temporary facilities for the detention or disposal of such waters as may be necessary to carry out the policies of the city's master plan for storm drainage. 
C.  Where storm drains for the off-tract disposal of surface and storm waters in accordance with the city's master plan for storm drainage are not reasonably available, the subdivider shall pay a fee, as prescribed in Section 16.24.010 E., for purposes of defraying the actual or estimated costs of constructing planned drainage facilities for the removal of such waters. Where temporary drainage facilities are approved by the city under subsection B. of this subsection, the provisions of this subsection (C.) shall also be made to apply. 
(Ord. 94-05 § 1 (part), 1994) 
16.32.040 - Sanitary sewers. 
    Sanitary sewer lines and appurtenances, including man-holes, pump stations, and off-site lines, shall be provided within all subdivisions in accordance with the policies of the collection system sewer master plan as adopted by the S-K-F sanitation district and shall connect with existing sewer lines and appurtenances. Where a sewer line is constructed or laid within a public right-of-way, the subdivider shall install a lateral connection extending to the right-of-way line to serve each lot within the subdivision. Sanitary sewer lines, appurtenances, and service connections shall be constructed and laid to grades established by the city engineer. 
(Ord. 94-05 § 1 (part), 1994) 
16.32.050 - Water supply and fire suppression. 
    The subdivider shall provide and connect water mains and fire hydrants to the city's water system. The design, lay-out and locations of such facilities shall be as approved by the city engineer, with approval of the number and location of fire hydrants to be determined by the fire chief. 
(Ord. 94-05 § 1 (part), 1994) 
16.32.060 - Local transit facilities. 
    The city may require the dedication or irrevocable offer of dedication of land within the subdivision for such local transit facilities as bus turnouts, benches, shelters, landing pads and similar facilities which will directly benefit the residents of the subdivision if the following conditions exist: 
A.  The subdivision as shown on the tentative map has the potential for two hundred (200) dwelling units or more if developed to the maximum density shown by the adopted general plan, or contains one hundred (100) acres or more; and 
B.  The city council finds that transit services are or will be made available to such subdivision within a reasonable time period. 
(Ord. 94-05 § 1 (part), 1994) 
16.32.070 - Other improvements. 
    The subdivider shall provide such other improvements, including but not limited to bridges, culverts, fencing of watercourses and hazardous areas, ornamental walls, landscaping, noise barriers, and recreation areas and facilities, as required by the Subdivision Map Act, and as designated by applicable policies and proposals of the general plan, applicable mitigation measures required by the general plan EIR, and mitigation measures required by any type of environmental assessment pertaining to the subdivision that is certified by the city in accordance with provisions of the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) and local guidelines pertaining thereto. 
(Ord. 94-05 § 1 (part), 1994) 
16.32.080 - Underground electric, telephone, cable and telecommunication utilities. 
    The subdivider shall provide electric, telephone and cable utilities by underground service to each lot within the subdivision, in accordance with applicable provisions of state law and rules and regulations of the California Public Utilities Commission. The subdivider is encouraged to provide for the installation of telecommunication facilities for service within subdivisions created for commercial and industrial development. 
(Ord. 94-05 § 1 (part), 1994) 
Chapter 16.36 - DESIGN STANDARDS 
Sections: 

16.36.010 - Conformance. 
    Unless exceptions are granted under the provisions of Chapter 16.40 of this title, or in the approval of a planned unit development, all subdivisions and parcel maps shall meet the design standards of this title. 
(Ord. 94-05 § 1 (part), 1994) 
16.36.020 - Streets. 
A.  The radius of curvature, grade, tangents between curves, and right-of-way intersection turn radius of streets shall conform with the city's standard specifications. 
B.  Width of Streets. The right-of-way and curb-to-curb cross-sections of streets shall conform to the standards prescribed by the general plan, unless otherwise modified by the planning commission under Chapter 16.40 of this title or planned unit development regulations of the zoning ordinance. 
C.  Alignment of Streets. Streets located on opposite sides of an intersecting street, shall have their center lines directly opposite each other where it is possible; otherwise the center line shall be separated by not less than one hundred fifty (150) feet. 
D.  Continuations of Existing Streets. Subdivision streets which constitute continuation of streets in contiguous territory shall be aligned so that their center lines coincide. Where straight line continuations are not physically possible, such center lines shall be continued by curves. The continuation of a street in contiguous territory may be required by the planning commission where such continuation is necessary to maintain the function of the contiguous street or a desirable existing pattern of streets and blocks in the surrounding area. 
E.  Intersections. Street intersections shall be as near right angles as practicable. In no case should the angle of intersection be less than sixty (60) degrees. 
F.  Streets in Subdivisions Adjoining Unsubdivided Land (acreage). 
1.  Stubbed Streets. Where a subdivision adjoins unsubdivided land, streets which may be necessary to assure the proper subdivision of the adjoining land shall be provided through to the boundary line of the subdivision. A temporary turn-around of a fifty (50) foot radius shall be provided at the end of a stubbed street where it is determined by the planning commission to be necessary for the movement of emergency vehicles. 
2.  Half Streets. Where a street is proposed adjacent and parallel to the boundary line of the subdivision, the subdivider shall dedicate and improve two-thirds ( 2/3 ) of the right-of-way prescribed for any arterial or collector street, or forty-two (42) feet of any Minor street needed to serve the subdivided land. Where an existing half street is located adjacent and parallel to the boundary line of the proposed subdivision the subdivider shall dedicate such additional right-of-way and provide such additional improvements as may be necessary for the classification of street involved. 
G.  Reserve Strips. 
1.  A one foot reserve strip shall be provided at the dead-end of a stubbed street and shall be offered for dedication to the city for future street purposes. 
2.  Where a half street is to be located adjoining unsubdivided land, a one foot reserve strip shall be provided adjacent to the unsubdivided land and shall be offered for dedication to the city for future street purposes. 
3.  Reserve strips shall be designated on the final map of the subdivision and shall be specifically referred to in the dedication certificate. 
H.  Cul-de-sacs. The following standards shall apply: 
1.  A cul-de-sac must end in a circular turn-around bulb with a radius of forty-five (45) feet from the center of the bulb to the curb and fifty-five (55) feet from the center of the bulb to the right-of-way line. 
2.  Between the intersecting street and the turn-around bulb a cul-de-sac street must have a curb-to-curb width of at least forty (40) feet, with at least sixty (60) feet of right-of-way. 
3.  A cul-de-sac may be no longer than five hundred (500) feet, measured from the right-of-way line of the intersecting street to the center of the turn-around bulb at the opposite end, and may serve no more than eighteen (18) residential lots. 
I.  Frontage Streets and Non-Access Rights. 
1.  Where property is to front upon an arterial street, a frontage street separated from the arterial street by a planting strip may be required for access to the subdivision. 
2.  Where property is to front upon a limited access highway or freeway, a frontage street separated from the limited access expressway or freeway by a planting strip shall be required for access to the subdivision. 
3.  Frontage streets will not be required when the lots of the subdivision adjacent to a arterial street, limited access expressway or freeway are oriented so as to back onto said arterial street, expressway or freeway and access rights thereto have been acquired previously by a public agency by purchase or dedication of waiver by the subdivider. 
4.  Where lots are proposed to back onto an arterial street, expressway or freeway, and access rights to the rear of said lots are offered for dedication, an ornamental masonry wall or wall/fence combination, not less than seven feet in height, shall be required by the city to be constructed along the rear lines of said lots. 
5.  Where a noise barrier is required under the circumstances of back-on lot design as provided under sub-paragraph 4 of this section, the barrier may be substituted for the requirement of an ornamental wall or wall/fence. 
6.  Irrigated landscaping shall be provided along the street, expressway or freeway side of a wall or noise barrier provided under subsections 4. and 5. of this section. 
J.  Private Streets. Private streets and alleys shall be permitted only if they are improved by the subdivider in accordance with the standards prescribed by this code, and a covenant is recorded in the office of the Fresno County Recorder, for the benefit of the city, which stipulates that the responsibility for maintenance of the private street rests with the owners of property served by said private streets. 
K.  Street Names. Every tentative tract map or tentative parcel map shall indicate the name of each street shown on the map. Street names shall conform to the street naming policy encompassed by subsections K and L of this section except as modified by order of the city council. The following criteria shall apply: 
1.  North-south streets are designated as avenues except for Morgan Drive, Rafer Johnson Drive, Cardinal Lane and a portion of Meadow Lane between Rafer Johnson Drive and Sixth Avenue. 
2.  East-west streets, Simpson Street and downtown diagonal streets are designated as streets except for the following: Kamm Avenue, Stroud Avenue and Clarkson Avenue. Exceptions will also apply to the following existing roads in the unincorporated area of Fresno County as portions are annexed into the city: Mountain View Avenue, Caruthers Avenue and Elkhorn Avenue. 
3.  Regardless of their orientation, cul-de-sacs are designated as courts. 
L.  New Streets. Names for streets proposed for construction shall be selected according to the following criteria, subject to review by the planning and development director and planning commission and approval by the city council: 
1.  Where a proposed new street is in alignment with an existing street elsewhere in the city of Kingsburg, the name of the existing street shall be applied to the proposed new section. 
2.  Where a proposed new street is not in reasonably close alignment with an existing street elsewhere in the city, a new name shall be assigned according to the following criteria: 
a.  North-south streets east of Rafer Johnson Drive will be sequentially-numbered avenues, for example: Fifth Avenue Drive, Sixth Avenue Drive, 10th Avenue, 18th Avenue. The only exceptions are: the street that would be known as 13th Avenue, which is named Sandell Avenue instead; Cardinal Lane; and a portion of Meadow Lane between Rafer Johnson Drive and Sixth Avenue. 
b.  North-south streets west of Morgan Drive will be lettered avenues in alphabetical order, beginning with Avenue A, then Avenue B, etc. 
c.  East-west streets north of Kamm Avenue will be named streets with a common theme and will proceed alphabetically north until the alphabet is exhausted (with the letters X and possibly Z excluded). Then another common theme will be followed alphabetically. The first common theme shall be names of flowers. Exceptions are existing avenues in unincorporated Fresno County that will continue to be known by their current names: Caruthers and Mountain View Avenues. 
d.  East-west streets south of Mehlert Avenue also will be named streets, will follow the common theme policy, and will be named alphabetically going south. Exceptions are existing avenues in unincorporated Fresno County that will continue to be known by their current names: Clarkson and Elkhorn Avenues. 
(Ord. 2004-04 §§ 1, 2, 2004; Ord. 2003-04 § 1, 2003; Ord. 94-05 § 1 (part), 1994) 
16.36.030 - Alleys. 
    The width of alleys within residential areas shall be sixteen (16) feet. The width of alleys bordering or within commercial areas shall be twenty (20) feet. Where two alleys intersect, there shall be provided on the inside corner thereof a twenty-five (25) foot radius curve to which the lot lines are tangent, or an equivalent angle cut-off. 
(Ord. 94-05 § 1 (part), 1994) 
16.36.040 - Lots. 
A.  Lot Area, Width, Depth and Frontage. The area, width, depth and frontage of lots shall conform with the requirements of the applicable zoning districts as provided in the zoning ordinance codified in Title 17. 
B.  Double Frontage Lots. Double frontage lots shall not be permitted except where proposed in accordance with the provisions of Section 16.36.010(H) of this chapter. 
C.  Lot Side Lines. The side lines of lots shall be approximately at right angles to the street line on straight streets and to the tangent on curve streets and cul-de-sacs. 
D.  Lot Boundary Lines. No lot shall be divided by the boundary line of a county, city school district or other taxing district. 
E.  Lots with the Capability of Resubdivision. Where lots are sufficiently large enough to permit resubdivision at some future time, the location of lot lines and other details of layout shall be such that resubdivision may readily take place without violating the requirements of this chapter or the zoning ordinance codified in Title 17, and without interfering with the orderly extension of adjacent streets. 
(Ord. 94-05 § 1 (part), 1994) 
16.36.050 - Blocks. 
A.  Block Length. Blocks shall not exceed one thousand (1,000) feet in length except where necessitated by topographical or other physical conditions, provided however that longer blocks may be required adjacent to expressways, arterial and collector streets in order to reduce the number of intersections. Blocks less than six hundred (600) feet in length may be cause for disapproval of the tentative map. 
B.  Block Depth. The depth of blocks shall be sufficient to allow for two tiers of lots with easements as required, but blocks shall not exceed three hundred (300) feet in depth except where necessitated by topographical or other physical conditions, or where permitted by provisions of the zoning ordinance codified in Title 17 for the zoning district involved. 
(Ord. 94-05 § 1 (part), 1994) 
16.36.060 - Utility easements. 
    Easements shall be provided for the placement of overhead and underground utilities along property lines where necessary to provide the subdivision with electric power, telephone and cable services, street lighting, sewer lines, water lines, gas lines or drainage. Such easements shall be labeled "Easement for Public Utilities" and shall be provided subject to variations requested by public utility companies. 
(Ord. 94-05 § 1 (part), 1994) 
16.36.070 - Railroads and freeway interchanges. 
    Where a subdivision adjoins a freeway and the general plan or an element thereof designates a freeway interchange or grade separation structure for location involving property of the proposed subdivision, the possibility of a freeway interchange, grade separation, or other treatment shall be considered by the planning commission. The plan of the subdivision may be required to conform to prescribed conditions in anticipation of a grade separation, freeway interchange or other treatment, subject to the standards of the California Department of Transportation (Caltrans). 
(Ord. 94-05 § 1 (part), 1994) 
16.36.080 - Watercourses. 
    In the event that the subdivision is bordered or traversed by any public irrigation ditch or slough, or other public watercourse, the subdivider may be required to pipe such watercourse underground to standards of the public agency having jurisdiction. Where a private irrigation ditch is involved, the subdivider may be required to pipe such ditch underground to the standards determined by the city engineer. The subdivider may be required to dedicate rights-of-way or easements as may be required by the city engineer for structures or channel changes required for the detention and disposal of surface and stormwater, or for vehicular access along the watercourse necessary to permit the proper maintenance thereof when such maintenance is the responsibility of a public body. 
(Ord. 94-05 § 1 (part), 1994) 
16.36.090 - Detention basins and ponding areas. 
    Areas which are subject to the detention or ponding of surface water shall not be subdivided until necessary measures have been taken or are required to be taken as a condition of approval of the tentative or final map by the city council. The city engineer shall make an investigation and report to the planning commission on the adequacy of measures taken or proposed to be taken by the subdivider. 
(Ord. 94-05 § 1 (part), 1994) 
16.36.100 - Planned unit developments. 
    Where, in accordance with provisions of the zoning ordinance codified in Title 17, a use permit has been granted authorizing a planned unit development (PUD) on the land or a portion of the land proposed to be subdivided, the plan of the subdivision shall conform with the PUD as approved by the planning commission and city council. Exceptions to the subdivision regulations which are necessary to execute the PUD as approved by the commission and council may be authorized by the planning commission in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 16.40 of this title and the zoning ordinance codified in Title 17. 
(Ord. 94-05 § 1 (part), 1994) 
16.36.110 - Partial recording based on tentative map. 
    Where a final map is proposed to be recorded on only a part of the area included within an approved tentative map, the tentative map shall be prepared in such a manner that such partial recording will result in compliance with all of the applicable provisions of this code. 
(Ord. 94-05 § 1 (part), 1994) 
16.36.120 - Provision for future passive or natural heating or cooling opportunities. 
    A design of a subdivision shall provide, to the extent practical and feasible, for future passive or natural heating and cooling opportunities for individual lots within the subdivision. 
A.  Examples of passive or natural heating opportunities in subdivision design include lot size and configuration to permit orientation of a structure in an east-west alignment for southern exposure. 
B.  Examples of passive or natural cooling opportunities in subdivision design include lot size and configuration to permit orientation of a structure to take advantage of shade and prevailing breezes. 
C.  In providing for future passive or natural heating or cooling opportunities in the design of a subdivision, consideration shall be given to local climate, parcel configuration and other design improvement requirements. Such provision shall not result in reducing allowable densities or the percentage of a lot which may be occupied by a building under applicable planning and zoning policy and regulation in force at the time of filing the tentative map. 
D.  The requirements of this section shall not apply to condominium projects which consist of the subdivision of airspace in an existing building when no new structures are added. 
E.  For purposes of this section, "feasible" means capable of being accomplished in a successful manner within a reasonable period of time, taking into account relevant economic, environmental, social and technological factors. 
(Ord. 94-05 § 1 (part), 1994) 
16.36.130 - Underground wiring. 
    All utility facilities (including but not limited to, electric lines, transformers, and concealed ducts, communication lines and cable television lines) installed in and for the purpose of supplying service to any subdivision shall be placed underground, except as follows: 
A.  Equipment appurtenant to underground facilities, such as pedestal mounted terminal boxes and metal cabinets. 
B.  Metal poles supporting only street lights. 
(Ord. No. 92-06, 10-7-1992) 
Chapter 16.40 - EXCEPTIONS 
Sections: 

16.40.010 - Exceptions authorized. 
    Exceptions and conditional exceptions to the regulations prescribed by this title may be authorized by the planning commission. 
(Ord. 94-05 § 1 (part), 1994) 
16.40.020 - Applications. 
    Application for an exception shall be made to the planning commission on a form prescribed by the commission. The subdivider shall state fully the grounds of the application, the facts relied upon and any other data pertinent to the findings prerequisite to the granting of an exception prescribed in Section 16.40.040 of this chapter. The application shall be filed with the secretary of the planning commission along with the tentative map. 
(Ord. 94-05 § 1 (part), 1994) 
16.40.030 - Referrals. 
    The secretary of the planning commission shall transmit copies of the application to the city engineer and the planning director and may transmit copies to other city departments and other public and private agencies to which the tentative map is referred, together with requests for recommendations on the proposed exception. Prior to the date set for consideration of the tentative map the city engineer and planning director shall submit to the planning commission written reports of their recommendations regarding the proposed exception. 
(Ord. 94-05 § 1 (part), 1994) 
16.40.040 - Action of planning commission-Findings. 
    The planning commission shall consider the application for an exception at the same meeting at which it considers the tentative map. An exception may be granted unqualifiedly or may be granted subject to prescribed conditions, provided that the commission shall make the following findings: 
A.  That there are special circumstances or conditions affecting the property; 
B.  That the exception is necessary for the proper design and/or function of the subdivision; 
C.  That the granting of the exception will not be detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to other property in the area in which the property is situated; 
D.  That the granting of the exception is in accordance with the purposes prescribed in Chapter 16.04, Section 16.04.020 of this title; and 
E.  That the granting of the exception is in accordance with the objectives of the general plan and elements thereof. 
(Ord. 94-05 § 1 (part), 1994) 
16.40.050 - Appeal to city council. 
    Within ten (10) days after the date of the planning commission's action on an application for an exception, the subdivider may appeal to the city council for review of the action. An appeal shall be filed with the city clerk and shall state specifically wherein it is claimed that there was an error or abuse of discretion by the planning commission. Upon the filing of an appeal, the planning commission shall transmit to the city clerk copies of the application, the reports of the city engineer and planning director and the reports received from other public and private agencies to which the application was transmitted. The city clerk shall give notice to the subdivider and the planning commission of the date when the action of the planning commission will be reviewed by the city council. At its next regular meeting, the city council shall review the action of the planning commission and hold a hearing thereon. The city council shall act on the appeal within thirty (30) days after the close of the hearing and shall report its action to the subdivider and the planning commission. The city council may sustain, reject or overrule any recommendations or rulings of the planning commission and may make such findings as are not inconsistent with the provisions of this title or the Subdivision Map Act. 
(Ord. 94-05 § 1 (part), 1994) 
Chapter 16.44 - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
Sections: 

16.44.010 - Prohibited transactions. 
A.  No person shall sell, lease, or finance any parcel or parcels of real property or commence construction of any building for sale, lease or financing thereon, except for model homes, or allow occupancy thereof, for which a final map is required by this section until such map thereof in full compliance with the provisions of this section and has been filed for record by the Fresno County Recorder. 
B.  No person shall sell, lease or finance any parcel or parcels of real property or commence construction of any building for sale, lease or financing thereon, except for model homes, or allow occupancy thereof, for which a parcel map is required by this section, until such map thereof is in full compliance with the provisions of this section has been filed for record by the County Recorder. 
C.  Conveyances of any part of a division of real property for which a final or parcel map is required by this section shall not be made by parcel or block number, initial or other designation, unless and until such map has been filed for record by the County Recorder. 
D.  This section does not apply to any parcel or parcels of a subdivision offered for sale or lease, contracted for sale or lease, or sold or leased in compliance with or exempt from any law (including a local ordinance), regulating the design and improvement of subdivisions in effect at the time the subdivision was established. 
E.  Nothing contained in subsections A and B of this section shall be deemed to prohibit an offer or contract to sell, lease, or finance real property or to construct improvements thereon where such sale, lease, or financing, or the commencement of such construction, is expressly conditioned upon the approval and filing of a final subdivision map or parcel map, as required under this section. 
F.  Nothing in this section shall in any way modify or affect the provisions of Section 11018.2 of the Business and Professions Code. 
G.  This section does not bar any legal, equitable or summary remedy to which the city or other public agency, or any person, firm, or corporation may otherwise be entitled, and the city or other public agency, or such person, firm, or corporation may file a suit in the superior court of Fresno County to restrain or enjoin any attempted or proposed subdivision or sale, lease, or financing in violation of this section enacted pursuant thereto. 
(Ord. 94-05 § 1 (part), 1994) 
16.44.020 - Penalties. 
    Each violation of this code by a person who is the subdivider or an owner of record, at the time of the violation, of property involved in the violation shall be punishable by imprisonment in the county jail not exceeding one year or in the state prison, by a fine not exceeding ten thousand dollars ($10,000), or by both that fine and imprisonment. Every other violation of this code is a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. 94-05 § 1 (part), 1994) 
16.44.030 - Enforcement. 
    It shall be the responsibility of the city clerk to notify the city attorney of any violation of this ordinance and to sign any necessary complaints. 
(Ord. 94-05 § 1 (part), 1994) 
16.44.040 - Voidable conveyances. 
A.  Any deed of conveyance, sale or contract to sell real property which has been divided, or which has resulted from a division, in violation of Titles 1 through 15 is voidable at the sole option of the grantee, buyer or person contracting to purchase, his/her heirs, personal representative, or trustee in insolvency or bankruptcy within one year after the date of discovery of the violation of the provisions of said sections, but the deed of conveyance, sale or contract to sell is binding upon any successor in interest of the grantee, buyer or person contracting to purchase, other than those above enumerated, and upon the grantor, vendor, or person contracting to sell, or his/her assignee, heir or advisee. 
B.  Any grantee, or his/her successor in interest, of real property which has been divided, or which has resulted from a division, in violation of the provisions of Titles 1 through 15, may, within one year of the date of discovery of such violation, bring an action in the superior court to recover any damages he/she has suffered by reason of such division of property. The action may be brought against the person who divided the property in violation of said sections and against any successors in interest who have actual or constructive knowledge of such division of property. 
C.  Nothing in this section shall render void or voidable any trust deed, mortgage, or other encumbrance in the hands of a bona fide holder for value. 
(Ord. 94-05 § 1 (part), 1994) 
16.44.050 - Remedies not barred. 
    Nothing herein contained shall bar any legal, equitable, or summary remedy to which the city of Kingsburg or other political subdivision, or any person may otherwise be entitled. The city or other political subdivision or person may file suit in any court of competent jurisdiction, to restrain or enjoin any attempted or proposed subdivision or sale in violation of the Subdivision Map Act or this code. 
(Ord. 94-05 § 1 (part), 1994) 
16.44.060 - Building permits. 
    Compliance with the provisions of this title is a condition precedent to the issuance of a Building Permit and any Building Permit which is issued before compliance with the provisions of this title shall be null and void. 
(Ord. 94-05 § 1 (part), 1994) 
Title 17 - ZONING 
Chapter 17.04 - GENERAL PROVISIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2, adopted Mar. 7, 2012, deleted the former Ch. 17.04, §§ 17.04.010-17.04.080, and enacted a new Ch. 17.04 as set out herein. The former Ch. 17.04 pertained to general provisions and derived from Ord. 92-11 § 1 (part), 1992; Ord. 408 (part), 1982. 

17.04.010 - Adoption. 
    There is hereby adopted, as provided herein, a zoning code for the city of Kingsburg, State of California, which is a part of the Kingsburg municipal code. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2(exh. A), 3-7-2012) 
17.04.020 - Purposes and objectives of the code. 
    The zoning code is adopted to preserve, protect and promote the public health, safety, peace, comfort, convenience, prosperity and general welfare. More specifically, the code is adopted to achieve the following objectives: 
A.  To provide a zone plan to guide the physical development of the city in such a manner as to achieve progressively the general arrangement of land uses described and depicted in the general plan. 
B.  To foster a wholesome, serviceable and attractive living environment, the beneficial development of areas which exhibit conflicting patterns of use, and the stability of existing land uses which conform with objectives, policies, principles and standards of the general plan. 
C.  To prevent excessive population densities and overcrowding of land with structures. 
D.  To promote a safe, effective traffic circulation system, the provision of adequate off-street parking and truck loading facilities, and the appropriate location of community facilities. 
E.  To protect and promote appropriately located commercial and industrial activities in order to preserve and strengthen the city's economic base. 
F.  To protect and enhance real property values and the city's natural assets. 
G.  To ensure unimpeded development of such new urban expansion that is logical, desirable and in conformance with objectives and policies of the general plan. 
H.  To provide and protect open space in accordance with policies of the open space element of the general plan, including avoiding the premature development of prime agricultural lands. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2(exh. A), 3-7-2012) 
17.04.030 - Short title. 
    This title shall be known as the "Zoning Code". The words "code" and "ordinance" as used herein shall have the same meaning. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2(exh. A), 3-7-2012) 
17.04.040 - Components of the zoning title. 
    The zoning ordinance codified in this title shall consist of a zone plan designating certain districts and a set of regulations controlling the uses of land; the density of population, the uses and locations of structures; the height and bulk of structures: the open spaces about structures, the appearance of certain uses and structures; the areas and dimensions of sites; the location, size and illumination of signs and requiring the provision of off-street parking and off-street loading facilities. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2(exh. A), 3-7-2012) 
17.04.050 - Interpretation. 
    In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this code are held to be minimum requirements except where they are expressly stated to be otherwise. No provision of this code is intended to abrogate, repeal, annul, impair or interfere with any existing ordinance of the city of Kingsburg, except as specifically repealed herein, or deed restriction, covenant, easement, or other agreement between parties, provided that where this code imposes greater restrictions or regulations than are imposed or required by an existing ordinance, deed restriction, covenant, easement, or agreement between parties, the ordinance codified in this title shall control. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2(exh. A), 3-7-2012) 
17.04.060 - Application. 
    This code shall apply to all property whether owned by private persons, firms, corporations or organizations; by the United States of America or any of its agencies; by the State of California or any of its agencies or political subdivisions; by any county or city, including the city of Kingsburg or any of its agencies; or by any authority or district organized under the laws of the State of California, all subject to the following exceptions: 
A.  Public streets and alleys. 
B.  Underground utility lines and facilities. 
C.  Overhead communication lines. 
D.  Overhead and underground electric and gas distribution and transmission facilities, subject to the provisions of Title 16. 
E.  Railroad rights-of-way, as defined in Chapter 17.96. 
F.  Other exemptions specifically allowed by state law or amendments thereto. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2(exh. A), 3-7-2012) 
17.04.070 - Construction and definitions. 
    The definitions of words used in this title, and the construction of the words and provisions thereof, shall be as set forth in Chapter 17.96. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2(exh. A), 3-7-2012) 
17.04.080 - Effect of graphic aids. 
    Graphics provided in this code in the form of specialized tables, charts, graphs, illustrations, maps and other forms of graphics are intended solely as a convenience to the user in identifying requirements of the ordinance. In the event of any conflict between such graphics and the written regulations, the written regulations shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2(exh. A), 3-7-2012) 
17.04.090 - Appeals to city council. 
    Where the planning commission is authorized to make any decision pursuant to the provisions of Title 17 of this code and that decision is to be subject to appeal to the city council, the following procedure shall apply. 
A.  The applicant or any interested person adversely affected may, upon payment of an appeal fee as may be established by resolution of the council, appeal any decision, determination or requirement of the planning commission by filing an appeal thereof in writing with the city clerk, setting forth in detail the action and the grounds upon which the appeal is based within ten (10) calendar days after the action which is the subject of the appeal, the first day of the ten-day period being the day following the planning commission action. Such written appeal shall state specifically where it is claimed there was an error or abuse of discretion by the planning commission. 
B.  Upon the filing of an appeal, the city council shall set the matter for hearing. Such hearings shall be held within thirty (30) days after the date of filing the appeal. The city clerk shall give notice of the hearing according to the procedure required for the initial action by the planning commission, except that the timing of such notice shall be not less than ten (10) days before the hearing. 
C.  In holding the hearing on the matter, the council may receive any and all information pertinent to the matter, regardless of whether such information was first presented to the planning commission. In the case of decisions by the planning commission that followed a public hearing, the city council shall hold a new public hearing on the matter. Upon the close of the hearing, the council shall vote to either [confirm] the decision of the planning commission, overturn the decision, or confirm the decision with modifications, and the council may continue the item to the next meeting if necessary to direct staff to prepare a conforming resolution with findings, which shall be considered by the council at the next scheduled council meeting. In the case of a tie vote, the planning commission decision shall stand, and shall be considered final as of the date of the council vote. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2(exh. A), 3-7-2012) 
17.04.100 - Multiple decisions in a single project. 
    Notwithstanding any other provision of this title to the contrary, if any project submitted to the city requires action by the city council and the planning commission the decisions of the planning commission pertaining to such project shall not be final but shall be advisory to the city council, which shall be vested with final decision making powers for all decisions pertaining to the project. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2(exh. A), 3-7-2012) 
Chapter 17.08 - ESTABLISHMENT AND DESIGNATION OF ZONING DISTRICTS 

17.08.010 - Districts. 
    The base districts establish the basic land use and property development regulations applicable to all property within the city as provided under Section 17.04.060. The combining districts provide additional regulations which are to be exercised over certain lands in order to meet special community health, safety, welfare, environmental or development objectives described by the general plan. Combining district regulations apply in addition to the base zone and other regulations of this code. 
    The base and combining districts established by the zoning ordinance are hereby designated as follows: 
A.  Base Districts. The RA, R & RM districts are also subject to the density limitations, policies and standards of the land use element of the Kingsburg general plan. The base districts are as follows: 
RCO RESOURCE, CONSERVATION AND OPEN SPACE DISTRICT UR URBAN RESERVE DISTRICT RA RESIDENTIAL ACREAGE DISTRICT R ONE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS R-1-7 7,000 square feet minimum site area RM MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS RM-MH-5.4 5,400 square feet minimum site area per mobilehome (8 mobilehomes/net acre) RM-5.5 5,500 square feet minimum site area per dwelling unit RM-3 3,000 square feet minimum site area per dwelling unit RM-2.5 2,500 square feet minimum site area per dwelling unit RM-2 2,000 square feet minimum site area per dwelling unit PO PROFESSIONAL OFFICE DISTRICT C COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS CN Neighborhood Commercial District CC Central Commercial District CS Service Commercial District CH Highway Commercial District I INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS IL Light Industrial District IH Heavy Industrial District IP Planned Industrial District  
B.  Combining Districts. 
PUD PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT MXU MIXED USE DISTRICT  
17.08.020 - District boundaries. 
    Whenever any uncertainty exists as to the boundary of a district as shown on the zone plan, the following regulations shall control: 
A.  Where a boundary line is indicated as following a street, alley, railroad right-of-way, drainage channel or other watercourse, the centerline of such street, alley, railroad right-of-way, drainage channel or other watercourse shall be considered to be the boundary line. 
B.  Where a boundary line is indicated as following a lot line or property line, it shall be construed as following such lot line or property ownership line. 
C.  Where a boundary line is not indicated as following a street or alley and does not follow or coincide approximately with a lot line or property ownership line, the boundary line shall be determined by the use of the scale designated on the zone plan. 
D.  Where further uncertainty exists, the planning commission, upon written application or on its own motion, shall determine the location of the boundary in question, giving due consideration to the location indicated on the zone plan and the objectives of the zoning code and the purposes set forth in the district regulations and the general plan. 
(Ord. 92-11 § 1 (part), 1992: Ord. 408 (part), 1982) 
17.08.030 - Effect of district regulations. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this code: 
A.  No structure or part thereof shall be erected, altered, added to or enlarged, nor shall any site or structure be used, designated or intended to be used for any purpose, or in any manner other than is included among the uses hereinafter listed as permitted or conditional in the district in which such structure, land or premises is located. 
B.  No structure or part thereof shall be erected, nor shall any existing structure be altered, enlarged or rebuilt or moved into any district, nor shall any open space be encroached upon or reduced in any manner, except in conformity to the yard, site area and building location regulations hereinafter designated for the district in which such structure or open space is located. 
C.  No yard or other open space on one site shall be considered as providing a yard or open space for a structure on any other site. 
D.  Two or more abutting lots may be combined and used as though a single site. Such combination of lots shall be deemed to be a single site for all purposes of this code, provided, however, that there shall not exist on any part thereof any structure or improvement which depends for compliance with this code upon the same being treated as a single site. 
E.  A lot, or lots, may be divided into parts, provided that each part is equal to or exceeds the minimum lot area requirements of the code, and so long as such parts are used as though separate lots they shall be deemed to be separate lots under all provisions of this code. 
F.  No deed or conveyance of any portion of a site shall be made which reduces the site area, yards, off-street parking spaces or other minimum requirements of this code, without the prospective grantor and grantee first recording, in the Office of the Fresno County Recorder, a covenant for the benefit of the city of Kingsburg agreeing that such site shall continue to be maintained, operated and used as though a single site so long as any part thereof depends on the other for compliance with the provisions of this code. 
G.  Any lot recorded prior to the adoption of this ordinance, any lot of record in any area heretofore or hereafter annexed to the city, and any lot affected by an action of eminent domain as described in Chapter 17.60, which are substandard with respect to the minimum lot area requirements of this title, shall be classified as a legal substandard lot. The existence of a legal substandard lot shall not be deemed to change any other requirement or regulation pertaining to such lot. Except as provided under subsection H. of this section, no lot shall be deemed to be a legal substandard lot where such lot, at the time of the adoption of this ordinance, or upon annexation or upon being affected by an action of eminent domain, has a common side lot line with another lot under the same ownership. 
H.  Where a group of legal substandard lots have common side lot lines and are under the same ownership, and have in the aggregate less than the minimum lot area required for the zoning district in which located, the aggregate of such lots may be continued to be used as a single legal substandard lot. 
(Ord. 92-11 § 1 (part), 1992: Ord. 408 (part), 1982) 
17.08.040 - Changes of district boundaries or regulations due to annexation or right-of-way abandonment. 
A.  All territory annexed to the city which was previously classified by the county in a particular zoning district may be retained by the city if such classification is also provided for by this code and is consistent with the Kingsburg general plan. 
B.  Where property to be annexed to the city was classified previously by the city under pre-zoning provisions of state law and this ordinance, such pre-zoning classification shall become effective at the same time that the annexation becomes effective. 
C.  All territory which becomes unzoned through abandonment as a public street, alley or railroad right-of-way shall immediately become classified the same as the property adjoining such right-of-way. 
(Ord. 92-11 § 1 (part), 1992: Ord. 408 (part), 1982) 
17.08.050 - Requirements for maintaining consistency with general plan. 
A.  Zoning districts shall be applied to all public and private property in a manner that is consistent with applicable policies and land use arrangements set forth in the general plan. 
B.  All actions and procedures pertaining to the granting, modification or denial of various permits or other entitlements provided by the ordinance, including use permits, site plans, planned unit development, and amendments, shall be consistent with applicable policies and land use arrangements set forth by the general plan. 
C.  The city shall not accept any application as a filing for any permit or entitlement provided for by this title if such permit or entitlement would in any way be inconsistent with applicable policies and land use arrangements of the general plan. 
D.  Where amendments to policies of the general plan have not yet been reflected in appropriate amendments to the zoning ordinance, the policies of the general plan shall govern as if set forth herein until corresponding regulations have been added to this ordinance consistent with such policies of the general plan. 
(Ord. 92-11 § 1 (part), 1992: Ord. 408 (part), 1982) 
Chapter 17.12 - ZONE PLAN 

17.12.010 - Adoption of zone plan. 
    In order that comprehensive zoning regulations may be applied uniformly to all incorporated territory with the adoption of the ordinance codified in this title, consecutively numbered maps beginning with Map No. 301 are hereto attached and made a part of this title by reference with the same force and effect as if the boundaries, together with any notations, references and information shown on said maps were specifically set out and described in this code. 
    Map No. 301, together with such additional maps as may be adopted in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and this ordinance, shall be known as the zone plan of the city of Kingsburg. 
(Ord. 92-11 § 1 (part), 1992: Ord. 408 (part), 1982) 
17.12.020 - Division of the zone plan. 
    For purposes of convenience and identification the zone plan may be divided into parts and subparts, which may be separately shown or employed for purposes of amending the zone plan or any official reference thereto. 
(Ord. 92-11 § 1 (part), 1992: Ord. 408 (part), 1982) 
17.12.030 - Amendments to the zone plan. 
    Amendments to the zone plan shall be adopted in the manner provided for changing district boundaries as prescribed in Section 2302 and Sections 2304 through 2309 of this code. Said code shall be recognized by the addition to this chapter of the code section adopting said map and the filing of said map, properly attested, in the office of the Kingsburg city clerk. Amendments to the zone plan shall be identified by consecutive numbers preceded by the last two numbers of the year in which adopted. 
(Ord. 92-11 § 1 (part), 1992: Ord. 408 (part), 1982) 
17.12.040 - Pre-zoning of unincorporated territory. 
    The city may pre-zone unincorporated territory adjoining the city for the purposes of determining the zoning that will apply to such property in the event of subsequent annexation to the city. The method of accomplishing such pre-zoning shall be the same as that for the zoning of property within the city as provided by this title. 
(Ord. 92-11 § 1 (part), 1992: Ord. 408 (part), 1982) 
Chapter 17.16 - RCO-RESOURCE CONSERVATION AND OPEN SPACE DISTRICT 

17.16.010 - Purpose and application. 
    This district is intended to provide for permanent open spaces in areas of the community which exhibit significant vegetation, scenic qualities, wildlife or recreation potential, and which are designated as open space, school and college sites or agriculture by the general plan. This district is further intended to be applied to lands within the city which are subject to an agricultural land conservation contract under provisions of the Williamson Act. 
(Ord. 92-11 § 1 (part), 1992: Ord. 408 (part), 1982) 
17.16.020 - Permitted uses. 
A.  Raising of field crops, fruit and nut trees, vines, vegetables and horticultural specialties, the raising of livestock, and rangelands. 
B.  Flood control channels; water pumping stations and reservoirs; irrigation ditches and canals; settling and water conservation recharge basins; drainage ponds; and streets and roads necessary for access to permitted uses. 
C.  Other uses which are added to this list by the planning commission according to the procedure set forth in Chapter 17.60. 
(Ord. 92-11 § 1 (part), 1992: Ord. 408 (part), 1982) 
17.16.030 - Permitted uses-Administrative approval. 
A.  Incidental and accessory structures and uses as defined in Chapter 17.96 located on the same site as a use permitted by administrative approval or conditional use. 
B.  Other uses which are added to this list according to the procedure in Chapter 17.60. 
(Ord. 92-11 § 1 (part), 1992: Ord. 408 (part), 1982) 
17.16.040 - Conditional uses-Commission approval. 
    The following uses may be permitted in accordance with Chapter 17.68: 
A.  Recreation areas, parks, playgrounds, wildlife preserves, and such buildings, structures and facilities as are appropriately related thereto. 
B.  Elementary, junior high and high school sites; college sites. 
C.  Expansion, remodeling, or additions to a conditional use that are not considered an incidental or accessory use as defined in Chapter 17.96. 
D.  Other uses which are added to this list according to the procedure in Chapter 17.60. 
(Ord. 92-11 § 1 (part), 1992: Ord. 408 (part), 1982) 
17.16.050 - Property development standards. 
A.  Fences, Walls and Hedges. No limitation except as may be required under Chapter 17.68 or 17.72. 
B.  Site Area. The minimum site area for a permitted use shall be one-half acre. 
C.  Frontage, Width and Depth of Site. No limitation except as may be required under Chapter 17.68 or 17.72. 
D.  Coverage. No limitation except as may be required under Chapter 17.68 or 17.72. 
E.  Yard Spaces. No limitation except as may be required under Chapter 17.68 or 17.72. 
F.  Distances between Structures. The minimum distance between a one-family dwelling and another structure shall be ten (10) feet. 
G.  Building Height. No building or structure shall have a height greater than thirty-five (35) feet, except as may be approved under Chapter 17.68 or 17.76. 
H.  Signs. No sign or outdoor advertising structure of any character shall be permitted except as prescribed in Chapter 17.56. 
I.  Off-Street Parking and Off-Street Loading. Off-street parking and off-street loading facilities shall be provided as prescribed in Chapter 17.52. 
(Ord. 92-11 § 1 (part), 1992: Ord. 408 (part), 1982) 
17.16.060 - General provisions and exceptions. 
    All uses shall be subject to the general provisions and exceptions prescribed in Chapter 17.60. 
(Ord. 92-11 § 1 (part), 1992: Ord. 408 (part), 1982) 
Chapter 17.20 - UR-URBAN RESERVE DISTRICT 

17.20.010 - Purposes and application. 
A.  This district is intended for application to areas which are designated by the general plan or any applicable specific plan to be held in reserve for future urban expansion, including lands where Williamson Act contracts have not yet been canceled. 
B.  The purposes of this district are to: preserve the availability of agricultural and vacant lands required for future urban expansion: and, to prevent the premature development of lands where the range of municipal type services required by the general plan are not yet available. When such services are available, the property should be rezoned to the appropriate general plan designation. 
(Ord. 92-11 § 1 (part), 1992: Ord. 408 (part), 1982) 
17.20.020 - Permitted uses. 
A.  Grazing and the raising of field crops, fruit and nut trees, vines, vegetables, horticultural specialties, livestock and poultry. 
B.  Flood control channels; water pumping stations and reservoirs; irrigation ditches and canals and ditch and canal rights-of-way settling and water conservation recharging basins; parkways; recreation areas and facilities. 
C.  A one-family dwelling in areas designated by the general plan for low density or medium density, provided that the site meets the property development standards and other requirements of that residential zoning district which is most appropriate for the general plan density designation involved. 
D.  Incidental and accessory structures and uses located on the same site as a permitted use. 
E.  Other uses which are added to this list according to the procedure in Chapter 17.60. 
(Ord. 92-11 § 1 (part), 1992: Ord. 408 (part), 1982) 
17.20.030 - Permitted uses-Administrative approval. 
A.  Incidental and accessory structures and uses, as defined in Chapter 17.96, located on the same site as a use permitted by administrative approval or conditional use. 
B.  Other uses which are added to this list by the planning commission according to the procedure set forth in Chapter 17.60. 
(Ord. 92-11 § 1 (part), 1992: Ord. 408 (part), 1982) 
17.20.040 - Conditional uses-Commission approval. 
    The following uses may be permitted in accordance with the procedures of Chapter 17.68 and Section 17.20.050 A: 
A.  Uses which are added to this list according to the procedure in Chapter 17.60. 
(Ord. 92-11 § 1 (part), 1992: Ord. 408 (part), 1982) 
17.20.050 - Required conditions. 
A.  Whenever a new use as listed under Section 17.20.020 is to be established in the UR district, the planning commission shall designate a zoning district classification for such use which is consistent with the general plan. Such use shall comply with the regulations of such designated district as if the use was actually proposed within such district. Such action shall be permissive for uses listed under Section 17.20.040. 
B.  No conditional use shall be permitted and no process, equipment or materials shall be used which are found by the commission to be objectionable to persons living or working in the vicinity or injurious to property, crops, livestock or poultry in the vicinity by reason of odor, fumes, dust, smoke, cinders, dirt, refuse, water-carried wastes, noise, vibration, illumination, glare or unsightliness or to involve any hazard of fire, explosion or toxic chemicals. 
(Ord. 92-11 § 1 (part), 1992: Ord. 408 (part), 1982) 
17.20.060 - Property development standards. 
A.  Distance between Structures. The minimum distance between a structure used for human habitation and another structure shall be ten (10) feet, except that such minimum distance shall be twenty-five (25) feet from a structure housing livestock or poultry. 
B.  Signs. No sign or outdoor advertising structure of any character shall be permitted except as prescribed in Chapter 17.96. 
C.  Off-Street Parking and Off-Street Loading. Off-street parking and off-street loading facilities shall be provided as prescribed in Chapter 17.52. 
(Ord. 92-11 § 1 (part), 1992: Ord. 408 (part), 1982) 
17.20.070 - General provisions and exceptions. 
    All uses shall be subject to the general provisions and exceptions prescribed in Chapter 17.60. 
(Ord. 92-11 § 1 (part), 1992: Ord. 408 (part), 1982) 
Chapter 17.24 - RA-RESIDENTIAL ACREAGE DISTRICT 

17.24.010 - Purposes and application. 
    The RA residential acreage district is intended to provide living area which combines certain of the advantages of both urban and rural location by limiting development to low density concentrations of one-family dwellings as designated by the general plan, and permitting limited numbers of animals and fowl to be kept for pleasure or hobbies, free from activities of a commercial nature. The RA district is intended to encourage the use of the subdivision or parcel map process in the creation of large residential sites to assure the provision of those physical improvements necessary to protect the health, safety and general welfare of the people. 
(Ord. 92-11 § 1 (part), 1992: Ord. 408 (part), 1982) 
17.24.020 - Permitted uses. 
A.  One-family dwellings. 
B.  Raising of field crops, fruit and nut trees, vines, vegetables and horticultural specialties. 
C.  Breeding, hatching, raising and fattening of birds, rabbits, chinchillas, hamsters and other small animals and fowl on a domestic, non-commercial basis on sites of one-half acre or more in area. 
D.  Raising of livestock, except swine, on a site containing not less than forty thousand (40,000) square feet, provided that the number of livestock shall not exceed four adult animals in any combination, and their immature off-spring, and further provided that the number of bovine and equine animals shall not exceed more than adults in any combination for each forty thousand (40,000) square feet of site area. 
E.  Fenced or enclosed swimming pools for either individual, family or communal use on an exclusive non-commercial basis, provided that no swimming pool shall be located within a utility easement. 
F.  Incidental and accessory structures and uses located on the same site as a permitted use, as follows: 
1.  Private garages and carports; storehouses, garden structures, greenhouses, recreation rooms and hobby rooms and hobby shops. 
2.  On sites containing not less than forty thousand (40,000) square feet: barns, stables, coops, and other farm-type outbuildings. Underground storage of petroleum products is prohibited. 
G.  Other uses which are added to this list according to the procedure in Chapter 17.60. 
(Ord. 92-11 § 1 (part), 1992: Ord. 408 (part), 1982) 
17.24.030 - Permitted uses-Administrative approval. 
    The following uses may be permitted in accordance with provisions of Chapter 17.64: 
A.  Enclosed temporary construction materials storage yards required in connection with the development of a subdivision, temporary subdivision sales offices and signs, and model home display areas in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 17.56. 
B.  Gas and electric transmission lines, in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 17.64, electrical distribution substations, gas regulator stations, communications equipment buildings, public service pumping stations, and elevated pressure tanks. 
C.  Mobilehomes on permanent foundations designed in accordance with the standards of Section 17.56.050 of this title. 
D.  Incidental and accessory structures and uses located on the same site as a use permitted by administrative approval or conditional use. 
E.  Other uses which are added to this list according to the procedure in Chapter 17.60. 
(Ord. 92-11 § 1 (part), 1992: Ord. 408 (part), 1982) 
17.24.040 - Conditional uses-Commission approval. 
    The following conditional uses may be permitted in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 17.68: 
A.  Public and quasi-public uses of an educational or religious type, including public and private elementary schools, junior high schools, high schools and colleges; nursery schools; private non-profit schools and colleges; churches, parsonages and other religious institutions. 
B.  Public and private charitable institutions, hospitals, sanitariums, nursing homes and rest homes, not including hospitals, sanitariums, nursing homes or rest homes for mental, drug addict, or liquor addict cases except as provided under Section 17.28.040 B. 
C.  Public uses of an administrative, recreational, public service or cultural type, including city, county, state or federal administrative centers and courts, libraries, museums, art galleries, police and fire stations and other public buildings, structures and facilities; public playgrounds, parks and community centers. 
D.  Private or public golf courses. 
E.  Modest expansion or remodeling of an existing non-conforming use of a structure or land, limited to twenty-five (25) percent or less of the assessed value of the existing structure, or reestablishment of a non-conforming use which has been damaged, except non-conforming signs and outdoor advertising structures, non-conforming uses occupying a structure with an assessed valuation of less than two hundred (200) dollars, and nonconforming fences, walls and hedges. 
F.  A second housing unit attached to an existing one-family detached residence, in accordance with the provisions of Section 17.56.060 of this title. 
G.  Home occupations in accordance with Chapter 17.56. 
H.  Mobilehome parks in accordance with Chapter 17.56, subject to density standards applicable to single-family dwellings in the RA district of not more than one mobilehome dwelling per net acre. 
I.  Expansion, remodeling, or additions to a conditional use that are not either incidental or accessory as defined in Chapter 17.96. 
J.  Incidental and accessory structures and uses located on the same site as a conditional use. 
K.  Other uses which are added to this list according to the procedure in Chapter 17.60. 
(Ord. 92-11 § 1 (part), 1992: Ord. 408 (part), 1982) 
17.24.050 - Property development standards. 
A.  Fences, Walls and Hedges. Fences, walls and hedges shall be permitted as follows: 
1.  Along side and rear property lines, and along any portion of the street side yard of a corner lot, not exceeding seven feet in height. 
2.  Fences or walls not exceeding three feet in height may be erected within any portion of the required front yard. A fence or wall not exceeding four feet in height may be located in the front yard, provided that the top one foot is at least fifty (50) percent open. 
3.  No fence, wall or hedge exceeding two and one-half feet in height may be located within an area of a corner lot on the street side of a diagonal line connecting points located twenty-five (25) feet along the property line as measured from the intersecting property lines at the street corner. 
4.  Open fences not exceeding seven feet in height, and hedges, may be located within any required yard, or along any side lot line, except as limited by the provisions of Section 17.24.050 A 3, above. 
B.  Site Area. The minimum site area shall be twenty thousand (20,000) square feet, provided that the average size of all lots or sites created by a division of land or subdivision shall be a minimum of forty thousand (40,000) square feet, and further provided that not more than one-half of such lots or sites shall be at the minimum site area. 
C.  Frontage, Width and Depth of Site. Each site shall have not less than one hundred (100) feet of frontage, or one hundred (100) feet of frontage when measured along the front yard setback line when a site fronts upon a cul-de-sac or loop-out street. 
1.  The minimum width of each site shall be one hundred (100) feet. 
2.  The minimum depth of each site shall be one hundred fifty (150) feet. 
D.  Number of Dwelling Units Per Site. Not more than one dwelling unit shall be allowed on each site, except as provided under Chapter 17.56. 
E.  Coverage. The maximum site area covered by structures shall be thirty-five (35) percent. 
F.  Yard Requirements. 
1.  Front Yard. The minimum front yard shall be not less than thirty-five (35) feet, except along those streets where a greater setback is required by the general plan or an ordinance of the city. 
2.  Rear Yard. The minimum rear yard shall be ten (10) feet, subject to the following conditions: 
a.  Where construction involves more than one story, the rear yard shall be increased by ten (10) feet for each additional story. 
b.  Accessory and garden structures less than seven feet in height may be located within any portion of a required rear yard. 
3.  Side Yards. The minimum side yard shall be ten (10) feet, subject to the following conditions: 
a.  Where construction involves more than one story, the side yard shall be increased by ten (10) feet for each additional story. 
b.  Accessory and garden structures under seven feet in height may be located in any portion of a required side yard. 
c.  On the street side yard of a corner lot, the side yard shall not be less than ten (10) feet. 
G.  Distances between Structures. The minimum distance between a one-family dwelling and another structure shall be ten (10) feet, except as provided by the city's building code, provided however that no structure housing poultry, or animals other than cat or dog household pets, shall be closer than twenty-five (25) feet to any side yard property line or to any dwelling on the site. 
H.  Building Height. No building or structure shall have a height greater than thirty-five (35) feet except as may be permitted under Chapter 17.68. 
I.  Signs. No sign or outdoor advertising structure of any character shall be permitted except as prescribed in Chapter 17.56. 
J.  Off-Street Parking and Off-Street Loading. Off-street parking and off-street loading facilities shall be provided as prescribed in Chapter 17.52. 
(Ord. 92-11 § 1 (part), 1992: Ord. 408 (part), 1982) 
17.24.060 - General provisions and exceptions. 
    All uses shall be subject to the general provisions and exceptions prescribed in Chapter 17.60. 
(Ord. 92-11 § 1 (part), 1992: Ord. 408 (part), 1982) 
Chapter 17.28 - R-ONE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS 

17.28.010 - Purposes and application. 
A.  The R districts are intended primarily to provide living areas at locations designated by the general plan for low density, involving single-family dwellings, with regulations designed to accomplish the following: 
1.  To promote and encourage a suitable environment for family life. 
2.  To provide space for community facilities needed to complement urban residential areas, and for institutions which require a residential environment, in accordance with policies of the general plan and state law. 
(Ord. 99-08 § 2, 1999: Ord. 92-11 § 1 (part), 1992: Ord. 408 (part), 1982) 
17.28.020 - Permitted uses. 
A.  One-family dwellings. 
B.  Raising of fruit and nut trees, vines, vegetables and horticultural specialties on a non-commercial basis. 
C.  Fenced or enclosed swimming pools for either individual, family or communal use on an exclusive non-commercial basis, provided that no swimming pool shall be located within a utility easement. 
D.  A "small family day care home" or "adult day care facility" as defined by the State Health and Safety Code, which provides day care to eight or fewer children or adult clients, including children or adult clients who reside in the home. 
E.  An alcoholic recovery facility as defined by the State Health and Safety Code, which provides care to six or fewer persons, whether or not related. 
F.  A state-authorized, certified or licensed family care home, foster home or group home serving six or fewer mentally disordered or otherwise handicapped persons, or dependent and neglected children. 
G.  Accessory structures and uses located on the same site with a permitted use. 
H.  Other uses which are added to this list according to the procedure in Chapter 17.60. 
(Ord. 2006-02 § 1, 2006; Ord. 92-11 § 1 (part), 1992: Ord. 408 (part), 1982) 
17.28.030 - Permitted uses-Administrative approval. 
    The following uses may be permitted in accordance with Chapter 17.64: 
A.  Enclosed temporary construction materials storage yards required in connection with the development of a subdivision, and temporary subdivision sales offices and signs and model home display areas, in accordance with Chapter 17.56. 
B.  Gas and electric transmission lines in accordance with Chapter 17.64, electrical distribution substations, gas regulator stations, communications equipment buildings, public service pumping stations and elevated pressure tanks. 
C.  Garden structures in accordance with Section 17.28.050(F). 
D.  Mobilehomes on permanent foundations designed in accordance with the standards of Section 17.56.050. 
E.  Single-family dwellings, not involving the issuance of occupancy permits, in subdivisions or divisions of land prior to the installation of all utilities, street improvements and other improvements. 
F.  A "large family day care home" or "adult day care facility" as defined by the State Health and Safety Code which provides day care to nine to fourteen (14) children or adult clients, inclusive, including children or adult clients who reside in the home. 
G.  Tennis courts, including related fencing over seven feet in height located on the same site as a permitted or conditional use. 
H.  Incidental and accessory structures and uses as defined in Chapter 17.96 located on the same site as a use permitted by administrative approval or conditional use. 
I.  Other uses which are added to this list according to the procedure in Chapter 17.60. 
(Ord. 2006-02 § 2, 2006; Ord. 92-11 § 1 (part), 1992: Ord. 408 (part), 1982) 
17.28.040 - Conditional uses-Commission approval. 
    The following conditional uses may be permitted in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 17.68: 
A.  Public and quasi-public uses of an educational or religious type including public and parochial elementary schools, junior high schools, high schools and colleges; nursery schools; private non-profit schools and colleges; churches; parsonages and other religious institutions. 
B.  Public and private charitable institutions, hospitals, sanitariums, rest homes, and nursing homes, including a state authorized, certified or licensed family care home, foster home or group home serving seven or more mentally disordered or otherwise handicapped persons, including rehabilitation homes for alcoholics and drug addicts, or dependent and neglected children, where such homes provide care on a twenty-four (24) hour basis. 
C.  Public uses of an administrative, recreational, public service or cultural type including city, county, state or federal administrative centers and courts, libraries, museums, art galleries, police and fire stations and other public buildings, structures and facilities; public playgrounds, parks and community centers. 
D.  Private or public golf courses. 
E.  Modest expansion or remodeling of an existing non-conforming use of a structure or land, limited to twenty-five (25) percent or less of the assessed value of existing structures, or reestablishment of a non-conforming use which has been damaged, except nonconforming signs and outdoor advertising structures, non-conforming uses occupying a structure with an assessed valuation of less than two hundred dollars ($200.00), and non-conforming fences, walls and hedges. 
F.  A second housing unit either unattached or attached to an existing single-family detached residence, in accordance with the provisions of Section 17.56.060 of this title. 
G.  Home occupations in accordance with Chapter 17.56. 
H.  Bed and breakfast inns. 
I.  Mobilehome parks in accordance with Chapter 17.56, subject to the density standards applicable to single-family dwellings in the RA district of not more than six mobilehome dwellings per net acre. 
J.  Expansion, remodeling or additions to a conditional use that are not either incidental or accessory as defined in Chapter 17.96. 
K.  Incidental and accessory structures and uses as defined in Chapter 17.96 located on the same site as a conditional use. 
L.  Other uses which are added to this list according to the procedure in Chapter 17.60. 
(Ord. 99-08 § 2, 1999; Ord. 92-11 § 1 (part), 1992: Ord. 408 (part), 1982) 
17.28.050 - Property development standards. 
A.  Fences, Walls and Hedges. Fences, walls and hedges shall be permitted in accordance with the provisions of Section 17.24.060. 
B.  Site Area. The minimum site area for the R-1-7 district shall be seven thousand (7,000) square feet. The minimum site area for the R-1-10 district shall be ten thousand (10,000) square feet. The minimum site area for the R-1-20 district shall be twenty thousand (20,000) square feet. 
C.  Frontage, Width and Depth of Site. 
1.  Each site in an R district shall have not less than sixty (60) feet of frontage on a public street except that those sites which front on a cul-de-sac or loop-out street may have a frontage of not less than forty (40) feet provided the width of the site, as measured along the front yard setback line, is at least sixty (60) feet in the R-1-7 district, eighty (80) feet in the R-1-10 district and one hundred (100) feet in the R-1-20 district. 
2.  The minimum width of each site in an R-1-7 district shall be sixty (60) feet for an interior lot and sixty-five (65) feet for a corner lot. The minimum width of each site in an R-1-10 district shall be eighty (80) feet and the minimum width of each site in an R-1-20 district shall be one hundred (100) feet. 
3.  The minimum depth of each site in an R-1-7 district shall be ninety (90) feet for an interior lot and eighty (80) feet for a corner lot. The minimum depth of each site in an R-1-10 district shall be one hundred twenty-five (125) feet and the minimum depth of each site in an R-1-20 district shall be one hundred fifty (150) feet. 
D.  Number of Dwelling Units Per Site. Not more than one dwelling unit shall be allowed on each site, except as may be allowed under Section 17.56.060. 
E.  Coverage. The maximum site area covered by dwellings and garages shall be forty percent (40%). 
F.  Yard Requirements. 
1.  Front Yard. The minimum front yard in an R-1-7 and R-1-10 districts shall be twenty (20) feet, provided that the distance from the centerline of a public street to the rear of the required front yard shall not be less than fifty (50) feet. The minimum front yard in an R-1-20 district shall be fifty (50) feet, provided that the distance from the centerline of a public street to the rear of the required front yard shall not be less than eighty (80) feet. 
    Except that: the minimum front yard in an R-1-7 district may be fifteen (15) feet when the garage for the single-family residence on the lot is located at the rear of the single-family residence or is a side-loaded garage. The minimum fifteen-foot front yard may only be used for one-third of the single-family residential lots in an R-1-7 single-family residential development, whether or not the development is phased. 
    On a site situated between sites improved with buildings where said buildings are set back less than a minimum distance required by this section, the minimum front yard shall be the average depth of the front yards on the improved sites immediately adjoining the side lines of the site. 
2.  Rear Yard. The minimum rear yard shall be ten (10) feet. Where construction involves more than one story, including decks, balconies, and other related platforms with a floor level over five (5) feet in height, the rear yard shall be increased by ten (10) feet for each additional story, unless the rear yard abuts an alley in which case the rear yard setback will remain at ten (10) feet. Where a garage or carport is located within a rear yard with access from an alley, it shall be set back a minimum of eleven (11) feet from the closest alley right-of-way line to provide for adequate garage ingress and egress. 
3.  Side Yards. The minimum side yard shall be five (5) feet, subject to the following conditions and exceptions: 
a.  On a reversed corner lot, and corner lot, the side yard adjoining the street shall be not less than one-half the required front yard on the adjoining key lot. 
b.  Where construction involves more than one story, the side yard shall be increased by five (5) feet for each additional story provided, however, that the side yard on the street side of a corner lot, that is not a reverse corner lot, need not be greater than ten (10) feet. 
G.  Distances Between Structures. The minimum distance between a one-family residence and another building shall be ten (10) feet. 
H.  Building Height. No building or structure shall have a height greater than thirty-five (35) feet except as may be required under Chapters 17.68 and 17.76. 
I.  Signs. No sign or outdoor advertising structure of any character shall be permitted except as prescribed in Chapter 17.56. 
J.  Off-Street Parking and Off-Street Loading. Off-street parking and off-street loading facilities shall be provided on the site for each use as prescribed in Chapter 17.52. 
K.  Accessory Structures. It is the purpose of this section to recognize accessory structures as desirable and beneficial accessory uses, and to provide for such uses under certain circumstances so long as land use compatibility is maintained, privacy of neighbors is protected, minimum open space and area requirements are maintained, and public health, safety, and welfare is preserved. 
    For purposes of this chapter, garages and permanent carports shall not be considered to be accessory structures. Accessory structures shall conform to all of the following requirements. 
1.  Accessory structures shall be reviewed and approved by either the planning department or building department. 
2.  All accessory structures shall comply with the requirements of the Uniform Building Code as adopted by the City of Kingsburg. 
3.  An accessory structure may only be constructed on a lot containing a principal structure. 
4.  Accessory structures and any accessory uses (including surface parking) may not exceed thirty percent (30%) of the square footage of the required rear yard. 
5.  The maximum height for an accessory structure shall be fifteen (15) feet. 
6.  Minimum setbacks for an accessory structure shall be: 
a.  Front yard-Same as principal structure. 
b.  Rear yard-Ten (10) feet. Zero feet if rear yard adjoins an alley or the accessory structure is less than ten and one-half (10.5) feet in height and contains no electrical, plumbing or mechanical improvements. 
c.  Interior side-Five (5) feet. Zero feet if interior side yard adjoins an alley or the accessory structure is less than ten and one-half (10.5) feet in height and contains no electrical, plumbing or mechanical improvements. 
d.  Street side-Same as principal structure. 
7.  The size of a non-habitable accessory structure shall not exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of the gross square footage of the primary structure (including any attached facilities such as a garage). 
8.  Accessory structures shall individually be located a minimum of ten (10) feet from the principal structure and any other accessory structure. 
9.  Except for guesthouses and second dwelling units, accessory structures shall not be used for dwelling purposes. 
10.  A non-habitable accessory structure (small shed) less than or equal to one hundred twenty (120) square feet in size and intended for storage purposes only may be located within the required rear yard or interior side yard but not in the front yard. The maximum shed height shall be ten and one-half (10.5) feet. 
11.  Shipping containers shall not be permitted in any residential zone district within the City of Kingsburg. 
12.  Portable carports shall not be permitted in the front or street-side, side yards. 
(Ord. 2008-01 § 1, 2008; Ord. 2005-07 § 1, 2005; Ord. 99-07 § 2, 1999; Ord. 92-11 § 1 (part), 1992: Ord. 408 (part), 1982) 
(Ord. No. 2017-001, § 2(Exh. A), 5-17-2017) 
17.28.060 - General provisions and exceptions. 
    All uses shall be subject to the general provisions and exceptions prescribed in Chapter 17.60. 
(Ord. 92-11 § 1 (part), 1992: Ord. 408 (part), 1982) 
Chapter 17.32 - RM-MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS 

17.32.010 - Purposes and application. 
    The RM multi-family residential districts are intended primarily for the development of multi-family residential structures at densities consistent with policies of the general plan, as follows: 
A.  The RM-MH-5.4 district is intended exclusively for application to areas designated by the general plan for low or medium density residential development. 
B.  The RM-5.5 district is intended exclusively for application to areas designated by the general plan for medium density-5.5. 
C.  The RM-3 is intended exclusively for application to areas designated by the general plan for medium density-3.0. 
D.  The RM-2.5 district is intended exclusively for application to areas designated by the general plan for high density in older residential areas where some conversion of existing single-family housing may be desired by the city under the city's redevelopment program. 
E.  The RM-2 district is intended for application to areas designated by the general plan for high density in the immediate vicinity of the central business district. 
(Ord. 92-11 § 1 (part), 1992: Ord. 408 (part), 1982) 
17.32.020 - Permitted uses. 
A.  One-family dwellings. 
B.  Multi-family dwellings. 
C.  Raising of fruit and nut trees, vegetables and horticultural specialties. 
D.  A "small family day care home" or "adult day care facility" as defined by the State Health and Safety Code, which provides day care to eight or fewer children or adult clients, including children or adult clients who reside in the home. 
E.  Fenced or enclosed swimming pools for either individual, family or communal use on an exclusive non-commercial basis, provided that no swimming pool shall be located within a utility easement or a front yard. 
F.  Incidental and accessory structures and uses located on the same site with a permitted use. 
G.  A state-authorized, certified or licensed family care home, foster home or group home serving six or fewer mentally disordered or otherwise handicapped persons, or dependent and neglected children. 
H.  Other uses which are added to this list according to the procedure in Chapter 17.60. 
(Ord. 2006-02 §§ 3, 4, 2006; Ord. 92-11 § 1 (part), 1992: Ord. 408 (part), 1982) 
17.32.030 - Permitted uses-Administrative approval. 
    The following uses may be permitted in accordance with Chapter 17.64: 
A.  Enclosed temporary construction materials storage yards required in connection with the development of a subdivision, and temporary subdivision sales offices and signs and model home display areas, in accordance with Chapter 17.56. 
B.  Gas and electric transmission lines in accordance with Chapter 17.64, electrical transmission and distribution substations, gas regulator stations, communications equipment buildings, public service pumping stations and elevated pressure tanks. 
C.  Rest homes and nursing homes; boarding or rooming houses. 
D.  Garden structures in accordance with Section 17.32.050(F). 
E.  Private clubs and lodges. 
F.  Mobilehomes on permanent foundations designed in accordance with the standards of Section 17.56.050. 
G.  A second housing unit attached to an existing single-family, detached residence, in accordance with the provisions of Section 17.56.060. 
H.  A "large family day care home" or "adult day care facility" as defined by the State Health and Safety Code which provides day care to nine to fourteen (14) children or adult clients, inclusive, including children or adult clients who reside in the home. 
I.  Incidental and accessory structures and uses located on the same site as a use permitted by administrative approval or conditional use. 
J.  Other uses which are added to this list according to the procedure in Chapter 17.60. 
(Ord. 2006-02 § 5, 2006; Ord. 92-11 § 1 (part), 1992: Ord. 408 (part), 1982) 
17.32.040 - Conditional uses-Commission approval. 
    The following uses may be permitted in accordance with the procedures prescribed in Chapter 17.68: 
A.  Public and quasi-public uses of an educational or religious type, including public and parochial elementary schools, junior high schools, high schools and colleges; nursery schools, private non-profit schools and colleges; churches, parsonages and other religious institutions. 
B.  Public and private charitable institutions, hospitals, sanitariums, nursing homes, rehabilitation homes and rest homes, including state authorized homes as prescribed under Section 17.28.040(B). 
C.  Public uses of an administrative, public service or cultural type including city, county, state or federal administrative centers and courts, libraries, museums, art galleries, police and fire stations and other public buildings, structures and facilities; public playgrounds, parks and community centers. 
D.  Private or public golf courses. 
E.  Modest expansion or remodeling of an existing non-conforming use of a structure or land, limited to twenty-five (25) percent or less of the assessed value of existing structures, or reestablishment of a non-conforming use which has been damaged, except non-conforming signs and outdoor advertising structures, non-conforming use occupying a structure with an assessed valuation of less than one hundred (100) dollars, and non-conforming fences, walls and hedges. 
F.  Home occupations in accordance with Chapter 17.56. 
G.  Mobilehome parks, in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 17.56. 
H.  Expansion, remodeling, or additions to a conditional use that are not considered an incidental or accessory use as defined in Chapter 17.96. 
I.  Professional offices, only within the RM-2 district. 
J.  A state authorized licensed day care center for thirteen (13) or more children. 
K.  Other uses which are added to this list according to the procedure in Chapter 17.60. 
(Ord. 92-11 § 1 (part), 1992: Ord. 408 (part), 1982) 
17.32.050 - Property development standards. 
A.  Fences, Walls and Hedges. Fences, walls and hedges shall be permitted in accordance with Section 17.24.050. 
B.  Site Area. The minimum site area shall be five thousand five hundred (5,500) square feet in the RM-5.5 districts and three thousand (3,000) square feet in the RM-3 and RM-2 districts. The minimum site area in the RM-MH-5.4 district shall be five acres [see Section 17.56.030 C.] 
C.  Site Area Per Dwelling Unit. The minimum site area per dwelling unit shall be as follows: 
District Area Per Unit RM-MH-5.4 5,400 sq. ft. RM-5.5 5,500 sq. ft. RM-3.0 3,000 sq. ft. RM-2.5 2,500 sq. ft. RM-2.0 2,500 sq. ft.  
D.  Frontage, Width and Depth of Site. 
1.  Each site, other than for a mobilehome in a mobilehome park, shall have not less than fifty (50) feet of frontage on a public street, except that those sites which front on a cul-de-sac or loop-out street may have a frontage of not less than forty (40) feet provided the width of the site, as measured along the front yard setback line, is at least sixty (60) feet. 
2.  The minimum width of each site, other than for a mobilehome in a mobilehome park, shall be fifty (50) feet. 
3.  The minimum depth of each site, other than for a mobilehome in a mobilehome park, shall be eighty (80) feet. 
E.  Coverage. The maximum site area covered by structures shall be as follows: 
District Coverage RM-MH-5.4 [Not Applicable] RM-5.5 50% RM-3 50% RM-2.5 55% RM-2 60%  
F.  Yard Requirements. 
1.  Front Yard. The minimum front yard shall be fifteen (15) feet, provided that the distance from the centerline of a public street to the rear of the required front yard shall not be less than forty-five (45) feet. Any fixed mechanical equipment shall not be located within the front yard. 
2.  Rear Yard. The minimum rear yard shall be five feet. Garden structures less than seven feet in height may be located within any portion of a required rear yard. Where construction involves more than one story, including decks, balconies, garden structures and other related platforms with a floor level over five feet in height, the rear yard shall be increased by five feet for each additional story. Accessory and garden structures under seven feet in height may be located within any portion of the required rear yard, provided that any mechanical equipment shall not be located closer than five feet from an adjoining property line. 
    Where a garage or carport is located within a rear yard with access from an alley, it shall be set back a minimum of eleven (11) feet from the closest alley right-of-way line. 
3.  Side Yards. The minimum side yard shall be five feet, subject to the following conditions and exceptions: 
a.  On a reversed corner lot, the side yard adjoining the street shall be not less than one-half the required front yard of the adjoining key lot. 
b.  Accessory and garden structures under seven feet in height may be located in any portion of a required side yard, subject to approval under Section 17.64, provided that any mechanical equipment shall be located a minimum of five feet from a side property line adjoining an interior lot in an UR, RA, R or RM district. 
c.  Where construction involves more than one story, the side yard shall be increased by five feet for each additional story, provided however that the side yard on the street side yard of a corner lot that is not a reversed corner lot need not be greater than five feet. 
d.  A side yard providing access to more than one dwelling unit shall not be less than ten (10) feet. 
e.  Garages or carports shall be subject to the setback requirements of Section 17.28.050 F. 3. 
G.  Distances between Structures. The minimum distance between a dwelling unit and another structure shall be ten (10) feet. 
H.  Building Height. No building or structure shall have a height greater than thirty-five (35) feet, except as may be allowed under Chapters 17.68 and 17.76. 
I.  Signs. No sign or outdoor advertising structure of any character shall be permitted except as provided in Chapter 17.56. 
J.  Off-Street Parking and Off-Street Loading. Off-street parking and off-street loading facilities shall be provided as prescribed in Chapter 17.52. 
(Ord. 92-11 § 1 (part), 1992: Ord. 408 (part), 1982) 
17.32.060 - Site plan and architectural design review. 
    Except for mobile homes, and single-family dwellings and accessory structures and uses related thereto, no use may be established on any lot or site in an RM district until a site plan and architectural plans shall have been submitted to and approved by the city pursuant to the provisions of Chapters 17.72 and 17.80 of this title. The development of mobilehome parks within the RM-MH8 district shall be subject to the standards and regulations prescribed under Section 17.56.030 of this title. 
(Ord. 92-11 § 1 (part), 1992: Ord. 408 (part), 1982) 
17.32.070 - General provisions and exceptions. 
    All uses shall be subject to the general provisions and exceptions prescribed in Chapter 17.60. 
(Ord. 92-11 § 1 (part), 1992: Ord. 408 (part), 1982) 
Chapter 17.36 - PO-PROFESSIONAL OFFICE DISTRICT 

17.36.010 - Purposes and application. 
    This district is intended to provide opportunities for the location of professional and commercial offices in close relationship to one another in areas designated for combined professional office use and high density use, by the general plan; to provide adequate space to meet the needs of such offices for off-street parking and loading space; and to protect offices from noise, disturbances, traffic hazards and other objectionable influences which would adversely affect professional and business practices being conducted. 
(Ord. 92-11 § 1 (part), 1992: Ord. 408 (part), 1982) 
17.36.020 - Permitted uses. 
A.  Offices which deal in professional and business services, in which goods; wares and merchandise are not commercially created, sold or exchanged. 
B.  Medical and dental laboratories and clinics, and prescription pharmacies in conjunction therewith or with a hospital. 
C.  Any use listed as a permitted use within the R or RM districts. 
D.  Accessory structures and uses located on the same site as a permitted use. 
E.  Other uses which are added to this list according to the procedure in Chapter 17.60. 
17.36.030 - Permitted uses-Administrative approval. 
A.  Boarding and rooming houses. 
B.  Guest houses. 
C.  Mobilehomes on permanent foundations designed in accordance with the standards of Section 17.56.050. 
D.  Gas and electric transmission lines, in accordance with Chapter 17.64; electrical transmission and distribution substations, gas regulator stations, communications equipment buildings, public service pumping stations and elevated pressure tanks. 
E.  Licensed family day care centers for seven to twelve (12) children as an accessory use in a dwelling. 
F.  Incidental and accessory structures and uses as defined in Chapter 17.96 located on the same site as a use permitted by administrative approval or conditional use. 
G.  Other uses which are added to this list according to the procedure in Chapter 17.60. 
(Ord. 92-11 § 1 (part), 1992: Ord. 408 (part), 1982) 
17.36.040 - Conditional uses-Commission approval. 
A.  Churches, parsonages and other religious institutions. 
B.  Public and private charitable institutions, hospitals, sanitariums, nursing homes, rehabilitation homes and rest homes, including state authorized homes as prescribed under Section 17.28.040 B. 
C.  Public uses of a cultural type, including libraries, museums, and art galleries. 
D.  Mortuaries. 
E.  Home occupations in accordance with Chapter 17.56. 
F.  Modest expansion or remodeling of an existing non-conforming use of a structure or land, limited to twenty-five (25) percent or less of the assessed value of existing structures, or reestablishment of a non-conforming use which has been damaged, except non-conforming signs and outdoor advertising structures, non-conforming uses occupying a structure with an assessed valuation of less than two hundred (200) dollars, and non-conforming fences, walls and hedges. 
G.  Expansion, remodeling, or additions to a conditional use that are not considered an incidental or accessory use as defined in Chapter 17.96. 
H.  Other uses which are added to this list according to the procedure in Chapter 17.60. 
(Ord. 92-11 § 1 (part), 1992: Ord. 408 (part), 1982) 
17.36.050 - Property development standards. 
A.  Fences, Walls and Hedges. Fences, walls and hedges shall be permitted in accordance with provisions of Section 17.24.050 A. 
B.  Site Area. The minimum office site shall be five thousand (5,000) square feet. The minimum site area per one-family dwelling unit shall be six thousand (6,000) square feet. The minimum site area per multi-family dwelling unit shall be two thousand (2,000) square feet. 
C.  Frontage, Width and Depth of Site. 
1.  Each site shall have not less than fifty (50) feet of frontage on a public street, except that those sites which front on a cul-de-sac or loop-out street may have a frontage of not less than forty (40) feet provided that the width of the site as measured along the front yard setback line is at least fifty (50) feet. 
2.  The minimum width of each site shall be fifty (50) feet at all other locations on the site which lay to the rear of the front yard setback line. 
3.  The minimum depth of each site shall be one hundred (100) feet. 
D.  Coverage. The maximum site area covered by structures shall be sixty-five (65) percent of the total area of the site. 
E.  Yard Requirements. 
1.  Front Yard. The minimum front yard shall be fifteen (15) feet; provided, however, the building official may approve, under Chapter 17.64, within any part of the front yard for non-residential uses, ornamental covers such as a sidewalk or entry awning, trellis or other similar improvement when said improvement is intended solely as an improved passageway or for aesthetic purposes, providing architectural integrity with the building to which it is attached. Supports shall not occupy more than ninety (90) percent of the horizontal area covered by the improvement, and the space between supports shall not be enclosed. 
2.  Rear Yard. The minimum rear yard shall be five feet; provided however, that where construction involves more than one story and the site lays adjacent to a site in an R district, the rear yard shall be increased by five feet for each additional story. Accessory and garden structures under seven feet in height may be located within any portion of a required rear yard. Access to off-street parking areas from an alley shall meet the standards of Section 17.32.050 F. 
3.  Side Yards. The minimum side yard shall be five feet, subject to the following conditions and exceptions: 
a.  On a reversed corner lot, the side yard adjoining the street shall be not less than one-half the required front yard on the adjoining key lot. 
b.  Accessory structures under seven feet in height may be located in any portion of a required side yard, subject to approval under the provisions of Chapter 17.64, except in the street side yard of a reversed corner lot. 
c.  Where construction involves more than one story, the side yard shall be increased by five feet for each additional story, provided however, that the side yard on the street side of a corner lot need not be greater than five feet. 
d.  A side yard providing access to more than one dwelling unit shall not be less than ten (10) feet. 
e.  Garages or carports on the street side yard of a corner lot shall be subject to the provisions of Section 17.28.050 F.3. 
F.  Distances between Structures. The minimum distance between a permitted or conditional use and another building on the same site shall be ten (10) feet. 
G.  Building Height. The maximum height of a permitted or conditional use shall be forty (40) feet. 
H.  Signs. No sign or outdoor advertising structure of any character shall be permitted except as prescribed in Chapter 17.56. 
I.  Off-Street Parking and Off-Street Loading. Off-street parking and off-street loading facilities shall be provided as prescribed in Chapter 17.52. 
(Ord. 92-11 § 1 (part), 1992: Ord. 408 (part), 1982) 
17.36.060 - Site plan and architectural design review. 
    Except for one-family dwellings, and accessory structures and uses related to one-family dwellings, no use shall be erected on any lot or site in this district until a site plan and architectural plans shall have been submitted to and approved pursuant to the provisions of Chapters 17.72 and 17.80. 
(Ord. 92-11 § 1 (part), 1992: Ord. 408 (part), 1982) 
17.36.070 - Required conditions. 
A.  All office site boundaries adjacent to any residential zoning district shall be visually screened with ornamental masonry walls and landscaping, with wall height to be determined by the planning commission. 
B.  Street trees, frontage landscaping and parking area landscaping, with automatic irrigation, shall be provided for all office sites. 
(Ord. 92-11 § 1 (part), 1992: Ord. 408 (part), 1982) 
17.36.080 - General provisions and exceptions. 
    All uses shall be subject to the general provisions and exceptions prescribed in Chapter 17.60. 
(Ord. 92-11 § 1 (part), 1992: Ord. 408 (part), 1982) 
Chapter 17.40 - C-COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS 

17.40.010 - C-Purposes and application. 
    The commercial districts included in this code are designed to provide the opportunity for various types of retail stores, offices, service establishments and wholesale business to concentrate for the convenience of the public; to be established in such relationships to each other as to be mutually beneficial; and to be located and grouped on sites that are in logical proximity to the respective geographical areas and categories of patrons which they serve. 
(Ord. 92-11 § 1 (part), 1992: Ord. 408 (part), 1982) 
17.40.020 - CC-Central commercial district. 
A.  CC-Application. The central commercial district is intended to be applied within and at the periphery of the central business district (CBD) of the city as described by the general plan. The CBD serves as the primary commercial district of the community where a wide range of retail, financial, governmental, professional, business service and entertainment activities and uses are encouraged to concentrate to serve the entire community. Central commercial areas at the periphery of the central business district are intended to be developed only as unified commercial centers, except where the existing development pattern makes it impractical. 
B.  CC-Permitted Uses. 
1.  Any use listed as a permitted use in the CN district. 
2.  Parking lots improved in conformity with the standards prescribed for required off-street parking facilities in Chapter 17.52. 
3.  Professional and commercial offices. 
4.  Retail stores and service establishments which supply commodities or provide services primarily to meet the needs of residents of the entire community, including: 
    Addressograph and copying services; 
    Apparel stores; 
    Arcades; 
    Art and antique stores; 
    Art and craft schools and colleges; 
    Art galleries; 
    Art supply stores; 
    Auction rooms; 
    Automobile supply stores; 
    Bakery goods stores; 
    Banks, including drive-in banks, and other lending agencies; 
    Barber shops and beauty shops; 
    Bicycle shops; 
    Billiard and pool halls; 
    Blueprint and photocopy shops; 
    Book stores and, rental libraries; 
    Bowling alleys; 
    Bus depots and transit stations, provided that buses or other transit vehicles shall not be stored on the site and no repair work or servicing of vehicles shall be conducted on the site; 
    Business, professional and trade schools and colleges; 
    Cafeterias; 
    Camera shops, photographic supplies and photography studios; 
    Candy, nut and confectionery stores; 
    Card rooms; 
    Catering shops; 
    Christmas tree sales lots; 
    Clothing and costume rental establishments; 
    Communications equipment buildings; 
    Dairy products stores; 
    Drapery and interior decorating shops; 
    Dance halls; 
    Department stores; 
    Drug stores; 
    Dry cleaning service; 
    Dry goods stores; 
    Egg and poultry stores (no slaughtering, eviscerating or plucking); 
    Electrical appliance and incidental repair shops; 
    Employment agencies; 
    Fire and police stations; 
    Florists; 
    Food stores, delicatessens and supermarkets; 
    Furniture stores; 
    Garden shops; 
    Garden supply stores and nurseries, provided that all equipment, supplies and merchandise, other than plants, shall be kept within a completely enclosed building or under a lath or other sun screen structure, and further provided that fertilizer of any type shall be stored and sold in packaged form only; 
    Gift, novelty or souvenir shops; 
    Gymnasium and health studios; 
    Hardware stores; 
    Health food stores; 
    Hobby supply stores; 
    Home furnishings; 
    Home improvements supplies; 
    Hotels, motels and apartment hotels; 
    Household appliance and repair shops; 
    Ice dispensers (coin operated); 
    Inns, providing temporary visitor accommodations and accessory recreational and commercial facilities; 
    Interior decorating shops; 
    Jewelry stores, including clock and watch repairing; 
    Leather goods and luggage stores; 
    Libraries; 
    Liquor stores; 
    Locksmith; 
    Massage and physical culture studios; 
    Medical and orthopedic appliance stores; 
    Medical buildings; 
    Meeting halls; 
    Messenger offices; 
    Millinery shops; 
    Music stores; 
    Music and dance studios; 
    Newspaper publishing; 
    Newsstands and magazine stores; 
    Office and business machine stores; 
    Paint and wallpaper stores; 
    Pawn shops; 
    Pet and bird stores and pet grooming, but not including boarding of pets; 
    Photographic supply stores; 
    Photography studios; 
    Picture framing shops; 
    Pool halls; 
    Post offices; 
    Pressing, altering and repairing of wearing apparel; 
    Printing shops; 
    Private clubs and lodges; 
    Public and private non-profit charitable institutions; 
    Radio and television broadcasting studios; 
    Radio and television stores and repair shops; 
    Reading rooms; 
    Restaurants, including drive-in restaurants, cafes, and outdoor cafes; 
    Sale firearms; 
    Scientific instrument stores; 
    Secretarial services; 
    Self-service laundry and dry cleaning establishments; 
    Shoe repair shops; 
    Shoe stores; 
    Soda fountains; 
    Sporting goods stores, including incidental boat sales and sporting equipment repair; 
    Sports arenas within buildings; 
    Stamp and coin stores; 
    Stationery stores; 
    Storage buildings incidental to a permitted use; 
    Tailor and dressmaking shops; 
    Telegraph offices; 
    Theaters and auditoriums; 
    Tobacco shops; 
    Toy stores; 
    Travel bureaus; 
    Variety stores; 
    Vending machines within enclosed areas; 
    Wedding chapels; 
    Incidental and accessory structures and uses located on the same site as a permitted use; 
    Other uses which are added to this list according to the procedure in Chapter 17.60. 
C.  CC-Permitted Uses-Administrative Approval. 
    The following uses may be permitted in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 17.64: 
1.  Electrical distribution substations, communication equipment buildings, gas regulator stations and utility pumping stations. 
2.  Accessory structures and uses as defined in Chapter 17.96, located on the same site as a use permitted by administrative approval. 
3.  Other uses which are added to this list according to the procedure in Chapter 17.60. 
D.  CC-Conditional Uses-Commission Approval. 
    The following uses may be permitted in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 17.68: 
1.  Bars, cocktail lounges and nightclubs; 
2.  Churches; 
3.  City, county, state or federal administrative offices; libraries, police and fire stations; 
4.  Dwellings in combination with permitted uses when approved through the planned unit development process outlined in Chapter 17.76, and subject to the following restrictions: 
(a)  Not more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the residential units may be located on the ground floor; 
(b)  Ground floor residential units may not be located along street frontages; 
(c)  After parking structures, garages or carports have been deducted, not more than fifty percent (50%) of the ground floor building area may be occupied by residential units. 
5.  Farmers markets, including indoor and outdoor facilities; 
6.  Any and all projects establishing new or modifying existing service stations, regardless of whether they are stand-alone or combined with other existing or proposed uses and/or structures; provided, the entire parcel or project upon which any service station is located, regardless of size, shall be included within and subject to any such conditional use permits. 
7.  Service commercial uses designated by an asterisk (*) as listed under Section 17.40.040(B) of this chapter, which include incidental retail and/or office use. 
8.  Temporary revival church services. 
9.  Expansion or remodeling of an existing non-conforming use of a structure or land, up to fifty percent (50%) or less of the value of the structure, or reestablishment of a non-conforming use which has been damaged, except non-conforming signs and outdoor advertising structures, non-conforming uses occupying a structure with an assessed valuation of less than one hundred dollars ($100.00), and non-conforming fences, walls and hedges. 
10.  Expansion, remodeling, or additions to a conditional use that are not considered an incidental or accessory use as defined in Chapter 17.96. 
11.  Incidental and accessory structures and uses located on the same site as a conditional use. 
12.  Other uses which are added to this list according to the procedure in Chapter 17.60. 
(Ord. 2006-01 § 1, 2006; Ord. 2000-07 § 2, 2000; Ord. 92-11 § 1 (part), 1992: Ord. 408 (part), 1982) 
17.40.030 - CS-Service commercial district. 
A.  CS-Application. The service commercial district is intended primarily for establishments engaged in servicing equipment, materials and products, but which do not require the manufacturing, assembly, packaging or processing of articles or merchandise for distribution and retail sale. Land requirements for most service commercial uses generally dictates its application along arterial and collector streets of the city which generally lie close to central commercial, highway commercial and industrial districts, in accordance with the general plan. 
B.  CS-Permitted Uses. 
1.  Off-street parking lots improved in conformity with Chapter 17.52; 
2.  Service commercial establishments, including: 
* Addressograph services; 
Automobile body and fender repair; 
Automobile repairing, overhauling, rebuilding and painting; 
* Automobile sale and service (new); 
* Automobile and tractor parts and equipment stores; 
Automobile upholstery and top shops; 
* Automobile washing, either self-service or involving the use of mechanical conveyors, blowers and steam cleaning; 
* Bakeries, retail and wholesale; 
Bars, cocktail lounges and 
nightclubs; 
Bicycle shops; 
Blacksmith shops; 
* Blueprint and photocopy shops; 
* Boat sales and service; 
Book binding; 
Bottling works; 
* Building materials yards; 
Bus depots and transit stations (including repair and storage); 
Business, professional and trade schools and colleges; 
Cabinet shops; 
* Canvas shops; 
Car washing; 
Carpenters' shops; 
Carpet stores; 
Catering shops; 
Ceramic and pottery works; 
* Cleaning, pressing and dyeing establishments (using non-inflammable and non-explosive cleaning fluid); 
Cold storage plants; Columbariums and crematoriums; 
Communications equipment buildings; 
Contractors' storage yards; 
Convenience-oriented food stores limited to a maximum of five thousand (5,000) square feet of floor area; 
Dairy products plants; 
Diaper supply services; 
Drapery and interior decorating stores; 
* Electrical repair shops; 
Equipment rental yards; 
Exterminators; 
Farm equipment sales and service; 
Feed and seed stores; 
Food lockers; 
Freight forwarding terminals; 
Furniture stores, new and used; 
Furniture warehouses and van services; 
* Glass shops; 
* Gunsmith shops; 
Heating and ventilating or air-conditioning shops, including incidental sheet metal; 
Home improvement centers; 
Household and office equipment and machinery repair shops; 
* Household repair shops; 
Ice storage or sale houses; 
Kennels located not closer than five hundred (500) feet to an RA, R, RM, PO, or CC district; 
* Laboratories; 
* Laundries; 
* Linen supply services; 
Liquor stores; Locksmith; 
* Lumber yards, not including planing mills or saw mills; 
Machinery sales and rentals; 
Mattress repair shops; 
* Mini-storage facilities; 
* Mortuaries; 
* Motorcycle sales and service; 
* Musical instrument repair shops and incidental sales; 
* Nurseries and garden supply stores; 
Offices; 
Packing and crating; 
Paint and wallpaper stores; 
* Parcel delivery services; 
* Photographic and blueprint processing and printing; 
Picture framing shops; 
* Plumbing and sheet metal shops; 
Pool halls; 
* Pressing establishments; 
* Printing, lithographing and engraving; 
Public utility service yards; 
Radio and television broadcasting studios; 
Radio, television, VCR, video, and related electronic equipment repair shops; 
* Railroad freight and passenger stations; 
Repair garages; 
Restaurants, including drive-in restaurants; 
Rug and carpet cleaning and dyeing; 
Safe and vault repairing; 
Self-service laundry and dry cleaning establishments; 
* Service stations (gasoline), including dispensing of diesel fuel and complete truck service; 
Sheet metal shops; 
Shoe repair shops; 
* Sign painting shops; 
Small animal hospitals or clinics and veterinarians' offices including short-term boarding of animals and incidental care such as bathing and trimming, provided that all operations are conducted entirely within a completely enclosed structure which complies with specifications of soundproof construction as prescribed by the building official; 
Stone and monument yards or mills; 
* Storage garages and buildings; 
Storage yards for commercial vehicles; 
* Taxidermists; 
Thrift shops and secondhand stores; 
* Tire sales, retreading and recapping; 
* Tool or cutlery sharpening or grinding; 
* Trade schools; 
Trailer sales and service and rentals; 
Transit terminals; 
Trucking terminals; 
* Typewriter repair shops; 
* Upholstery shops; 
* Used car sales; 
Warehouses except for the storage of fuel oil or flammable liquids and explosives; 
Welding and blacksmithing shops, excepting drop hammer; 
* Wholesale establishments; 
Other uses which are added to this list according to the procedure in Chapter 17.60. 
3.  Offices and retail stores incidental to and on the same site with a commercial service establishment; 
4.  Electrical transmission and distribution substations, gas regulator stations, public service pumping stations and elevated pressure tanks; 
5.  Incidental and accessory uses and structures located on the same site as a permitted use. 
C.  CS-Permitted Uses-Administrative Approval. 
1.  Gas and electrical transmission lines, in accordance with Chapter 17.64; 
2.  Christmas tree sales lots. 
3.  Incidental and accessory structures and uses as defined in Chapter 17.100 located on the same site as a use permitted by administrative approval, or conditional use; 
4.  Other uses which are added to this list according to the procedure in Chapter 17.56. 
D.  CS-Conditional Uses-Commission Approval 
1.  Any use listed as a permitted use in the IL, Light Industrial district. 
2.  Drive-in theaters, golf driving ranges, pony riding rings, racetracks, riding stables, skating rinks, sports arenas and sports stadiums, and other similar open, unenclosed commercial recreation facilities. 
3.  Electroplating shops. 
4.  Expansion or remodeling of an existing non-conforming use of a structure or land, up to fifty (50) percent or less of the value of the structure, or reestablishment of a non-conforming use which has been damaged, except non-conforming signs and outdoor advertising structures, non-conforming uses occupying a structure with an assessed valuation of less than two hundred (200) dollars, and non-conforming fences, walls and hedges. 
5.  Hotels and motels. 
6.  Public buildings and grounds. 
7.  Private clubs and lodges. 
8.  Temporary revival church services. 
9.  Expansion, remodeling, or additions to a conditional use that are not considered an incidental or accessory use as defined in Chapter 17.96. 
10.  Other uses which are added to this list according to the procedure in Chapter 17.60. 
(Ord. 92-11 § 1 (part), 1992: Ord. 408 (part), 1982) 
17.40.040 - CH-Highway commercial district. 
A.  CH-Application. The highway commercial district is intended primarily for application to areas along major highway entrances to the city in accord with policies of the general plan, where controlled access to the highway is afforded for the convenience of patrons traveling the highway by the provision of frontage roads, interchanges, channelized intersections and control over driveway spacing. 
B.  CH-Permitted Uses. 
1.  Highway commercial uses, including: 
    Ambulance service; 
    Automobile sales, service and repair, including body and fender work; 
    Automobile and farm equipment sales and supply stores; 
    Automobile washing; 
    Bars, cocktail lounges or night clubs; 
    Boat sales and service; 
    Bowling alleys; 
    Bus depots and transit stations; 
    Hotels and motels; 
    Motorcycle sales, service and repair; 
    Public utility structures, service and facilities, including gas and electrical distribution and transmission substations, gas regulator stations, public service pumping stations; 
    Private clubs and lodges; 
    Recreation vehicle sales and service; 
    Repair garages; 
    Restaurants, including drive-in restaurants; 
    Service stations (gasoline, butane and diesel fuels only); 
    Soda fountains; 
    Used car sales; 
    Utility trailer sales, service and rental; 
    Incidental and accessory structures and uses located on the same site as a permitted use; 
    Other uses which are added to this list according to the procedure in Chapter 17.60. 
2.  Convenience stores and services for the highway traveler, only at locations close to highway intersections or freeway interchanges, including: 
    Barber and beauty shops; 
    Drug stores; 
    Food stores (under ten thousand (10,000) square feet in area), excluding supermarkets; 
    Gift shops; 
    Laundromats; 
    Liquor stores; 
    Offices providing financial lending services; 
    Offices and retail stores incidental to and on the same site with a highway commercial use; 
    Incidental and accessory structures and uses located on the same site as a permitted use. 
    Other uses which are added to this list according to the procedure in Chapter 17.60. 
C.  CH-Permitted Uses-Administrative Approval. 
1.  Gas and electric transmission lines, in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 17.64. 
2.  Public buildings and grounds. 
3.  Christmas tree sales lots. 
4.  Incidental and accessory structures and uses located on the same site as a use permitted by administrative approval or conditional use. 
5.  Other uses which are added to this list according to the procedure in Chapter 17.60. 
D.  CH-Conditional Uses-Commission Approval. 
1.  Drive-in theaters, golf driving ranges, pony riding rings, race tracks, riding stables, skating rinks, sports arenas and sports stadiums, and other similar open, unenclosed commercial recreation facilities. 
2.  Overnight parking for recreational vehicles; mini-storage facilities. 
3.  Service stations involving the dispensing of petroleum gas fuels for use by the traveling public. 
4.  Expansion or remodeling of an existing non-conforming use of a structure or land, up to fifty (50) percent or less of the value of the structure, or reestablishment of a non-conforming use which has been damaged, except non-conforming signs and outdoor advertising structures, non-conforming uses occupying a structure with an assessed valuation of less than two hundred (200) dollars, and non-conforming fences, walls and hedges. 
5.  Expansion, remodeling, or additions to a conditional use that are not considered an incidental or accessory use as defined in Chapter 17.96. 
6.  Uses involving the manufacture, sale, repair and maintenance of light duty utility vehicles and agricultural equipment. 
7.  Other uses which are added to this list according to the procedure in Chapter 17.60. 
(Ord. 93-01 (part), 1993; Ord. 92-11 § 1 (part), 1992: Ord. 408 (part), 1982) 
17.40.050 - C-Required conditions. 
A.  Other than in a CS district, all businesses, services and processes shall be conducted entirely within a completely enclosed structure, except for off-street parking and off-street loading areas, gasoline service stations, outdoor dining areas, nurseries, garden shops, signs, Christmas tree sales lots, bus depots and transit stations, public utility stations, and used car sales incidental to new car sales. 
B.  No use shall be permitted and no process, equipment or materials shall be used which are found by the planning commission to be objectionable to persons living or working in the vicinity by reasons of odor, fumes, dust, smoke, cinders, dirt, refuse, water-carried waste, noise, vibration, illumination, glare or unsightliness or to involve any hazard of fire, explosion or toxic chemicals. 
C.  Temporary sidewalk sales and use of the public right-of-way for the display and sales of merchandise shall require approval by the city council. Permanent use for such purposes is strictly prohibited. 
D.  All commercial site boundaries adjacent to any residential zoning district shall be visually screened with ornamental masonry walls and landscaping. Wall height shall be a minimum of seven feet, except as may be designated otherwise under site plan review. 
E.  Street trees and frontage landscaping, with automatic irrigation, shall be provided for all commercial sites. Parking area landscaping may also be required under site plan review. 
(Ord. 92-11 § 1 (part), 1992: Ord. 408 (part), 1982) 
17.40.060 - C-Property development standards. 
A.  Screening and Landscaping-Fences, Wall and Hedges. 
1.  Where a site adjoins or is located across a street or alley from a RCO, UR, R, RM or PO district, an ornamental solid wall or fence, seven feet minimum in height, or such other height or type of screening device as may be required by the planning commission, shall be located on the property line common to such districts, except in a required front yard. 
2.  Open storage of materials and equipment attendant to a permitted use or conditional use shall be permitted only within an area surrounded or screened by a solid wall or fence seven feet minimum in height, except as may be modified under site plan review. Said storage shall not be visible above said fence or wall. 
3.  Street trees and other forms of landscaping may be required under the provisions of Chapters 17.72 and 17.76. 
B.  Site Area. No limitation. 
C.  Frontage, Width and Depth of Site. No limitation. 
D.  Coverage. No limitation. 
E.  Yard Requirements. 
1.  The minimum front yard shall be as follows: 
District Minimum Minimum on a site abutting on property in a RCO, UR, R, RM or PO District and fronting on the same street CN 15 feet 15 feet CC 0 feet, except 15' outside of the CBD 10 feet CS 0 feet 10 feet CH 10 feet 15 feet  
2.  Except as specified in paragraphs 1 and 2 hereunder, no side yards or rear yards shall be required. 
a.  In any commercial district, the minimum side yard abutting a RCO, UR, RA, R, RM or PO district shall be ten (10) feet. 
b.  In any commercial district, the minimum rear yard abutting a RCO, UR, BA, R, RM or PO district shall be ten (10) feet. 
F.  Distances between Structures. The minimum distance between a dwelling unit and another structure shall be ten (10) feet. 
G.  Building Height. In a CN or CH district, fifty (50) feet maximum; in a CC or CS district, seventy-five (75) feet maximum except as may be provided under the provisions of Chapter 17.68. 
H.  Off-Street Parking and Off-Street Loading. Off-street parking and off-street loading facilities shall be provided as prescribed in Chapter 17.52. 
I.  Signs and Outdoor Advertising Structures. No sign or outdoor advertising structure of any character shall be provided except as prescribed in Chapter 17.56. 
(Ord. 92-11 § 1 (part), 1992: Ord. 408 (part), 1982) 
17.40.070 - C-Site plan and architectural design review. 
    No use shall be erected on any lot or site in any C district until a site plan and architectural plans shall have been submitted to and approved by the city pursuant to the provisions of Chapters 17.72 and 17.80. 
(Ord. 92-11 § 1 (part), 1992: Ord. 408 (part), 1982) 
17.40.080 - C-General provisions and exceptions. 
    All uses shall be subject to the general provisions and exceptions in Chapter 17.60. 
(Ord. 92-11 § 1 (part), 1992: Ord. 408 (part), 1982) 
Chapter 17.44 - I-INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS 

17.44.010 - I-Purposes and application. 
    The I industrial districts are included in the zoning code to achieve the following purposes: 
A.  To reserve appropriately located areas for various types of industrial plants and related activities; 
B.  To protect areas appropriate for industrial use from intrusion by residences and other inharmonious uses; 
C.  To protect residential, commercial and nuisance-free non-hazardous industrial uses from noise, odor, dust, dirt, smoke, vibration, heat, glare, fire, explosion, noxious fumes, radiation, hazardous chemicals and other hazardous and objectionable influences incidental to certain industrial uses; 
D.  To provide opportunities for certain types of industrial plants to concentrate in mutually beneficial relationships to each other; 
E.  To provide adequate space to meet the needs of modern industrial development, including off-street parking and truck loading areas; and 
F.  To provide industrial employment opportunities for residents of the city. 
(Ord. 92-11 § 1 (part), 1992: Ord. 408 (part), 1982) 
17.44.020 - IL-Light industrial district. 
A.  IL-Application. This district is intended primarily for application to those areas of the city which are designated for light industrial use by the general plan. 
B.  IL-Permitted Uses. 
1.  Any use listed as a permitted use in the CS, service commercial district; 
2.  Light industrial and related uses, including: 
a.  Assembly of small electric appliances such as lighting fixtures, irons, fans, toasters and electric toys, refrigerators, washing machines, dryers, dishwashers and similar home appliances. 
b.  Assembly of small electrical equipment such as home motion picture equipment, stereos, video cameras and radio and television receivers, but not including electrical machinery. 
c.  Manufacture of scientific, medical, dental and drafting instruments, orthopedic and medical appliances, cameras and photographic equipment, except film, electronic equipment, musical instruments, precision instruments, optical goods, watches and clocks. 
d.  Manufacture of ceramic products, such as pottery, figurines and small glazed tile. 
e.  Manufacturing, assembling, compounding, packaging and processing of cosmetics, drugs, pharmaceuticals, toilet soap (not including refining or rendering of fats or oils) and toiletries. 
f.  Manufacture and assembly of electrical supplies such as coils, condensers, crystal holders, insulation, lamps, switches and wire and cable assembly, provided no noxious or offensive fumes or odors are produced. 
g.  Manufacture of cutlery, hardware, hand tools and furniture, die and pattern making; metal stamping and extrusion of small products such as costume jewelry, pins and needles, razor blades, bottle caps, buttons and kitchen utensils. 
h.  Manufacturing, assembling, copounding, packaging and processing of articles or merchandise from the following previously prepared materials: bone, canvas, cellophane, cellulose, cloth, cork, feathers, felt, fiber and synthetic fiber, fur, glass, hair, horn, leather, paint (not employing a boiling process), paper, plastics, precious or semi-precious metals or stones, rubber and synthetic rubber, shell, straw, textiles, tobacco and wood. 
i.  Manufacturing, assembling, com-pounding, processing, packaging or treatment of such products as bakery goods, candy, dairy products, food products, including fruits and vegetables, but not including fish and meat products, pickles, sauerkraut, vinegar or yeast, or refining or rendering of fats and oils. 
j.  Blacksmith shops; boat building; electric motor rebuilding, machine shops, paint shops. 
k.  Food lockers and accessory sales; 
l.  Gasoline service stations, including dispensing of diesel and liquid petroleum gas fuels and complete truck service. 
m.  Lumberyards, including planing mills; mattress manufacture; storage yards for commercial vehicles or feed; flour, feed and grain mills; grain elevators; 
n.  Manufacture and maintenance of electric and neon signs, billboards and commercial advertising structures. 
o.  Offices, retail stores and watchman's living quarters incidental to and on the same site with an industrial use. 
p.  Public utility and public service structures and facilities such as communications equipment buildings, electric distribution substations, electric transmission substations, gas regulator stations, public service pumping stations, public utility service yards, corporation yards, railroad rights-of-way and stations, reservoirs and storage tanks. 
q.  Emergency shelters, subject to the following standards and requirements: 
1.  The emergency shelter shall comply with all applicable federal, state and local standards and requirements. 
2.  The emergency shelter shall have satisfied all applicable federal, state and local licensing requirements for any programs conducted at the emergency shelter. 
3.  The maximum number of beds in an emergency shelter shall not exceed fifteen (15) beds. 
4.  The length of stay by an individual at an emergency shelter shall not exceed six (6) months in a consecutive twelve-month period. 
5.  The emergency shelter must have on-site security (approved by the Kingsburg Police Department) at all times. 
6.  Exterior lighting is required for all on-site pedestrian pathways and parking areas. 
7.  The emergency shelter shall provide secure storage areas for the personal property of the occupants. 
8.  The emergency shelter shall provide off-street on-site parking at the rate of one (1) space for each employee/staff member and one (1) space for every six (6) occupants at maximum capacity. 
9.  No emergency shelter shall be located closer than three hundred (300) feet from another emergency shelter. 
10.  A management plan is required for all emergency shelters to address management experience, good neighbor issues, transportation, client supervision, client services, and food services. Such plan shall be submitted to the city planning department for review and approval prior to commencement of operation of the emergency shelter. The management plan shall include a floor plan that demonstrates compliance with the requirements and standards of this chapter. Annually, the operator of each emergency shelter shall submit the management plan to the city planning, department with updated information for review and approval. The city council may establish a fee by resolution to cover the administrative cost of review of the required management plan. 
r.  Incidental and accessory structures and uses located on the same site as a use permitted by administrative approval or conditional use. 
s.  Other uses which have been added to this list according to the procedure in Chapter 17.60. 
C.  IL-Permitted Uses-Administrative Approval. 
1.  Gas and electric transmission lines, in accordance with Chapter 17.64. 
2.  Mobile or modular offices in accordance with the requirements of Chapter 17.56. 
3.  Incidental and accessory structures and uses located on the same site as a use permitted by administrative approval, or conditional use. 
4.  Other uses which have been added to this list according to the procedure in Chapter 17.60. 
D.  IL-Conditional Uses-Commission Approval. 
1.  Any of the uses listed in Section 17.44.030 B., provided that, on the basis of the use permit application and the evidence submitted, the planning commission makes the following findings in addition to the findings prescribed in Chapter 17.68: 
a.  That consideration of all the determinable characteristics of the use which is the subject of the application indicates that the use has the same essential characteristics as the uses listed in Section 17.44.020 B., with respect to methods of operation, type of process, materials, equipment, structures, storage and appearances. 
b.  If the use involves nuisance or hazardous characteristics, that the application include sufficient evidence to indicate that special devices, construction or site design are planned to eliminate the nuisance or hazardous characteristics normally attendant to operation of the use. 
c.  That the use reasonably can be expected to conform with the required conditions prescribed for the I district in Section 17.44.060. 
2.  Public buildings and grounds. 
3.  Expansion or remodeling of an existing non-conforming use of a structure or land, up to fifty (50) percent or less of the value of the structure, or reestablishment of a non-conforming use which has been damaged, except non-conforming signs and outdoor advertising structures, non-conforming uses occupying a structure with an assessed valuation of less than two hundred (200) dollars, and non-conforming fences, walls and hedges. 
4.  Bulk storage and delivery of liquified petroleum gas. 
5.  Outdoor vending stalls for the sale or trade of new and used articles at specified times of the day and week as either a temporary or permanent use of land. 
6.  Adult entertainment enterprises as defined in Chapter 17.86. 
7.  Expansion, remodeling, or additions to a conditional use that are not considered an incidental or accessory use as defined in Chapter 17.96. 
8.  Other uses which are added to this list according to the procedure in article 15. 
(Ord. 92-11 § 1 (part), 1992: Ord. 408 (part), 1982) 
(Ord. No. 2009-05, § 1, 2-18-09; Ord. No. 2015-05, §§ 1-3, 6-3-2015) 
17.44.030 - IH-Heavy industrial district. 
A.  IH-Application. This district is intended for application to those urban areas of the city which are designated for heavy industrial use in the general plan. 
B.  IH-Permitted Uses. 
1.  Any use listed as a permitted use in the IL district, excluding Emergency Shelters and all CS uses. 
2.  Heavy industrial and related uses including: 
    Aircraft and aircraft accessories and parts manufacture; 
    Automobile, truck and trailer accessories and parts manufacture; 
    Bag cleaning; 
    Battery manufacture; 
    Boiler works; 
    Box factories and cooperage; 
    Breweries, distilleries and wineries; 
    Building materials manufacture and assembly including composition wallboard, partitions, panels and prefabricated structures; 
    Business machine manufacture including accounting machines, calculators, card counting equipment and typewriters; 
    Can and metal container manufacture; 
    Candle manufacture, not including rendering; 
    Carpet and rug manufacture; 
    Cement products manufacture provided no hazard of fire or explosion is created, including adhesives, bleaching products, bluing, calcimine, dyestuffs (except aniline dyes), essential oils, soda and soda compounds and vegetable gelatin, glue and size; 
    Concrete and concrete products manufacture; 
    Cotton ginning, cotton wadding, cotton seed processing and linter manufacture; 
    Clay products manufacture including brick, fire brick, tile and pipe; 
    Fire arms manufacture; 
    Food products manufacture including such processing as cooking, dehydrating roasting, refining, pasteurization and extracting involved in the preparation of such products as casein, cereal, chocolate and cocoa products, cider and vinegar, coffee, fruits and vegetables, glucose, milk and dairy products, molasses and syrups, oleo/margarine, pickles, sauerkraut, sugar, vegetable oils and yeast; 
    Glass and glass products manufacture; 
    Graphite and graphite products manufacture; 
    Gravel, rock and cement yards; 
    Ink manufacture; 
    Insecticides, fungicides, disinfectants and similar agricultural, industrial and household chemical compounds manufacture; 
    Jute, hemp, sisal and oakum products manufacture; 
    Leather and fur finishing and dyeing, not including tanning and curing; 
    Machinery manufacture including heavy electrical, agricultural, construction and mining machinery and light machinery and equipment such as air conditioning, commercial motion picture equipment, dishwashers, dryers, furnaces; heaters, refrigerators, stoves and washing machines; 
    Machine tools manufacture including metal lathes, metal presses, metal stamping machines and woodworking machines; 
    Meat products processing and packaging, not including slaughtering and glue and size manufacture; 
    Metal alloys and foil manufacture including solder, pewter, brass, bronze and tin, lead and gold foil; 
    Metal casting and foundries not including magnesium foundries; 
    Motor and generator manufacture and testing; 
    Paper products manufacture including shipping containers, pump goods, carbon paper and coated paper stencils; 
    Paraffin products manufacture; 
    Plastic manufacture; 
    Porcelain products manufacture including bathroom and kitchen fixtures and equipment; 
    Precious metals reduction, smelting and refining; 
    Rubber products manufacture including tires and tubes; 
    Sand blasting; 
    Shoe polish manufacture; 
    Solid waste recycling; 
    Starch and dextrine manufacturing; 
    Steel products manufacture and assembly including steel cabinets and lockers, doors, fencing and furniture; 
    Steam electric generating stations; 
    Stone products manufacture and stone processing including abrasives, asbestos, stone screening and sand and lime products; 
    Storage, sorting, collecting or baling or iron, junk, paper, rags, or scrap; structural steel products manufacture including bars, girders, rail and wire rope; 
    Textile bleaching; 
    Wire and cable manufacturing; 
    Wood and lumber processing and woodworking including planing mills and saw mills, excelsior, plywood, veneer and wood-preserving treatment. 
3.  Incidental and accessory structures and uses located on the same site as a permitted use. 
4.  Other uses which are added to this list according to the procedure in Chapter 17.60. 
C.  IH-Permitted Uses-Administrative Approval. 
1.  Gas and electric transmission lines. 
2.  Mobile and modular offices. 
3.  Incidental and accessory structures and uses located on the same site as a use permitted by administrative approval, or conditional use. 
4.  Other uses which are added to this list according to the procedure in Chapter 17.60. 
D.  IH-Conditional Uses-Commission Approval. 
1.  The following uses and other uses may be approved according to the procedures in Chapter 17.68; provided, however, that for uses which involve nuisances, danger of fire or explosion or other hazards to health and safety, the planning commission shall make a specific finding that the use can be expected to conform with each of the required conditions prescribed for an IH district in Section 17.44.010. The commission may require submission of reports by technical consultants or other evidence in addition to the data prescribed in Chapter 17.68: 
    Asphalt and asphalt products manufacture; 
    Cement, lime, gypsum and plaster of paris manufacture; 
    Charcoal, lampblack and fuel briquettes manufacture; 
    Chemical products manufacture including acetylene, aniline dyes, ammonia, carbide, caustic soda, cellulose, chlorine, cleaning and polishing preparations, creosote, exterminating agents, hydrogen and oxygen, industrial alcohol, nitrating of cotton or other materials, nitrates of an explosive nature, potash, pyroxlin, rayon yarn, and carbolic, hydrochloric, picric and sulphuric acids; 
    Coal, coke and tar products manufacture; 
    Drop forges; 
    Dumps and slag piles; 
    Electroplating shops; 
    Explosives manufacture and storage; 
    Fertilizer manufacture; 
    Film manufacture; 
    Fireworks manufacture and storage; 
    Fish products processing and packaging; 
    Garbage and refuse dumps; 
    Gas and oil wells; 
    Gas manufacture or storage; 
    Gelatin, glue and size manufacture from animal or fish refuse; 
    Grain rolling and storage; 
    Incineration or reduction of garbage, offal and dead animals; 
    Junk yards; 
    Lard manufacture; 
    Linoleum and oil cloth manufacture; 
    Liquified petroleum gas bulk storage and delivery; 
    Magnesium foundries; 
    Manure, peat and topsoil processing and storage; 
    Metal and metal ores reduction, refining, smelting and alloying; 
    Motor vehicles wrecking yards; 
    Paint manufacture including enamel, lacquer, shellac, turpentine and varnish; 
    Paper mills; 
    Petroleum and petroleum products refining and storage; 
    Rifle and pistol ranges; 
    Rubber manufacture or processing including natural or synthetic rubber and gutta-percha; 
    Soap manufacture including fat rendering; 
    Steam plants; 
    Stock yards, stock feeding yards and slaughter houses; 
    Stone quarries, gravel pits, mines and stone mills; 
    Storage of inflammable liquids; 
    Storage of used building materials; 
    Tallow manufacture; 
    Tanneries and curing and storage of rawhides; 
    Wood and bones distillation; 
    Wood pulp and fiber reduction and processing. 
2.  Public buildings and grounds. 
3.  Expansion or remodeling of an existing non-conforming use of a structure or land, up to fifty (50) percent or less of the value of the structure, or reestablishment of a non-conforming use which has been damaged, except non-conforming signs and outdoor advertising structures, non-conforming uses occupying a structure with an assessed valuation of less than two hundred (200) dollars, and non-conforming fences, walls and hedges. 
4.  Expansion, remodeling, or additions to a conditional use that are not considered an incidental or accessory use as defined in Chapter 17.96. 
5.  Other uses which are added to this list according to the procedure in Chapter 17.60. 
(Ord. 92-11 § 1 (part), 1992: Ord. 408 (part), 1982) 
(Ord. No. 2015-05, § 4, 6-3-2015) 
17.44.040 - I-Required conditions. 
A.  In the IL and IH districts, all open and unlandscaped portions of any lot shall be maintained in good condition free from weeds, dust, trash and debris. 
B.  No use shall be permitted and no process, equipment or materials shall be employed which is found by the commission to be injurious to persons residing or working in the vicinity by reason of odor, fumes, dust, smoke, cinders, dirt refuse, noise, vibrations, illumination, glare or heavy truck traffic or to involve any hazard of fire, explosion or radio activity or to emit electrical disturbances which adversely affect commercial or electronic equipment outside the boundaries of the site. 
C.  No solid or liquid wastes shall be discharged into a natural watercourse, nor into a public or private sewage disposal system except in compliance with applicable regulations of the Central Valley Regional Water Quality Control Board. 
D.  In an IL or IH district, no use shall emit particulate matter or other air pollutants in excess of the applicable air pollution emission standards of the Fresno County Air Pollution Control District, the State of California or of the federal government. 
E.  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection D. of this section, no industrial use shall be permitted to utilize coal in any form as a source of fuel for the conduct of any industrial operations within the city. 
(Ord. 92-11 § 1 (part), 1992: Ord. 408 (part), 1982) 
17.44.050 - I-Property development standards. 
A.  Screening and Landscaping; Fences, Walls and Hedges. 
1.  Where a site adjoins a UR, RCO, RA, R, RM, PO, or CC district, a solid wall or screen fence seven feet in height or such other height or type of screening device as may be required by the planning commission, shall be located on the property line common to such districts, except in a required front yard. 
2.  A use not conducted entirely within a completely enclosed structure, on site across a street or an alley from a UR, RA, R, RM, or CC district, shall be screened by an ornamental solid wall or screen fence, not less than seven feet in height, if found by the planning commission to be unsightly. All materials to be screened shall not be stored above the height of the wall or screen fence. 
3.  In an IL district, open storage of materials and equipment shall be permitted only within an area surrounded and screened by an ornamental solid wall or fence or compact evergreen hedge (with solid gates where necessary), not less than seven feet in height. 
4.  No fence, wall or hedge exceeding four feet in height, with the top one foot being fifty percent (50%) or more open, shall be located or maintained within the area of a corner lot on the street side of a diagonal line connecting points located thirty (30) feet along the property lines as measured from the intersection of the property lines at the street corner. 
5.  No fence or wall shall exceed seven feet in height if located in a required side or rear yard or three feet in height if located in a required front yard, except that a chainlink fence greater than three feet in height may be located in any portion of a required front yard. 
6.  Street trees, frontage landscaping and off-street parking area landscaping, with automatic irrigation, shall be provided for all industrial sites. 
B.  Site Area: The minimum site area shall be one-half acre in the IH district. No minimum site area shall be required in the IL district. 
C.  Frontage, Width and Depth of Site: No limitations. 
D.  Coverage: No limitations. 
E.  Yard Requirements: 
1.  Front Yard: The minimum front yard for both the IL and IH districts shall be ten (10) feet. 
2.  Rear and Side Yards: Except as provided below, no rear or side yards shall be required: 
a.  The minimum rear yard abutting a UR, RCO, RA, R, RM, PO, or C district shall be fifteen (15) feet. 
b.  On a reversed corner lot adjoining a key lot in a UR, RCO, RA, R, RM, PO or C district, the minimum side yard adjoining the street shall not be less than one-half the required front yard on the key lot. 
c.  The minimum side yard abutting a UR, RCO, RA, R, RM, PO or C district shall be fifteen (15) feet. 
F.  Distances between Structures: No limitations. 
G.  Building Height: No greater than seventy-five (75) feet, except that a greater height may be approved for tanks, towers, silos and similar facilities under the provisions of Chapter 17.68; and except that a height of no greater than two hundred (200) feet shall be permitted for a site in the IH (Heavy Industrial) zone district at least one mile away from the central business district. 
H.  Off-Street Parking and Off-Street Loading: Off-street parking and off-street loading facilities shall be provided as prescribed in Chapter 17.52. 
I.  Signs and Outdoor Advertising Structures: No signs or outdoor advertising structure of any character shall be permitted except as provided in Chapter 17.56. 
(Ord. 2007-04 § 1, 2007; Ord. 92-11 § 1 (part), 1992: Ord. 408 (part), 1982) 
17.44.060 - I-Site plan and architectural design review. 
    No use shall be erected on any lot or site in an I district until the site plan and architectural plans shall have been approved in accordance with the provisions of Chapters 17.72 and 17.80. 
(Ord. 92-11 § 1 (part), 1992: Ord. 408 (part), 1982) 
17.44.070 - I-General provisions and exceptions. 
    All uses shall be subject to the general provisions and exceptions in Chapter 17.60. 
(Ord. 92-11 § 1 (part), 1992: Ord. 408 (part), 1982) 
17.44.080 - IP-Planned industrial districts. 
A.  IP-Purposes and Application. The IP planned industrial district is intended for application to those industrial areas which are planned for development for the mutual protection of a community of industries in accordance with a development program approved by the city. Such a program involves the combining of certain uses and a set of development regulations which are more restrictive than those otherwise provided in the IL and IH districts. 
B.  IP-Regulations. In order to assure the mutual protection and compatibility of uses to be located, within a IP district, the owners of all the land within the area proposed to be classified IP shall submit the following to the city: 
1.  A more restrictive list of those uses set forth in Sections 17.44.020 B and C., and Sections 17.44.030 B and C of this chapter which uses are desired by the owners to be listed as permitted uses under this section; a statement of more restrictive regulations relating to each of the subjects of Sections 17.44.050 and 17.44.070, and Sections 17.44.040 and 17.44.050 of this chapter than are now provided by these sections and which are desired by the owners to become additional regulations under this section. 
    Upon written approval of the planning commission, the list of permitted uses and statements of more restrictive regulations requested for a particular parcel of land shall become the regulations of this section with respect to such parcel of land by reference with the same force and effect as if the regulations were specifically set out and described under this section; provided, however, such statements of more restrictive regulations shall apply in addition to those prescribed within Section 17.44.050 of this chapter. 
2.  All uses listed as requiring conditional use permits in the IL or IH districts shall be considered as conditional uses under this section. 
3.  The minimum acreage required for the application of the IP district shall be five acres. 
C.  IP-Required Conditions. Before the city council may give written approval pursuant to this section and classify property as being within the IP district, the owners shall record, in the office of the Fresno County Recorder, deed restrictions running with the land affected corresponding to the list of permitted uses and statements of more restrictive regulations approved pursuant to the provisions of subsection B. of this section. 
(Ord. 92-11 § 1 (part), 1992: Ord. 408 (part), 1982) 
Chapter 17.48 - COMBINING AND OVERLAY DISTRICTS* 

17.48.010 - PUD-Planned unit development combining district. 
A.  PUD-Purposes and Application. The PUD-planned unit development combining district is intended for application to those residential, professional office, commercial and industrial base zoning districts which are designated by the general plan and/or city council as areas to assure that property will be developed in a manner superior to that which otherwise would be achieved through regulations of the base zoning district involved. The PUD combining district is also intended as an optional approach to achieving the purposes of Chapter 17.76, at the discretion of the city rather than the landowner. 
B.  PUD-Applicable Regulations and Procedures. The development of property within a PUD combining district shall be subject to all of the regulations and procedures of Chapter 17.76. 
(Ord. 92-11 § 1 (part), 1992: Ord. 408 (part), 1982) 
17.48.020 - MXU-Mixed use combining district. 
A.  Purposes and Application. The MXU-Mixed use combining district is intended for application to two types of property: 
1.  Within commercial base zoning districts, on any site of such a size and configuration that a mixture of businesses is determined to appropriate, such as a commercial subdivision or business park. 
2.  Those residential, commercial and industrial base zoning districts which lay within the boundaries of the city's redevelopment project area(s), and which are designated as areas characterized by a mixture of uses, blighted structures and sites, and/or inadequate street and alley improvements. The MXU combining district is to be applied to those redevelopment project areas selected by the city council as meeting the purposes of this section. 
    Use arrangements within the areas designated MXU are to be made physically, functionally and aesthetically compatible through site plan review, architectural design review, PUD (planned unit development) procedures, or a combination thereof, as determined by the city council. 
B.  Applicable Regulations and Procedures. The MXU combining district provides the flexibility needed to achieve the following goals: 
1.  To facilitate full development of large pieces of commercial property, different portions of which may have varying degrees of suitability and desirability for development for particular types of businesses. 
2.  To improve land use conditions within redevelopment project areas under conditions of uncertainty as to the types of uses that may be proposed or that may be economically feasible for specific properties over time. 
    Under mixed use, all categories of land use shown on the general plan diagram are eligible for consideration. Because the best potential use for some properties may be more clear-cut than for others, the base land use designations of the general plan provide guidance for the selection of those base zoning districts to be applied. However, such guidance does not abrogate the potential and flexibility offered for mixed use. 
    An application for a building permit, site plan review or PUD will initiate the process for determining an appropriate development proposal under mixed use regulations. The planning commission shall make a determination as to which procedures shall be followed under the provisions of Chapters 17.68, 17.72 and 17.76 of this title. 
(Ord. 2005-04 § 1, 2005: Ord. 92-11 § 1 (part), 1992: Ord. 408 (part), 1982) 
17.48.030 - PF-Public facilities combining district. 
A.  PF-Purposes and Application. The PF-public facilities combining zoning district is intended for application to all base zoning districts which are designated by the general plan for the accommodation of public facilities. For purposes of this section, public facilities shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
1.  Elementary, junior high and high schools. 
2.  Corporation yard. 
3.  City Hall. 
4.  Fire station. 
5.  Police station. 
6.  Justice court. 
7.  Library. 
8.  Senior center. 
9.  Youth center. 
10.  Off-street parking areas. 
11.  Neighborhood parks. 
12.  Community parks. 
13.  Open space corridors. 
14.  Drainage basins. 
    The PF-public facilities combining district is intended to preserve the opportunity for the acquisition of lands that eventually will be needed for public purposes at locations where they will be needed. 
B.  Applicable Regulations and Procedures. No site or parcel of land designated for future public use by the general plan, or designated by the zone plan as a PF combining district, shall be developed for any other use until the public agency having jurisdiction has the opportunity to purchase or otherwise acquire the land for the intended public use. 
    In order to assure reasonable use of lands until needed for public purposes, interim private use is allowed. Interim use may include any existing use of the property, or the remodeling or conversion of an existing use in such manner that it does not preclude the ability to physically remove and relocate existing structures to other sites. Uses to be remodeled or converted in use shall be subject to the provisions of Chapter 17.60 of this ordinance requiring administrative approval by the city. 
    Interim use of vacant parcels of land designated for future public use by the general plan or zone plan shall be permitted an interim use as may be approved by the planning commission or city council under the provisions of Chapter 17.68 of this title. Interim uses proposed shall be compatible with the purposes of the applicable base zoning district, with any structures involved to be capable of physical removal and relocation to another site. 
(Ord. 92-11 § 1 (part), 1992: Ord. 408 (part), 1982) 
17.48.040 - HB-Highway beautification overlay district. 
A.  Statement of Intent. The HB-Highway beautification overlay district is intended to promote attractive development along highways of regional and interregional importance in Kingsburg and Fresno County. In the past, development along important highways, such as State Route 99, has often treated these important transportation routes like back alleys, fronting the highway with unembellished rears of buildings, junk storage, utility equipment, and trash receptacles. This has given the traveling public, particularly out-of-town visitors, a negative image of Kingsburg and Fresno County, and has also damaged Fresno County's image of itself. The regulations of this district are designed to ensure that our important highways present Fresno County's best side, not its worst, to the traveling public. These regulations seek to encourage continued growth in commerce while contributing to the aesthetic enhancement of the district, balancing the economic health of our community with achievements in a visually improved corridor. 
B.  Area of Applicability. The HB-highway beautification overlay district shall apply to the following areas: 
1.  Highway 99: All property within one thousand (1,000) feet of the outside boundaries of the state right-of-way. 
C.  Definitions. For the purposes of the section, the following definitions shall apply. Due to the unique nature of this overlay, the following definitions may be in conflict with other sections of the zoning ordinance and shall only apply to the highway beautification ordinance. 
    "At-Grade" means a section of highway, the grade of which is within five feet of the grade of the adjacent properties. 
    "Billboard" means a freestanding sign or wall sign advertising off-site services, ideas, and products. 
    "Co-location" means locating more than one antenna on the same antenna mount. 
    "Communication tower" means a structure higher than its diameter used to support antennas for wireless communications. 
    "Depressed" means a section of highway, the grade of which is more than five feet below of the grade of the adjacent properties. 
    "Elevated" means a section of highway, the grade of which is more than five feet above the grade of the adjacent properties. 
    "Freestanding sign" means any sign supported by structures or supports that are placed on, or anchored in, the ground and that are independent from any building or other structure, or sign taller than eight feet in height with a height limit of thirty-five (35) feet. Includes sign types that are independent of a building. 
    "Gateway sign" means a freestanding sign in which the bottom of the sign is in contact with the ground and marks a perceptual designated entry into city or county borders. 
    "Guyed tower" means a communication tower that is supported, in whole or in part, by guy wires and ground anchors. 
    "Lattice tower" means a self-supporting communications tower consisting of an open work structure made of crossing bars or rods forming a network used for support. 
    "Marquee sign" means any sign supported by structure or supports that are placed on, or anchored in, the ground and that are independent from any building or other structure, or sign taller than eight feet in height with a height limit of one hundred (100) feet. A marquee sign will advertise multiple destinations within a set location and eliminate visual clutter by combining what would otherwise be multiple freestanding signs. 
    "Monopole" means a self-supporting communication tower consisting of a single pole. 
    "Monument signs" means a freestanding sign in which the entire bottom of the sign is in contact with the ground, and which does not exceed eight feet in height. 
    "Wall sign" means any sign attached parallel to, but within six inches of a wall; painted on the surface of a wall; or erected and confined within the limits of an outside wall of any building or structure, which is supported by such wall or building, and which displays only one sign surface. 
D.  Uses Permitted. Uses permitted shall be those uses permitted in the underlying zone district. 
E.  Uses Permitted Subject to Conditional Use Permit. Uses permitted subject to a conditional use permit shall be as follows: 
1.  Those uses permitted subject to a conditional use permit in the underlying zone; 
2.  Communications towers, unless expressly prohibited by the underlying district. 
F.  Uses Expressly Prohibited. Uses prohibited shall be those uses prohibited in the underlying zone district. 
G.  Property Development Standards. The following additional property development standards shall apply to all land and structures in the HB district. 
1.  Lot Area. Each lot shall have the minimum area required by the underlying district. 
2.  Lot Dimensions. Each lot shall have the minimum dimensions required by the underlying district. 
3.  Population Density. Population shall be as required by the underlying district. 
4.  Building Height. Building heights shall be as required by the underlying district. 
5.  Yards. Yards shall be provided as follows: 
a.  General Provisions. 
i.  All yard requirements shall be for the entire length of the specified lot line. 
ii.  Yard requirements shall apply whether property is directly adjacent to the highway, or is adjacent to a frontage road that runs along the highway. 
b.  For agricultural uses, yards shall be as required by the underlying district. 
c.  For single-family residential uses, yard requirements shall be as follows: 
i.  Along residential properties adjacent to at-grade highway sections, a landscaped buffer no less than twenty (20) feet deep shall be provided. The setback line shall constitute the lot line of the adjacent subdivision and building setback requirements of the underlying zone district shall apply. 
(A)  In conventional subdivisions this landscaped buffer shall be deeded to the city and an assessment district created to fund its maintenance. In subdivisions in which there is a homeowners association responsible for the maintenance of common facilities, the landscaped buffer may be owned and maintained by the homeowners association. 
(B)  The landscaped buffer shall consist of ground cover and shrubs. Trees shall be provided within the landscape buffer at a rate of one per twenty-five (25) feet of highway frontage, and may be spaced evenly or planted in groups or clusters. 
(C)  No buildings, parking areas, storage areas, trash or recycling areas, utility equipment, freestanding signs, communications towers, or other structures may be established within the landscaped buffer. 
(D)  All city standards for noise reduction shall apply. 
ii.  Along lot lines that are adjacent to elevated highway sections, trees shall be provided at a rate of one tree per twenty-five (25) feet of highway frontage. The trees may be spaced evenly or planted in groups or clusters, and shall be of a species which will grow tall enough to be visible from the highway. All city standards for noise reduction shall apply. 
iii.  Along lot lines that are adjacent to depressed highway sections trees shall be provided at a rate of one tree per twenty-five (25) feet of highway frontage. The trees may be spaced evenly or planted in groups or clusters and shall be placed close enough to the right-of-way line that they will be visible from the highway. No buildings; parking areas; trash or recycling areas; utility equipment; communications towers; or other structures may be established within twenty (20) feet of the highway right-of-way. All city standards for noise reduction shall apply. 
d.  Yard requirements shall be as follows for automobile wrecking yards; damaged automobile storage yards; dumps; transit storage facilities; electric distribution substations; electric transmission substations; garbage, offal, dead animal, or refuse incineration, reduction, or dumping; generating plants; junkyards; pallet yards; quarries; recycling plants; refuse dumping; surface mining operations; waste-to-energy plants; or similar uses: 
i.  Along lot lines that are adjacent to at-grade highway sections, or allow visibility into the site from at-grade highway sections, a landscaped buffer no less than twenty (20) feet deep shall be provided. 
(A)  The landscaped buffer shall contain, as a minimum, a continuous shrub hedge, interplanted twenty (20) feet on center with trees. The plant species used should coordinate with adjacent highway landscaping. Shrub variety used shall be fast growing, and attain an ultimate height of no less than eight feet. Shrubs and trees shall not be pruned as to allow visibility into the site from the highway. 
(B)  A solid masonry wall shall be located at the rear of the landscaped buffer. The wall shall be not less than six feet in height and shall be located twenty (20) feet from and parallel to the buffered property line or right-of-way line. 
(C)  No buildings, parking areas, trash or recycling areas, utility equipment, freestanding signs, communications towers or other structures may be established within twenty (20) feet of the highway right-of-way, with the exception of one monument sign as set forth in subsection (G)(10). 

    Figure 1: Required landscaped buffer for wrecking yard next to at-grade highway section. 
ii.  Along lot lines that are adjacent to elevated highway sections, or allow visibility into the site from elevated highway sections, a landscaped buffer of no less than twenty (20) feet deep shall be provided. 
(A)  The landscaped buffer shall consist of trees spaced at thirty (30) feet on center and staggered or triangularly spaced within the buffer to minimize visibility into the site from the highway. Species used shall be fast-growing, dense, tall evergreen trees. 
(B)  No buildings, communications towers or other structures may be established within twenty (20) feet of the highway right-of-way, with the exception of one monument sign as set forth in subsection (G)(10). 

    Figure 2: Required landscaped buffer for wrecking yard next to above grade highway section. 
iii.  Along lot lines which are adjacent to depressed highway sections, or allow visibility into the site from depressed highway sections, a landscaped buffer no less than ten (10) feet deep shall be provided. 
(A)  The landscaped buffer shall contain a continuous shrub hedge adjacent to the right-of-way line, interplanted twenty (20) feet on center with trees. The plant species used should coordinate with adjacent highway landscaping. Shrub variety used shall be fast-growing, and attain an ultimate height of no less than eight feet. Shrubs and trees shall not be pruned as to allow visibility into the site from the highway. 
(B)  No buildings, parking areas, trash or recycling areas, utility equipment, communications towers or other structures may be established within ten (10) feet of the highway right-of-way, with the exception of one monument sign as set forth in subsection (G)(10). 
iv.  Along lot lines which are not adjacent to the highway right-of-way and do not allow visibility into the site yards shall be provided as required by the underlying district. 

    Figure 3: Required landscaped buffer for wrecking yard next to below grade highway section. 
e.  For commercial uses, professional office uses, manufacturing uses, multiple-family residential uses, and all other uses not included in subsections (G)(5)(a) through (c) of this section, yard requirements shall be as follows: 
i.  Along lot lines that are adjacent to at-grade highway sections a landscaped buffer no less than twenty (20) feet deep shall be provided. 
(A)  The landscaped buffer shall consist of lawn, ground cover, or shrubs. Trees shall be provided within the landscape buffer at a rate of one per twenty-five (25) feet of highway frontage, and may be spaced evenly or planted in groups or clusters. 
(B)  No buildings, parking areas, storage areas, trash or recycling areas, utility equipment, freestanding signs, communications towers or other structures may be established within the landscaped buffer, with the exception of one monument sign as set forth in subsection (G)(10). 

    Figure 4: Illustration of possible required landscaped buffers for land uses specified in subsection (G)(5)(d) (wrecking yards, etc.). Unlike other land uses, these uses must provide landscaped buffers along not only the highway frontage, but along all lot lines that allow visibility into the site from the highway. 

    Figure 5: Required landscaped buffer for commercial use next to at-grade highway section. 
ii.  Along lot lines that are adjacent to elevated highway sections a landscaped buffer no less than twenty (20) feet deep shall be provided. 
(A)  Trees shall be provided at a rate of one tree per twenty-five (25) feet of highway frontage. The trees may be spaced evenly or planted in groups or clusters, and shall be of a species which will grow tall enough to be visible from the highway. 
(B)  No freestanding signs or communications towers may be established within twenty (20) feet of the highway right-of-way. 

    Figure 6: Required landscaped buffer for commercial use next to elevated highway section. 
iii.  Along lot lines that are adjacent to depressed highway sections a landscaped buffer no less than twenty (20) feet deep shall be provided. 
(A)  Trees shall be provided at a rate of one tree per twenty-five (25) feet of highway frontage. The trees may be spaced evenly or planted in groups or clusters and shall be placed close enough to the right-of-way line that they will be visible from the highway. 
(B)  No buildings, parking areas, trash or recycling areas, utility equipment, freestanding signs, communications towers or other structures may be established within twenty (20) feet of the highway right-of-way, with the exception of one monument sign as set forth in subsection (G)(10). 

    Figure 7: Required landscaped buffer for commercial use next to depressed highway section. 
Highway Beautification Overlay Yard Requirements* 
Use Type Adjacent Highway Type At-Grade Elevated Depressed Agricultural Uses (See subsection (G)(5)(b) details) As required by underlying district. As required by underlying district. As required by underlying district. Single-Family Residential (See subsection (G)(5)(c) for details) 20' landscaped setback consisting or lawn, ground cover, or shrubs. 1 tree shall be planted for every 25 feet of highway frontage. 1 tree shall be planted for every 25 feet of highway frontage. 1 tree shall be planted for every 25 feet of highway frontage. Wrecking Yards, Pallet Yards, Recycling Facilities, Used Equipment Yards, or Similar Uses (See subsection (G)(5)(d) for details) 20' deep landscaped setback with a continuous shrub hedge, interplanted 30' on center with trees. 6' masonry wall must be provided behind landscaped setback. 20' deep landscaped setback interplanted with large, dense evergreen trees 30' on center. 10' deep landscaped setback with a continuous shrub hedge and a 6' masonry wall. Commercial, Industrial, Multiple-Family, etc. (See subsection (G)(5)(e) for details) 20' landscaped setback consisting or lawn, ground cover, or shrubs. 1 tree shall be planted for every 25 feet of highway frontage, but the trees may be grouped or clustered to allow visibility into the site. 1 tree shall be planted for every 25 feet of highway frontage, but the trees may be grouped or clustered to allow visibility into the site. 1 tree shall be planted for every 25 feet of highway frontage, but the trees may be grouped or clustered to allow visibility into the site.  
* For illustrative purposes only. Refer to text for complete requirements. 
iv.  Yards for areas of the lot other than those specifically addressed in this overlay district shall be as required by the underlying district. 
6.  Space Between Buildings. Space between buildings shall be as required by the underlying district. 
7.  Lot Coverage. Lot coverage shall be as required by the underlying district. 
8.  Fences, Hedges, and Walls. Fences, hedges, and walls shall be provided as required by the underlying district, with exceptions noted above. 
9.  Off-Street Parking. Off-street parking shall be provided as required by the underlying district. 
10.  Outdoor Advertising. 
a.  Freestanding Signs. 
i.  No freestanding sign shall be erected on lots in which the underlying district prohibits freestanding signs. 
ii.  On lots in which the underlying district permits freestanding signs, the number of freestanding signs on any lot shall be limited to two. One shall be permitted facing the highway, and one shall be permitted facing the street that the lot fronts. On lots that are not adjacent to the highway, only one freestanding sign shall be permitted. 
iii.  No freestanding sign may be located in the required yard area described in subsection (G)(5). Only monument signs shall be permitted in the required yard area. 
iv.  Sign height shall be as follows: 
(A)  The maximum permitted height of freestanding signs shall be dependant on the distance that the freestanding sign is set back from the highway and shall be calculated using the following formula: one foot of sign height shall be permitted for every one foot that the sign is set back from the highway, to a maximum of thirty-five (35) feet in height. 
(B)  The maximum permitted height of a marquee sign shall be one hundred (100) feet in height. The required setback for marquee signs shall be at the discretion of each individual city/county. 
v.  The maximum permitted area for monument signs in the required yard area shall be sixty (60) square feet. 
vi.  The maximum permitted area for freestanding signs shall be as follows: 
(A)  The maximum permitted area of freestanding signs shall be dependant on the distance that the sign is set back from the highway and shall be calculated using the following formula: three square feet of sign area shall be permitted for every one foot that the sign is set back from the highway, to a maximum of two hundred (200) square feet in area. 
(B)  The maximum permitted area of a marquee sign shall be at the discretion of each individual city/county. 
b.  Wall Signs. 
i.  No wall sign shall be erected on lots in which the underlying district prohibits wall signs. 
ii.  Wall signs shall consist of no more than ten percent (10%) of the wall area. 
c.  Sign types not addressed in this section shall be as regulated by the underlying district. 
d.  Sign characteristics not addressed in this section shall be as regulated by the underlying district. 
e.  Non-conforming Signs and Advertising Structures. 
i.  Signs which become non-conforming on or after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section but which lawfully existed and were maintained prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section shall be removed or made to conform within ten (10) years after the effective date of the ordinance. During the interim ten (10) year period, said non-conforming signs shall be kept in good repair and visual appearance. 
ii.  Any sign determined to be of historical significance, and identified as such in any community or specific plan, shall be exempt from the removal and conformance requirements of this section. 
iii.  A non-conforming sign may be required to be removed prior to the ten (10) year amortization period if it meets any of the following criteria: 
(A)  The sign was erected without first complying with all ordinances and regulations in effect at the time of its construction and installation or use. 
(B)  The sign was lawfully erected but its use has ceased, or its owner has abandoned it, for a period of not less than ninety (90) days. 
(C)  The sign has been more than fifty percent (50%) destroyed, repair of the sign would require more than copy replacement, and the damage cannot be repaired within thirty (30) days of the date of its occurrence. 
(D)  The sign owner remodels the sign, beyond a change of copy, without first complying with all ordinances and regulations in effect at the time of its remodeling. 
(E)  The property owner expands or enlarges the building or land use upon which a lawfully erected, non-conforming sign is located and the sign is displaced by the construction, enlargement, or remodeling. 
(F)  The sign is or may become a danger to the public or is unsafe. 
(G)  The sign constitutes a traffic hazard that was not created by relocation of streets or highways or by acts of the governing body. 
iv.  Non-conforming, on-premises signs that were installed without first obtaining required approvals and permits shall be removed or made to comply within six months of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section. 
v.  Advertising structures that become non-conforming on or after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section are subject to the following provisions: 
(A)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, only customary maintenance or use of the structure shall be permitted. 
(B)  No addition, structural alteration, modification to, or enlargement, repair, reconstruction, change in use or replacement of, the structure will be permitted, except: 
(1)  Mere customary maintenance or use; or 
(2)  Such alterations or changes that will render the structure conforming in every respect with this code. 
(C)  Maintenance, repair, structural alteration, modification, change in use or construction to the structure in any twelve (12) month period which exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the fair market value of the structure immediately prior to such twelve (12) month period, or increases the basis of such structure to its owner by one hundred percent (100%) or more than it was immediately prior to such twelve (12) month period, shall be considered as reconstruction or replacement, or as exceeding customary maintenance or use. Advertising structures requiring this level of maintenance or repair shall be removed or made to conform in every respect with this municipal code. 
(D)  Any non-conforming advertising structure that is permitted to remain pursuant to this section shall be maintained in good repair and visual appearance. 
11.  Architectural Standards. Any building wall visible from the highway shall be detailed and treated equally in terms of appearance to the front of the building. 
12.  Communications Towers. 
a.  Communications towers shall be permitted subject to a conditional use permit in the HB district unless the underlying district expressly prohibits communications towers. 
b.  Each application for a communications tower shall be accompanied by the following: 
i.  A signed statement from the applicant indicating their intention to share space on the tower with other providers. 
ii.  A copy of the lease between the applicant and the landowner. The lease shall contain the following provisions: 
(A)  The landowner and the applicant shall have the ability to enter into leases with other carriers for co-location. 
(B)  The landowner shall be responsible for the removal of the communications tower or facility in the event the lessee fails to remove it upon abandonment. 
c.  Communications towers must be of a monopole design. Lattice tower and guyed tower communications towers shall not be permitted. 
d.  Communications towers may not be located closer than twenty (20) feet to the highway. 
e.  The maximum permitted height of communications towers shall be dependant on the distance than the communications tower is set back from the highway and shall be calculated using the following formula: one foot of height shall be permitted for every one foot that the tower is set back from the highway, to a maximum of one hundred fifty (150) feet in height. A lightning rod, not to exceed ten (10) feet, shall not be included within the height limitations. 
f.  All new communications towers shall be designed to accommodate no less than two additional providers. 
g.  All communications towers shall maintain a galvanized finish, unless camouflaged in some other manner. Examples include disguising the tower as a tree or hiding the equipment in a church steeple. 
h.  All communications towers shall be separated by not less than one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet. Communications equipment mounted to existing towers or structures such as light poles, tall buildings, water towers, grain silos, or church steeples shall not be subject to this requirement. 
i.  Mobile or immobile equipment not used in direct support of a communications tower facility shall not be stored or parked on the site of the communications tower unless repairs to the tower are being made. 
j.  Accessory uses shall only include such buildings and facilities necessary for transmission functions and satellite ground stations associated with them, but shall not include broadcast studios, offices, vehicle storage areas, or other similar uses not necessary for the transmission function. All accessory buildings shall be constructed of building materials consistent with the primary use of the site and shall be subject to site plan or final development plan approval. Where there is no primary use other than the tower, the building materials for the accessory building shall be subject to the review and approval of the governing body. 
k.  Communications towers shall only be illuminated as required by the Federal Communications Commission and/or the Federal Aviation Administration. Security lighting around the base of the communications tower may be provided if the lighting is shielded so that no light is directed towards adjacent properties or right-of-way. 
l.  The base of the tower and all related equipment shall be screened from view with a solid masonry wall a minimum of six feet in height. A landscaped buffer of no less than five feet shall be provided outside of the screening wall. 
m.  Any antenna or communications tower that is not operated for a continuous period of twelve (12) months shall be considered abandoned, and the owner of such antenna or tower shall remove the same within ninety (90) days of a receipt of notice from the governing body notifying the owner of such abandonment. If such antenna or tower is not removed within said ninety (90) days, the governing body may remove such antenna at the owner's expense. If there are two or more users of a single tower, then this provision shall not become effective until all users cease using the tower. 
13.  Utility and Mechanical Equipment. Utility and mechanical equipment such as heating units, air conditioners, antennas, satellite dishes, HVAC units, or similar devices, shall be integrated into the design of the building or situated on the site so that they are not visible from the highway. When this is not possible, the equipment shall be screened from view of the highway by a masonry wall. 
14.  Trash and Recycling Areas. Trash and recycling areas shall be situated on the site so that they are not visible from the highway. When this is not possible, the trash and recycling areas shall be screened from view of the highway by a masonry wall. 
15.  Loading Areas. Loading areas shall be situated on the site so that they are not visible from the highway. When this is not possible, the loading areas shall be screened from view from the highway by a masonry wall. 
(Ord. 2006-04 § 1, 2006) 
Chapter 17.50 - RIGHT TO FARM* 

17.50.010 - Findings and policy. 
    It is the declared policy of this city to preserve, protect, and encourage the use of viable agricultural lands for the production of food and other agricultural products. When non-agricultural land uses extend into agricultural areas nearby, such operations frequently become the subjects of nuisance complaints. As a result, agricultural operators are often forced to cease or curtail their operations. Such conflicts discourage investments in farm improvements to the detriment of adjacent agricultural uses and the economic viability of the city's agricultural industry. It is the purpose and intent of this chapter to reduce the loss to the city of its agricultural resources by clarifying the circumstances under which agricultural operations may be considered a nuisance and thereby lessening conflicts between agricultural operations and non-agricultural uses. It is therefore a requirement of all persons who wish to sell real property or apply for building permits within the city to provide a disclosure statement as set forth in Section 17.50.040 or Section 17.50.060. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; Ord. 93-02 § 1 (part), 1993) 
17.50.020 - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter, the following terms have the meanings stated in this section: 
    An "agent" is one authorized by law to act in that capacity for that type of property, and is licensed as a real estate broker under Chapter 3 (commencing with Section 10130) of Part of Division 4 of the Business and Professions Code or is a licensee, as defined in Section 18006 of the Health and Safety Code. 
    "Agricultural land" means all real property within the boundaries of the city of Kingsburg, and those properties immediately surrounding the city, currently used for agricultural operations or upon which agricultural operations may in the future be established. 
    "Agricultural operation" means and includes, but not be limited to, cultivation and tillage of the soil; dairying; the production, irrigation, frost protection, cultivation, growing, harvesting and processing of any agricultural commodity, including viticulture, horticulture, timber; the raising of livestock, fur bearing animals, fish or poultry; and any commercial agricultural practices performed as incident to or in conjunction with such operations, including preparation for market, delivery to storage or to market, or to carriers for transportation to market. 
    "Buyer" includes any transferee. 
    A "listing agent" is one who has obtained a listing of property and is authorized by law to act as an agent for compensation. 
    "Property" means real property. 
    "Sell" or "sale" means any transfer of fee title. 
    A "selling agent" is an agent who acts in cooperation with a listing agent and who sells, finds and obtains a buyer for the property. 
    "Sold" includes an exchange. A property is sold when a deed is recorded. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; Ord. 93-02 § 1, 1993) 
17.50.030 - Nuisance. 
    No agricultural activity, operation or facility or appurtenances thereof, conducted or maintained for commercial purposes, in a manner consistent with proper and accepted customs and standards and all codes, ordinances, and resolutions adopted by the city council of the city of Kingsburg, as established and followed by similar agricultural operations, shall be or become a nuisance, public or private, if it was not a nuisance when such activity commenced operation, or facilities or appurtenances thereof commenced activity. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; Ord. 93-02 § 1, 1993) 
17.50.040 - Disclosure statement format. 
    The disclosure statement required by this section is set forth herein, and shall be included within or accompanying the form TDS 114 as set forth by California Civil Code Article 15. The statement is as described as follows: 
 The City of Kingsburg permits operation of properly conducted agricultural operations within the City limits, including those that utilize chemical fertilizers and pesticides. You are hereby notified that the property you are purchasing may be located close to agricultural lands and operations. You may be subject to inconvenience or discomfort arising from the lawful and proper use of agricultural chemicals and pesticides and from other agricultural activities, including without limitation, cultivation, plowing, spraying, irrigation, pruning, harvesting, burning of agricultural waste products, protection of crops and animals from depredation, and other activities which may generate dust, smoke, noise, odor, rodents and pests. Be aware also, that this property may be located close to agricultural operations outside the city's jurisdiction. Consequently, depending on the location of your property, it may be necessary that you be prepared to accept such inconveniences or discomfort as normal and necessary aspect of living in an agriculturally active region. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; Ord. 93-02 § 1 (part), 1993) 
17.50.050 - Delivery by transferor. 
    The transferor of any property located in the city of Kingsburg shall deliver the disclosure statement required by this chapter to the prospective transferee as follows: 
A.  In the case of a sale, as soon as practicable before transfer of title. 
B.  In the case of transfer by a real property sales contract, as defined in Section 2985 of the Civil Code, as soon as practicable before execution of the contract. For the purpose of this subsection, "execution" means the making or acceptance of an offer. With respect to any transfer subject to subsection A or B, the transferor shall indicate compliance with this chapter either on the receipt for deposit, the real property sales contract, or any addendum attached thereto or on a separate document. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; Ord. 93-02 § 1 (part), 1993) 
17.50.060 - Disclosure statement with building permits. 
    Prior to the issuance of a city building permit for construction of a residential building the owner of the property upon which the building is to be constructed shall sign, date, and file with the city building division, the disclosure statement set forth below: 
DISCLOSURE STATEMENT-BUILDING PERMIT 
    The City of Kingsburg permits operation of properly conducted agricultural operations within the City limits, including those that utilize chemical fertilizers and pesticides. You are hereby notified that the property you are purchasing may be located close to agricultural lands and operations. You may be subject to inconvenience or discomfort arising from the lawful and proper use of agricultural chemicals and pesticides and from other agricultural activities, including without limitation, cultivation, plowing, spraying, irrigation, pruning, harvesting, burning of agricultural waste products, protection of crops and animals from depredation, and other activities which may generate dust, smoke, noise, odor, rodents and pests. Be aware also, that this property may be located close to agricultural operations outside the city's jurisdiction. Consequently, depending on the location of your property, it may be necessary that you be prepared to accept such inconveniences or discomfort as normal and necessary aspects of living in an agriculturally active region. 
    I declare that I have read and understand the foregoing disclosure. 
Date:_______ (Sign) _____ Print Name: _____ Address: _____ Phone No. _____  
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; Ord. 93-02 § 1 (part), 1993) 
17.50.070 - Refusal to sign disclosure statement. 
    If a buyer refuses to sign the disclosure statement set forth in Section 17.50.040, the transferor may comply with the requirements of this chapter by delivering the statement to the buyer as provided in Section 17.50.050 and affixing and signing the following declaration to the statement: 
    I (insert name) have delivered a copy of the foregoing disclosure statement as required by law to (insert Buyer's name) who has refused to sign. 
    I declare the foregoing to be true and correct to the best of my knowledge and belief under penalty of perjury. 
Date: _____ (Sign) _____ Print Name: _____ Address: _____ Phone No. _____  
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; Ord. 93-02 § 1 (part), 1993) 
17.50.080 - No limitation on other disclosure obligations. 
    The specification of items of disclosure in this chapter does not limit or abridge any obligation for disclosure created by any other provision of law or which may exist in order to avoid fraud, misrepresentation, or deceit in the sale. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; Ord. 93-02 § 1 (part), 1993) 
17.50.090 - Delivery of disclosure statement. 
    Delivery of the disclosure statement required by Section 17.50.050 shall be by personal delivery or certified mail return receipt requested to the buyer. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; Ord. 93-02 § 1 (part), 1993) 
17.50.100 - Penalty for violation. 
    Noncompliance with any provision of this chapter shall not affect title to real property, nor prevent the recording of any document. Any person who violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of an infraction punishable by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each violation. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; Ord. 93-02 § 1 (part), 1993) 
17.50.110 - Does not abridge state law. 
    Nothing contained in this chapter is to be construed as modifying state law as set out in the California Civil Code, Health and Safety Code, Fish and Game Code, Food and Agricultural Code, Division 7 of the Water Code, or any other applicable provision of state law relating to nuisances; rather, it is only to be utilized in the interpretation and enforcement of this code and city regulations. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; Ord. 93-02 § 1 (part), 1993) 
17.50.120 - Renting or leasing of real property. 
    It shall be the responsibility of the property owner to notify any tenant, lessee, or renter of his/her property of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement; Ord. 93-02 § 1 (part), 1993) 
Chapter 17.52 - OFF-STREET PARKING AND OFF-STREET LOADING FACILITIES 

17.52.010 - Purposes and application. 
    In order to alleviate progressively or to prevent traffic congestion and shortage of curb spaces, off-street parking and off-street loading facilities shall be provided incidental to new land uses and major alterations and enlargements of existing land uses. The number of parking spaces and loading berths shall be in proportion to the need for such facilities as created by the particular type of land use. Off-street parking and loading areas are to be laid out in a manner which will ensure their usefulness, protect the public safety and, where appropriate, insulate surrounding uses from their impact. 
    Provisions of this chapter are also intended to deal with problems, conditions and needs which are apparent in attempting to provide sufficient off-street parking facilities in areas of intense commercial development, including: 
A.  The difficulty in assembling land by private means, including the often excessive time required; 
B.  The varying financial capabilities and traffic generating characteristics among varying types of commercial enterprise; 
C.  The importance of avoiding fragmented patterns of off-street parking facilities which may bear little relation to the needs of a commercial area as a whole; 
D.  The importance of having regulations which will not inadvertently discourage private investment while alleviating or preventing traffic congestion; and 
E.  The importance of achieving a reasonable distribution of financial burden among private interests and the public at large consistent with their individual and collective responsibilities to provide off-street parking facilities. 
(Ord. 92-11 § 1 (part), 1992: Ord. 408 (part), 1982) 
17.52.020 - Off-street parking facilities required. 
A.  Definition of Parking Space. A parking space is an area for the parking of a motor vehicle plus those additional areas and facilities required to provide for safe access to and from the motor vehicle parking area. The parking space must be useable and accessible for the type of motor vehicle allowed to use the parking space. 
B.  Special Limitations and Requirements for Parking in Residential Areas. No semi-truck and trailer or truck-tractor, or truck-tractor and trailer, or other vehicle having a gross vehicle weight rating in excess of eight (8) tons (sixteen thousand (16,000) pounds), excluding public utility vehicles shall be parked within any residential zone district except for the purpose of loading, unloading or delivery of merchandise, materials or packages. No recreational vehicles, including, without limitation, motor homes, camping trailers, above-cab campers, boat trailers, boats, pick-up campers, fifth wheel trailers or dune buggies (collectively "RVs"), shall be stored or parked in a residential zone except as follows: 
1.  RVs may be parked within paved or graveled front yard areas (including the front yard driveway): (i) so long as the paved or graveled area is not within any required setback; or (ii) if the property is not subject to any required setbacks, the RV may be parked within paved or graveled front yard areas (including the front yard driveway) so long as the paved or graveled area is at least five (5) feet away from the side yard property line. An RV parked within the front yard of a property must be parked at least ten (10) feet behind the curb line of the street. If the RV is parked in the driveway, the front of the RV including, without limitation, trailer tongues, goosenecks and other trailering apparatus must be at least ten (10) feet from the curb line of the street. 
2.  RVs may be parked on a paved or graveled side yard area so long as the paved or graveled side yard area is not within any required setbacks. If the property is not subject to any required setbacks, the RV may be parked on a paved or graveled side yard area so long as the paved or graveled side yard area is at least five (5) feet away from the side yard property line. 
3.  RVs may be parked in any portion of the backyard area of a property within the property lines of the property. 
4.  Guest parking of RVs in the street in front of a residence is limited to not more than seven (7) days in any thirty-day period, measured from the first day of parking, provided a permit for such RV parking is first obtained from the city's police department. The permitted RV shall be used solely as sleeping quarters and water and electricity may be provided by on-site hookups from the residence. However, on-site hookups of an RV to on-site, gas or sewage disposal facilities are prohibited. 
5.  RV parking at the street curb line is permitted for the time period needed for actual loading or unloading of the RV which time period shall not exceed seventy-two (72) hours. 
6.  In any residential zone district, all motor vehicles incapable of movement under their own power, other than in cases of emergency, accident or breakdown, shall be stored in an entirely enclosed space, garage or carport. No more than one such vehicle shall be so stored at any time at a residence, and no more than one such vehicle shall be under repair at any time at a residence. Parking on lawns and, except as otherwise provided in this Section 17.52.020, other areas in front yards is prohibited. 
    A fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00) will be imposed for each violation of the provisions of this Paragraph B. 
C.  Time when Off-Street Parking is Required. Except as provided in paragraph J. of this section or in Section 17.52.100 of this chapter, there shall be provided off-street parking facilities in accordance with the provisions of this chapter when any of the following shall occur: 
1.  Initial occupancy of a site; 
2.  A major alteration or enlargement of a use, site or building; and 
3.  A change in use that requires additional parking. 
D.  Parking Space Schedule. 
1.  Residential Uses. 
a.  One-family dwellings, duplexes, triplexes, fourplexes and multi-family dwellings: two spaces for each dwelling unit, with at least one space within a garage or carport. 
b.  Except for driveways allowed in the front setback area of a garage or carport, all additional parking for 2-4 unit structures and multi-family units shall be to the rear or side of such units. If parking is located to the side of the units, the first parking space shall be to the rear of the front yard setback line. 
c.  Housing for the elderly: one space for each dwelling unit, provided however that sufficient space shall be set aside and incorporated into the site plan for the number of spaces prescribed under Subsection b., above, in the event of a change of use to housing for the non-elderly. 
d.  Private clubs, fraternity or sorority houses, lodging and rooming houses: one space for each two beds. 
e.  Motels, hotels, inns and bed and breakfast establishments: one space for each guest room, plus one space for each employee. 
2.  Uses within the Central Commercial District. 
a.  Commercial uses and non-medically related office uses, excluding conditional uses, within the area designated as the central business district by the general plan: one space for each eight hundred (800) square feet of floor area, except as provided under Subsection 2.b. of this subsection. 
b.  Uses within an integrated shopping center located outside of the central business district involving a combination of three or more retail uses permitted within the CC district for which building area, off-street parking, off-street loading, landscaping, lighting and other features are developed, managed and maintained as if a single unit-three spaces for each one thousand (1,000) square feet of gross leasable area, or four spaces for each one thousand (1,000) square feet of gross leasable area if the center includes a supermarket. 
c.  Other uses within the central commercial district within or outside of the central business district-the number of spaces otherwise required for the type of use. 
3.  Other Commercial Use-Industrial Use. 
a.  Banks: one space for each three hundred (300) square feet of floor area. 
b.  Offices (not including medically related or public administrative offices): one space for each four hundred (400) square feet of floor area. 
c.  Retail stores, food: one space for each one hundred fifty (150) square feet of floor area; mini-market food stores-one space for each three hundred (300) square feet of floor area for stores under two thousand (2,000) square feet of gross floor area. 
d.  Retail stores, other than food, and personal service establishments: one space for each three hundred (300) square feet of floor space. 
e.  Retail stores which handle primarily bulky merchandise such as furniture, household appliances, motor vehicles, farm implements, machinery and bulk supplies: one space for each six hundred (600) square feet of floor area. 
f.  Service commercial uses, repair shops and wholesale establishments: one space for each eight hundred (800) square feet of floor area, plus one space for each employee, and one space for each vehicle stored on the property for more than twenty-four (24) hours. 
g.  Commercial and industrial uses conducted primarily outside of buildings: one space for each employee of the maximum working shift, plus one space for each vehicle stored on the property for more than twenty-four (24) hours. 
h.  Manufacturing, indoor storage and other industrial uses: one space for each employee of the maximum working shift, plus one space for each vehicle stored on the property for more than twenty-four (24) hours. 
4.  Utility Uses. Electrical distribution and transmission substations, gas regulator stations, public utility pumping stations, reservoirs, water or gas storage tank farms, sewage treatment plants and other public utility buildings and uses: one space for each two employees of the maximum working shift, plus one space for each vehicle stored at the site. Where the use is un-manned, one space for each service vehicle to be parked at the site. 
5.  Health Uses. 
a.  Medical and dental offices and clinics, including (but not limited to) surgeons, general practitioners, psychiatrists, psychologists, medical specialists, ophthalmologists, dentists, optometrists and similar medically-related professions: three spaces for each practitioner, plus one space for each employee, or one space for each two hundred fifty (250) square feet of floor area, whichever is greater. 
b.  Rest homes, nursing homes, convalescent homes, homes for the aged: one space for each employee of the daytime shift, plus one space for each four beds. 
c.  Charitable and religious institutions providing sleeping accommodations: one space for each employee and one space for each four beds. 
d.  Hospitals: one space for each four beds and one space for each employee of the maximum working shift, plus one space for each staff doctor. 
6.  Places of Assembly. 
a.  Cafe, restaurant or other establishment for the sale and consumption of food and beverages on the premises: one space for each four seats. 
b.  Drive-in and fast food restaurants: one space for each two seats, and one space for each employee of the maximum working shift. 
c.  Auditoriums (except school auditoriums), churches, mortuaries, sports arenas and stadiums, dance halls, private clubs and lodges: one space for each fifty (50) square feet of floor area used for seating if seats are not fixed, or one space for each four seats, plus one space for each employee. School classrooms associated with a church do not require parking in addition to that required for church seating. 
d.  Theaters (indoor): one space for each four seats. 
e.  Bowling alleys: four spaces for each alley, plus one space for each four seats devoted to restaurant and/or cocktail lounge, plus one space for each employee of the maximum working shift. 
f.  Other places of assembly without fixed seats: one space for each fifty (50) square feet of floor areas used for assembly, plus one space for each employee of the maximum working shift. 
7.  Educational Uses. 
a.  Public and private elementary and junior high schools: one space for each employee, plus sufficient space for safe and convenient bus loading and unloading of students. 
b.  High schools: one space for each employee, one space for each ten (10) students, plus sufficient space for safe and convenient bus loading and unloading of students. 
c.  Colleges: one space for each employee, plus one space for each five students enrolled. 
d.  Nursery schools and day care centers: one space for each employee, plus sufficient space for safe and convenient loading and unloading of students enrolled. 
e.  Business, professional and trade schools and colleges, and art, craft, music and dancing schools: one space for each employee, plus one space for each three adult students. 
8.  Public Uses. 
a.  City, county, special district, state and federal administrative offices: one space for each employee, plus one space for each one thousand (1,000) square feet of floor area. 
b.  Public buildings and grounds other than offices and educational uses: one space for each employee of the maximum working shift, plus the number of additional spaces prescribed by the planning commission. 
9.  Transportation Terminals and Facilities. Airports, heliports, bus depots, taxi stations, railroad stations and yards: one space for each employee of the maximum working shift, plus sufficient space for loading and unloading of passengers. 
10.  Miscellaneous Uses. For a use not specified or covered by the above parking schedule, the same number of spaces shall be provided, as determined by the planning commission, as are required for the most similar use. 
11.  Recreation Vehicle Parking within Multi-Family Developments. Recreation vehicle parking shall not be permitted within multi-family developments unless confined to an area designed for the purpose enclosed by a security fence, and located where it will have the least visual impact on the site as a whole. RV parking within yard spaces of individual dwelling units or multi-family structures shall be prohibited. 
12.  Demonstrated Alternative Parking Requirements. Notwithstanding the parking requirements of Subsections D.2. and D.3. of the above schedule, an applicant shall be entitled to submit a parking formula for consideration by the planning commission which is based on a demonstrated satisfaction of parking requirements for the same or similar use at another location. Such alternative demonstration shall be submitted in writing, together with photographic and other evidence as may be necessary in support of the request. Evidence from a location outside of the city of Kingsburg shall include a letter from the planning official having jurisdiction corroborating that the evidence supports the alternative formula. 
E.  Units of Measurement. 
1.  For purposes of this chapter, and with the exception of references to gross floor area, the term floor area shall mean that floor area used, or intended to be used, for direct service to the public as customers, patrons, clients or patients, or as tenants, including areas occupied by fixtures and equipment for the display and sale of merchandise, or for repair services. It shall not include areas used principally for non-public use, including restrooms, storage areas or administrative offices incidental to a commercial use. 
2.  In outdoor or indoor places of assembly, in which patrons or spectators occupy benches, pews or other similar seating facilities, each twenty-four (24) lineal inches of each seating facility shall be counted as one seat for purposes of calculating off-street parking requirements. 
3.  If, in the application of the requirements of this section, a fractional number is obtained, one parking space shall be provided for a fraction of one-half or more, and no parking space shall be required for a fraction of less than one-half. 
F.  Change in Use, Additions and Enlargements. Whenever there is a change in use or increase in floor area, or change in other unit of measurement specified herein, and such change of increase creates a need for an increase in the number of off-street parking spaces by twenty (20) percent or more, such increase in parking facilities shall be provided on the basis of the increased requirements of the new or enlarged use; provided, however, that in the event a change in use creates a need for an increase of two or less off-street parking spaces, no additional parking facilities shall be required. 
G.  Remodeling. No additional off-street parking facilities shall be required solely because of the remodeling of an existing use or building, unless there is a change in use, addition or enlargement for which additional facilities are required in accordance with Subsection F. of this section. 
H.  Mixed Uses. In the case of mixed uses, the total requirements for off-street parking shall be the sum of the requirements for the several uses computed separately. Off-street parking facilities for one use shall not be considered as providing required parking facilities for any other use except as herein specified for joint use and uses within integrated shopping centers. 
I.  Joint Use. The building official may, upon written application by the owner or lessee of any property, authorize the joint use of parking facilities by the following uses and activities, and under the conditions specified herein: 
1.  Seventy-five (75) percent of the parking facilities required for a use considered to be primarily a daytime use may be provided by the parking facilities of a use considered to be primarily a nighttime use, or the reciprocal; provided however, that such parking area shall meet the conditions set forth for in-lieu payments in Subsection K.3., below. 
2.  The following uses are typical daytime uses: banks, business offices, retail stores, personal services, manufacturing or wholesale uses and similar uses. The following uses are typical nighttime uses: dance halls, theaters, bars, auditorium and restaurants that only serve dinners. 
3.  The following are conditions required for joint use: 
a.  The building or use for which application is made for authority to utilize the existing off-street parking facilities provided by another building or use shall be located within two hundred (200) feet from such parking facility. 
b.  The applicant shall show that there is no substantial conflict in the principal operating hours of the building or uses for which the joint use of off-street parking facilities is proposed. 
c.  If the building, structure or improvement requiring parking space is in one ownership and the required parking space provided is in another ownership, partially or wholly, there shall be a recording in the office of the Fresno County Recorder of a covenant by such owners for the benefit of the city, in a form approved by the city, that such owner or owners will continue to maintain such parking space so long as said building structure or improvement is maintained by said owner within said city. The covenant herein required shall stipulate that the title to and right to use the parcel or parcels upon which the parking space is to be provided will be subservient to the title to the premises upon which the building is to be erected and that said parcel or parcels are not and will not be made subject to any other covenant or contract for use without prior written consent of the city. 
J.  Common Facilities. Common parking facilities may be provided in lieu of the individual requirements contained herein, but such facilities shall be approved by the planning commission as to size, shape and relationship to sites to be served. The total of such off-street parking spaces, when used together, shall not be less than the sum required for the various uses computed separately, except as follows: 
1.  Where joint use is allowed. 
2.  When such common parking facility is to occupy a site three thousand (3,000) square feet or more, a fifteen (15) percent reduction in the total number of spaces shall be permitted. 
3.  Where the provisions of Subsection D.2 of this section apply. 
K.  In-Lieu Payments for Uses within the central business district. In lieu of furnishing the parking spaces and facilities required by the provisions of this section for uses within the central business district, the requirements thereof may be satisfied by electing one of the following options: 
1.  Payment to the city of an amount of money, per parking space, for each parking space required by the provisions of this article, equal to fifty (50) percent of the value of a parking space, which value shall be fixed annually by the city council based on the city's experience in the cost of developing municipal off-street parking facilities. The payments of such money shall constitute full compliance with the provisions of this section, and the city shall provide such spaces for the benefit of the public as part of, and through the expansion of, the city's municipal off-street parking program. The city shall construct, maintain and manage such spaces at such locations and at such times as will best benefit the public-at-large in accordance with the policies and programs of the off-street parking plan of the city as adopted by the council. 
2.  Construction of such off-street parking spaces and facilities as reasonably may be provided in view of the physical limitations of the property available for such purpose and the deposit of money with the city in accordance with the provisions, and under the terms of Subsection K.1., above, for the remainder of the off-street parking spaces and facilities required by this section; or 
3.  With the consent of the council, the owner of the property or use for which twenty (20) or more off-street parking spaces are required may deposit with the city an amount of money, per parking space for each parking space required by the provisions of this article, equal to seventy-five (75) percent of the value of a parking space, which value shall be fixed annually by the council based on the city's experience in the cost of developing municipal off-street parking facilities. The payment of such money shall constitute full compliance with the provisions of this section, and the city shall provide such spaces for the benefit of the public as a part of, and as an expansion of, the city's municipal off-street parking program. The city shall construct, maintain and manage such spaces within four hundred (400) feet of the exterior boundaries of the property or use for which the spaces were originally required and within a time period determined by the mutual agreement of the depositor and the council. 
    Whenever a payment of money is made to the city in lieu of the provision of parking spaces and facilities required by this section, such money shall be deposited in a special fund and shall be used and expended exclusively for the purpose of acquiring and developing off-street parking facilities as an expansion of the city's municipal off-street parking program. The value of an off-street parking space, to be fixed annually by the council, shall be determined in such a manner that it will reflect reasonably the actual unit parking space costs to the city for the acquisition and development of parking facilities. 
    Whenever a payment of money is made to the city in lieu of the provision of parking spaces and facilities required by this section, the payment may be made in equal monthly installments, with interest, over the maximum period of time possible consistent with attaining the objectives of the city's municipal off-street parking program. The time period for such payment shall be stated in an agreement with the city for payment, with the first installment due and payable upon execution of the agreement with the city for such payment. No use permit shall become effective, nor shall any building permit be approved, where in lieu payments are required, until such agreement has been duly executed. 
(Ord. 93-04, 1993; Ord. 92-11 § 1 (part), 1992: Ord. 408 (part), 1982) 
(Ord. No. 2016-005, § 1, 12-21-2016) 
17.52.030 - Standards for off-street parking facilities. 
    Off-street parking facilities shall conform to the standards set forth in the City of Kingsburg Parking Manual as amended from time to time. 
(Ord. 92-11 § 1 (part), 1992: Ord. 408 (part), 1982) 
(Ord. No. 2009-07, § 1, 9-16-09) 
17.52.040 - Off-street loading facilities required. 
    In any district, in connection with every building or part thereof hereafter erected and having a gross floor area of ten thousand (10,000) square feet or more, which is to be occupied by manufacturing, storage, warehouse, goods display, retail store, wholesale store, market, hotel, hospital, mortuary, laundry, dry cleaning or other uses similarly requiring the receipt or distribution by vehicles of materials or merchandise, there shall be provided and maintained, on the same parcel with such building, at least one off-street loading space, plus one additional off-street loading space for each twenty thousand (20,000) square feet or major fraction thereof of gross floor area. 
(Ord. 92-11 § 1 (part), 1992: Ord. 408 (part), 1982) 
17.52.050 - Standards for off-street loading facilities. 
    Off-street loading facilities shall conform with the following standards: 
A.  Each loading berth shall be of a length and width, and shall have an overhead clearance sufficient to accommodate fully the maximum size of vehicles used in loading or unloading operations. 
B.  Sufficient room for the turning and maneuvering of vehicles shall be provided on the site. 
C.  Entrances and exits shall be provided at locations approved under site plan review procedures of this code. 
D.  The loading area, access drives and aisles shall be paved so as to provide a durable, dustless surface and shall be so graded and drained as to dispose of surface water, with the design and specifications of such work subject to city standards and approval of the public works director. 
E.  Bumper rails or other barriers shall be provided where needed for safety or to protect property, as determined by the public works director. 
F.  If the loading area is illuminated, lighting shall be deflected away from abutting sites so as not to cause annoying glare to such sites. 
G.  A loading area shall not be located in a required front yard. A loading area may be located in a required side or rear yard. 
H.  No commercial repair work or servicing of vehicles shall be conducted in an off-street loading area. 
(Ord. 92-11 § 1 (part), 1992: Ord. 408 (part), 1982) 
17.52.060 - Location of off-street parking and off-street loading facilities. 
    Off-street parking and off-street loading facilities shall be located on the same site with the use for which the berths are required or on an adjoining site, except that within the central business district as located within the CC district, off-street parking facilities may be located within four hundred (400) feet of the use for which the spaces are required, measured by the shortest route of pedestrian access. No off-street loading space shall be required where buildings are served by a public alley. 
(Ord. 92-11 § 1 (part), 1992: Ord. 408 (part), 1982) 
17.52.070 - Screening, fencing and landscaping. 
A.  Where an off-street parking area in a C district adjoins a UR, RA, R, RM, or PO district, an ornamental solid wall or fence, vine-covered open fence, or compact screening device, as may be required under site plan review, shall be located on the property line common to such districts, except in a required front yard. 
B.  In a RM, PO, C, or I district, not less than five percent of the interior of a parking area shall be landscaped with trees and other plant materials suitable for ornamentation. Landscaped areas shall be distributed throughout the parking area to the extent practical in consideration of the size and design of the parking area. Shade trees shall be provided within off-street parking areas at a ratio of approximately one tree per five parking spaces, placed along the line between parking bays and at both ends of a line of parking spaces, served by automatic irrigation. 
C.  Shade trees approved by the city shall be provided in off-street parking areas at a ratio of one tree per five parking spaces placed along the line between or at the back of parking bays, with trees to be provided at both ends of a line of parking spaces, with all trees served by automatic irrigation. 
(Ord. 92-11 § 1 (part), 1992: Ord. 408 (part), 1982) 
17.52.080 - Existing uses. 
    No existing use of land or structure shall be deemed to be a non-conforming use solely because of the lack of off-street parking facilities or off-street loading facilities prescribed in this article; provided, however, that facilities being used for off-street parking and off-street loading at the time of the adoption of this ordinance shall not be reduced in capacity to less than the number of spaces or berths or reduced to less than the minimum standards prescribed in this chapter. Where an existing use is expanded, the parking requirements of this chapter shall apply only to the addition. 
(Ord. 92-11 § 1 (part), 1992: Ord. 408 (part), 1982) 
17.52.090 - Reduction of off-street parking and off-street loading facilities. 
    No off-street parking or off-street loading facilities provided for a use of land or structure in compliance with this chapter shall be reduced in capacity or in area without sufficient additional capacity or additional area being provided to comply with the regulations of this chapter. 
(Ord. 92-11 § 1 (part), 1992: Ord. 408 (part), 1982) 
17.52.100 - Exceptions to off-street parking and off-street loading requirements. 
    None of the provisions of the ordinance codified in this section which require the provisions of off-street parking and off-street loading spaces in connection with the use of property for commercial or industrial purposes shall apply to any parcel of property which is located within any vehicle parking district hereafter formed and existing under the provisions of any parking district act approved by the city council, and where parking and loading facilities provided by such district are determined by the city council to be adequate to serve the district. 
(Ord. 92-11 § 1 (part), 1992: Ord. 408 (part), 1982) 
Chapter 17.56 - HOME OCCUPATIONS-TEMPORARY SUBDIVISION SIGNS AND SALES OFFICES-MOBILEHOME PARKS-SIGNS AND OUTDOOR ADVERTISING STRUCTURES-MANUFACTURED SECOND HOUSING UNITS 

17.56.010 - Home occupations. 
A.  Procedures. Home occupations and short-term rental of houses or condominiums shall be permitted only in accordance with the provisions of this section, and a home occupation permit shall be valid only for the applicant to whom it was issued while the applicant operates the business or short-term rental in the location specified in the permit. The permit cannot be transferred to another owner, applicant or location. The terms of the permit cannot be modified except by applying for a new permit. For purposes of this section and any other applicable provision of this code, the words "home occupation" shall include short-term rental of houses and condominiums in accordance with the provisions of Section 17.56.010.H. 
B.  Standards. A home occupation must comply with the following standards: 
1.  A home occupation shall be clearly incidental to the use of the home as a dwelling. 
2.  A home occupation shall not be conducted in any accessory structure other than a garage. Except that, a garage or accessory structure cannot be used as a short-term rental. There shall be no storage of equipment or supplies outside the dwelling or in any accessory structure other than a garage. 
3.  No one other than a resident of the dwelling shall be employed in the conduct of the home occupation. Except that, the owner of the house or condominium may hire an agent to act as the "local contact person" to manage a short-term rental. 
4.  Sales of goods on the premises shall be limited to the products of the home occupation, and no other merchandise or goods shall be sold, kept or displayed for the purposes of sale on the premises. 
5.  Merchandise not produced on the premises may be kept and stored for purposes of sale at locations off the premises, provided that such merchandise is limited to small articles such as jewelry, cosmetics and similar items of merchandise which can be carried by one person in a case or other container. For purposes of this standard, materials typically involved in providing contracting services, such as plumbing, heating, air conditioning, electrical, carpentry and landscaping, are not included within the meaning of the clause "small articles". 
6.  A home occupation may involve the performance of business services in which goods, wares and merchandise are not commercially created, sold or exchanged, but shall not include, medical offices, tattoo parlors, fortune tellers, palm readers, beauty salons, barber shops or similar services. 
7.  A home occupation shall not involve the performance of any repair services on the premises other than the repair of small appliances and equipment or other small objects which normally are capable of being carried by one person without the aid of mechanical equipment or devices. 
8.  A home occupation shall not involve the use of any material or mechanical equipment not recognized as being part of normal household or hobby uses. 
9.  No motor power other than electrically-operated motors shall be used in connection with a home occupation. 
10.  A home occupation shall not create any radio or television interference or noise audible beyond the walls of the dwelling. 
11.  There shall be no external alteration of the appearance of a dwelling in which a home occupation is conducted in order to accommodate or enhance the home occupation. 
12.  The existence of a home occupation shall not be apparent beyond the boundaries of the site except for one non-illuminated name plate affixed to the dwelling not exceeding two square feet in area. 
13.  Except for short-term rentals, the number of customers of a home occupation who travel to the site of the home occupation shall not exceed four persons per day unless permission is specifically granted through a condition imposed by the planning commission and/or city council. In no case shall the number of customers of a home occupation who travel to the site of the home occupation exceed eight persons per day. 
14.  Not more than one truck of not more than one ton capacity and no trailers incidental to a home occupation shall be kept on the site unless permission is specifically granted through a condition imposed by the planning commission and/or city council. 
15.  The planning commission and/or city council may impose other conditions deemed necessary to make the home occupation compatible with the neighborhood. 
16.  To assure compliance with these standards and any other conditions of approval, a home occupation shall be subject to review by staff six months after issuance of a permit, with annual review thereafter. 
17.  The holder of a home occupation permit must obtain and maintain a valid city of Kingsburg business license. If the business license is revoked or is not renewed in a timely manner, the home occupation permit shall be suspended and revoked in accordance with the procedure outlined in Section 17.56.010 G. Once revoked, the home occupation cannot be established again without application for a new permit. 
C.  Application. An application for a home occupation shall be submitted to the planning and development department on a form prescribed by the department, accompanied by the processing fee specified by city resolution. The application shall provide information about the applicant's home and about the proposed business. The applicant must sign the form, verifying that the home occupation, if approved, will comply with the standards listed in Subsection B and/or Subsection H of this section. 
    The planning and development director or his/her designee shall review the application and determine whether the proposed business use meets the standards of Subsection B and/or Subsection H of this section, the objectives of the zoning ordinance, and the purpose of the zone district in which it is located. If so, the application will be accepted for processing. 
    If the application is accepted, public notices will be prepared for mailing to the owners of all properties within three hundred (300) feet of the location of the proposed home occupation based on assessor's parcel records. The notice will include information about the application and an invitation for interested persons to comment by contacting the planning and development department. The comment period will remain open for a period of fourteen (14) days following mailing of the notices. 
D.  Administrative Approval. If any negative comment is received about the proposed home occupation during the comment period, or if the planning and development director or designee makes the independent determination that the proposal could possibly cause significant impacts to the surrounding neighborhood, the application will be referred to the planning commission. If no negative comment is received and if it is determined that the proposal will not have significant neighborhood impact, when the comment period ends the application will be approved and a home occupation permit issued. 
E.  Planning Commission Hearing. If it is determined that a hearing must be held before the planning commission, public notice of the hearing will be published in a newspaper of general circulation at least ten (10) days in advance of the hearing and mailed to owners of properties within three hundred (300) feet of the location of the proposed home occupation based on assessor's parcel records. After receiving oral testimony at the hearing, and reviewing written comments presented prior to and during the hearing, the planning commission shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny the application. The decision of the planning commission will be final unless formally appealed by the applicant or other interested party to the city council within ten (10) days of the planning commission decision. If the application is approved and if no appeal is filed within the ten (10) day period, a permit shall be issued. If the application is conditionally approved and no appeal is filed within the ten (10) day period, a permit shall be issued after it has been demonstrated to the planning and development department that the conditions have been, or are being, satisfied. 
F.  Appeal. An appeal of the planning commission decision must be filed by the applicant or other interested party in writing with the city clerk. The city council will conduct the appeal hearing at a regularly-scheduled meeting following completion of a public notice process. Within ten (10) days of receipt of an acceptable appeal, a public notice regarding the city council appeal hearing will be published in a newspaper of general circulation and mailed to owners of properties within three hundred (300) feet of the location of the proposed home occupation, based on assessor's parcel records. Such notice must be published at least ten (10) days in advance of the date of the hearing. 
    The city council may affirm or overturn the decision of the planning commission or may add, remove or amend conditions of approval. If the city council decision results in approval of the application, a permit shall be issued. If the city council decision results in conditional approval, a permit shall be issued after it has been demonstrated to the planning and development department that the conditions have been, or are being, satisfied. 
G.  Revocation. Upon violation of any of the applicable provisions of this section, or upon failure to comply with any of the conditions that were attached to approval of the permit, a home occupation permit shall be suspended automatically. Notice of such suspension shall be sent as soon as possible to the applicant by the planning and development director or designee. If the violation that caused the suspension is not rectified within fourteen (14) days of the issuance of the notice, a public hearing shall be scheduled before the planning commission for consideration of revocation of the permit. Notice of the hearing shall be given in the same manner as described in Subsection E for a planning commission hearing on application for a new permit. 
    The decision of the planning commission whether to revoke the permit, or to take such action as may be necessary to eliminate the violation, shall be final unless formally appealed to the city council. The process for appealing the decision, for conducting the appeal hearing before the city council, and for providing notice of the appeal hearing shall be the same as described in Subsection F for processing an appeal regarding an application for a new permit. 
H.  Operating Standards for Short-Term Rentals. 
    In addition to all other applicable requirements of this chapter, and notwithstanding any contrary provisions in the Kingsburg Municipal Code ("code"), short-term rentals are subject to the following operational standards: 
1.  Definitions. The definitions in this subsection shall govern the construction, meaning, and application of the following words and phrases used in this section: 
    "Local contact person" means a person designated by an owner or the owner's agent, who, if designated to act as such, shall be available to respond to notification of a complaint regarding the house or condominium (collectively "dwelling"), and take remedial action necessary, as required under subsection 4 of this subsection H. A local contact person may be the owner of the dwelling or the owner's designated agent. 
    "Occupant" means any person who is on or in a short-term rental property other than service providers or the owner, whether or not the person stays overnight. 
    "Operator" means the owner or the designated agent of the owner who is responsible for compliance with the provisions of this subsection. 
    "Owner" means the person(s) or entity(ies) that holds legal or equitable title to a dwelling. "Owner" does not include a lessee of the dwelling. 
    "Short-term rental" means the rental of a single-family house or single- family condominium or a portion thereof by the owner to another person or group of persons for occupancy, dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes for a period of less than thirty (30) consecutive calendar days. The rental of units within city-approved hotels, motels, bed and breakfasts, and time-share projects shall not be considered to be a short-term rental. 
    "Short-term rental unit" means the habitable interior space of a dwelling, or any portion thereof, that is being rented, or is intended to be rented, as a short-term rental to a person or group of persons. 
2.  The owner of a short-term rental unit shall not be relieved of any personal responsibility or personal liability for noncompliance with any applicable law, rule or regulation pertaining to the use and occupancy of the short-term rental unit, regardless of whether such noncompliance was committed by the owner's agent, a local contact person or the occupants of the owner's short-term rental unit. 
3.  The owner shall ensure that the short-term rental dwelling and short-term rental unit(s) comply with all applicable codes regarding fire, building and safety, health and safety, and all other relevant laws, regulations and ordinances, obtain all permits required, including, without limitation, a home occupation permit issued in accordance with the provisions of this section, and pay all applicable fees. 
4.  While a short-term rental unit is rented, the owner or a local contact person shall be available by telephone twenty-four (24) hours per day, seven (7) days per week to respond to complaints regarding the use, condition, operation or conduct of occupants of a short-term rental unit. The owner or a local contact person must be on the premises of the short-term rental dwelling at the request of a code enforcement officer or the city's police department within forty-five (45) minutes after contact to satisfactorily correct or take remedial action necessary to resolve any complaint, alleged nuisance or violation of this chapter or the code by occupants occurring at the short-term rental dwelling. Failure of the owner or a local contact person to respond to calls or complaints in a timely and appropriate manner shall be grounds for revocation of the home occupation permit for the short-term rental. 
5.  Within ten (10) calendar days following the issuance of a home occupation permit for a short-term rental, the owner shall mail or personally deliver in writing ("short-term rental notice") the following information to the owners and occupants of properties contiguous to and directly across the street (or alley or other right-of-way) from the short-term rental dwelling as determined by the city: the name and telephone number of the person, whether the owner or the local contact person, who shall be available twenty-four (24) hours per day, seven (7) days per week to respond to complaints regarding the use, condition, operation or conduct of occupants of a short-term rental unit. Thereafter, within thirty (30) days following the issuance of the home occupation permit, the owner shall sign under penalty of perjury, and submit to the city clerk, a dated written certification that the required mailing or delivery was completed. At any time during the pendency of a home occupation permit for a short-term rental any information in the short-term rental notice changes, the owner shall, within ten (10) calendar days following the change in information, mail or personally deliver in writing the updated short-term rental notice setting forth the new information to maintain accuracy and shall also promptly submit to the city clerk a signed (under penalty of perjury) and dated written certification that the required mailing or delivery of the updated short-term rental notice was completed. 
6.  Short-term rental dwellings and short-term rental unit(s) shall be used only for overnight lodging accommodations. At no time shall a short-term rental unit or short-term rental dwelling be used for activities in excess of the occupancy limits established in subsection 8 of this subsection H, or for weddings, receptions, parties, commercial functions, conferences, or other similar assemblies that are separate from the purpose of lodging. 
7.  All advertising appearing in any written publication or on any website that promotes the availability or existence of a short-term rental shall include the city-issued home occupation permit number as part of the rental offering. No person shall advertise the use of a dwelling as a short-term rental unless the city has approved a home occupation permit for short-term rental of the dwelling in accordance with this section. 
8.  The owner shall limit occupancy of a short-term rental dwelling to a specific number of occupants. The following table sets forth the maximum number of occupants for all short-term rentals: 
Number of Bedrooms Total Occupants 0-Studio 2 1 4 2 7 3 9 4 10  
    If the home occupation permit for a short-term rental limits occupancy of the dwelling to a number less than that shown on the table, the limit set forth in the home occupation permit shall control. 
9.  Only the habitable interior portions of a dwelling shall be utilized as a short-term rental. No garages, tents, camper trailers, recreational vehicles, or other exterior structures or spaces shall be used as short-term rentals. 
10.  In any advertising concerning the availability of a dwelling as a short-term rental, the owner or a local contact person shall advertise the maximum number of occupants allowed to occupy the short-term rental. 
11.  All vehicles of occupants of a short-term rental unit shall be parked only in an approved driveway or garage on the short-term rental dwelling. The maximum number of vehicles allowed on a short-term rental dwelling shall be limited to the number of available off-street parking spaces; however, any short-term rental dwelling must have a minimum of two (2) off-street parking spaces. The owner shall provide access to the garage of the dwelling if that area has been included in the determination of the number of available off-street parking spaces pursuant to this subsection. In no event shall off-street parking include the use of landscaped areas, any private or public sidewalk, parkway, walkway or alley (or any portion thereof) located on, at or adjacent to the short-term rental dwelling, or the blocking of the driveway or street in front of the short-term rental. The term "sidewalk" shall include that portion of a driveway that is delineated for pedestrian travel or is in the public right-of-way. 
12.  No on-site exterior signs shall be posted advertising the availability of a short-term rental at the short-term rental dwelling. 
13.  If the code enforcement officer or police department has received a complaint concerning a suspected violation of this subsection or of the code or any applicable law, rule, or regulation pertaining to the use or occupancy of a short-term rental dwelling, or if the code enforcement officer or police department has reason to believe that such a violation has occurred, the code enforcement officer or the police department may notify the owner or the local contact person of the complaint or suspected violation and the notified person shall cooperate in facilitating the investigation and the correction of the suspected violation. Failure of the owner or the local contact person to affirmatively respond to the officer's request within forty-five (45) minutes and reasonably cooperating in facilitating the investigation and the correction of the suspected violation shall be deemed to be a violation of this subsection and the home occupancy permit. Notwithstanding the foregoing, it is not intended that an owner or the local contact person act as a peace officer or place himself or herself in an at-risk situation. 
14.  No musical instrument, phonograph, loudspeaker, amplified or reproduced sound, or any machine or device for the production or reproduction of any sound shall be used outside or be audible from the outside of a short-term rental dwelling between the hours of ten o'clock p.m. and nine o'clock a.m. 
15.  Occupants shall not engage in outdoor activities on a short-term rental dwelling between the hours of ten o'clock p.m. and nine o'clock a.m. that involve the use of swimming pools, hot tubs, spas, tennis and paddleboard courts, play equipment and other similar and related improvements. The hours between ten o'clock p.m. and nine o'clock a.m. are considered to be "quiet time," where all activities at a short-term rental dwelling shall be conducted inside of a short-term rental dwelling so that no outdoor activity will disturb the peace and quiet of the neighborhood adjacent to a short-term rental dwelling or cause discomfort or annoyance to any reasonable person of normal sensitivity residing in the area. 
16.  Trash and refuse shall not be left stored within public view, except in proper containers for the purpose of collection by the responsible trash hauler, in accordance with the city requirements. The owner of a short-term rental dwelling shall provide sufficient trash collection containers and service to meet the demand of the occupants. The short-term rental dwelling shall be free of debris both on site and in the adjacent portion of the street. 
17.  It is unlawful for any owner, occupant, renter, person present upon, or person having charge or possession of a short-term rental to make or continue or cause to be made or continued any loud, unnecessary or unusual noise which disturbs the peace and quiet of any neighborhood or which causes discomfort or annoyance to any reasonable person of normal sensitivity residing in the area, or violates any other applicable provision of the code. 
18.  The owner and the local contact person shall ensure that the occupants of a short-term rental dwelling do not create unreasonable noise or disturbances, engage in disorderly conduct, or violate provisions of the code or any state law pertaining to noise, disorderly conduct, overcrowding, the consumption of alcohol, or the use of illegal drugs. Owners and local contact persons are expected to take any measures necessary to abate disturbances, including, but not limited to, directing the occupants of a short-term rental dwelling to cease the disturbing conduct, calling for law enforcement services or enforcement officers, removing the occupant(s), or taking any other action necessary to immediately abate the disturbance. 
19.  The owner shall post a sign at a conspicuous location within the short-term rental dwelling advising occupants of all rules and operational standards imposed upon occupants under this subsection. The sign shall also include the telephone numbers for the city of Kingsburg, the Kingsburg Police Department and the Kingsburg Fire Department. 
20.  All short-term rentals shall be subject to the city's transient occupancy tax, as required by Title 3, Chapter 3.16 of the code. For the purposes of this subsection, the definitions in Section 3.16.020 of Title 3 of Chapter 3.16 of the code shall include the following: (i) the definition of "Hotel" shall include short-term rental unit and short term rental dwelling; (ii) the definition of "Occupancy" shall include the renting of a short-term rental unit or short-term renal dwelling; (iii) the definition of "Operator" shall include the owner of a short-term rental unit or short-term rental dwelling; (iv) the definition of "Rent" shall include the rent paid by the occupant of a short-term rental unit or short-term rental dwelling; and (v) the definition of a "Transient" shall include an occupant of a short-term rental unit or short-term rental dwelling. The owner shall also maintain at all times a valid Kingsburg business license. All transient occupancy tax statements shall be addressed to the owner and the local contact person. 
21.  Short-term rentals shall not exceed one short-term rental unit per short-term rental dwelling. 
22.  The violation or breach of any provision of this Section 17.56.010 H. shall result in the revocation of the home occupancy permit for the short-term rental. 
(Ord. 2003-01 § 1, 2003: Ord. 92-11 § 1 (part), 1992: Ord. 408 (part), 1982) 
(Ord. No. 2018-006, § 1, 12-19-2018) 
17.56.020 - Temporary subdivision signs and sales offices. 
    Temporary subdivision signs and sales offices may be located within subdivisions for a period not to exceed two years from the date of recordation of the subdivision. Subdivision signs and sales offices shall be removed at the expense of the owner, unless, prior to the expiration of two years, a renewal of time is granted by the commission. Upon expiration of such renewal period, subdivision signs and sales offices shall be removed at the expense of the owner. Subdivision signs shall be governed by the regulations prescribed in Section 17.56.040 of this chapter. A temporary subdivision sales office shall not be permitted until an application for a subdivision sales office permit shall be made to and approved by the commission in accordance with Chapter 17.68. 
(Ord. 92-11 § 1 (part), 1992: Ord. 408 (part), 1982) 
17.56.030 - Mobilehome Parks. 
A.  Occupancy. No mobilehome shall be occupied or used for living or sleeping purposes, or be parked, other than in a mobilehome sales yard or in an approved storage area within a CS, CH or I district, unless it is located within a licensed mobilehome park; provided, that a mobilehome may also be used as follows: as an office for a construction project, circus or carnival; as a residence of a watchman on the site of a construction project or an industrial use; to provide temporary living quarters for circus or carnival personnel in accordance with the provisions of an approved conditional use permit; or as a single family dwelling when set on a permanent foundation within any RA, R, RM or PO district. 
B.  Location, Access and Procedure. For purposes of the ordinance codified in this title, mobilehome parks are considered to require the same considerations in their location as do other types of dwellings under low, medium or high density policies of the general plan. Mobilehome parks shall be located only within R or RM districts, with access from elements of the arterial or collector street system to be considered as a condition of approval. Mobilehome parks shall be permitted only in accordance with the regulations of Chapter 17.68 and this section. 
C.  Development Standards, Mobilehome Parks. 
1.  Park Area, Density and Site Area. 
a.  The minimum area of a mobilehome park shall be five acres. The first phase of mobilehome park development shall be not less than five acres and shall include all required recreational and service amenities. 
b.  The maximum density shall be eight mobilehome sites per gross acre in the RM district, six per net acre in the R districts, and one per net acre in the RA district. 
c.  Each mobilehome site shall be not less than three thousand (3,000) square feet in area, including pad, parking, private access, landscaping and private storage areas. 
d.  No mobilehome site shall be less than thirty (30) feet in width. 
2.  Clearances, Setbacks and Yard Spaces. 
a.  Mobilehome Park: 
1. Front yard: 20 feet 2. Interior side yard: 10 feet 3. Street side yard: 10 feet 4. Interior rear yard: 10 feet 5. Street rear yard: 20 feet  
b.  Mobilehome Sites within the Park: 
1. Front yard: 10 feet 2. Side yard: 5 feet 3. Rear yard: 10 feet  
c.  No mobilehome shall be located in any required yard space, except that tow bars may extend into such yard space, and other incidental structures may be located in accordance with the provisions of Section 17.08.050. 
3.  Patios and Pads. 
a.  Each mobilehome site shall have a hard surfaced patio area of not less than two hundred (200) square feet. A permanent porch greater than twenty (20) square feet in area may be counted as part of the required patio area. 
b.  Each mobilehome site shall have a support pad of concrete or asphalt concrete laid over a compacted surface base which, in combination, will be adequate to support the mobilehome on a level plane. 
4.  Parking. 
a.  Not less than two off-street parking spaces shall be provided within each mobilehome site, one of which may be tandem to the other. 
b.  Not less than one guest parking space shall be provided for each mobilehome site at a location central to each four contiguous mobilehome sites. 
c.  Parking shall be provided for central recreation buildings, park offices and other similar buildings at a ratio of one parking space for each four hundred (400) square feet of gross floor space. 
d.  Supplemental parking for pleasure boats, recreation vehicles and non-occupied travel trailers shall be provided at a ratio of one parking space for each ten (10) mobilehome sites, and shall be used only by mobilehome park tenants. Said parking shall be clustered, easily accessible via interior drives, and screened from view by means of a solid ornamental fence or wall and landscaping. 
e.  All parking areas and spaces shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 17.52 of this title. 
5.  Streets. 
a.  Entrance streets shall be located to assure safe access to and from the public street system. 
b.  Minor streets within the mobilehome park shall be a minimum of thirty (30) feet of paved width; collector streets shall be a minimum of thirty-six (36) feet of paved width. Paving shall be to city standards. 
c.  Streets shall be constructed to effect positive drainage, including concrete curbs and gutters constructed to city standards. 
d.  Parallel parking shall be permitted on both sides of a collector street and on only one side of a minor street. Such on-street parking shall be in addition to off-street parking requirements of this section. 
6.  Driveways, Street Signs, Lighting, Storm Drainage, Water and Sewer Systems. Driveways for individual mobilehome sites, street signs, interior street lighting, storm drainage facilities and water and sewer systems shall be installed subject to approval of the director of public works. 
7.  Underground Utilities. All public utilities shall be installed underground, including electrical, telephone, street lighting cable, community television antenna connections and ducts for cable television. A community television antenna with underground ducts and connections to each mobilehome site shall be provided. 
8.  Recreation Areas and Pedestrian Ways. 
a.  Common recreation area in an aggregate total equal to ten (10) percent of the gross area of the mobilehome park shall be provided at a location or locations which are easily accessible and convenient to park residents. 
b.  Recreation areas shall be landscaped and maintained, with all landscaped areas to be irrigated by an automatic underground system. 
c.  Pedestrian ways shall be provided throughout the mobilehome park, connecting all mobilehome sites with each other and with common recreation areas. Such pedestrian ways shall be provided where possible at locations away from the interior street system to avoid conflict in pedestrian and vehicle traffic. 
d.  The calculation of common recreation areas shall not include yard areas, pedestrian ways, management offices, laundry and tenant storage areas and parking areas. 
9.  Signs. No more than one identification sign shall be erected displaying the name of the mobilehome park. Such signs shall be located near the park entrance drive and shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in total readable surface area, or eight feet in height. Such sign shall be installed within the front yard area of the mobilehome park, parallel to the abutting street, with landscaping at its base. Additional directional and identification signs may be installed within the mobilehome park subject to the approval of the planning director. 
10.  Landscaping and Screening. Mobilehome parks shall provide permanently maintained landscaped areas and site screening as follows: 
a.  A landscaped border along the entire street frontage yard area and along the rear yard if such yard is adjacent to a public street. 
b.  Ornamental screen wall or fencing, seven feet in height, along all interior side property lines, along all rear property lines which do not abut a public street, and along street side yard and street front yard setback lines. 
11.  Other Requirements. 
a.  Each mobilehome park shall provide: (1) a laundry building equipped for clothes washing and drying; (2) an outdoor clothes drying area screened from view from other areas of the mobilehome park by an ornamental screen fence or wall and landscaped area; and (3) trash enclosures at locations along the interior street system which are convenient to all residents and to municipal refuse trucks, integrated with parking areas. Trash enclosures are not required where each mobilehome unit is served by mechanized individual unit trash pickup service. 
b.  Applications for mobilehome parks shall be subject to site plan review under the provisions of Chapter 17.72. 
12.  Placement and Sale of Mobile Homes. 
a.  At the time of placement on the site, all mobilehomes shall be fitted with appropriate skirts to obscure stands, pads, and under-carriage equipment. 
b.  Mobilehomes may be displayed and sold within a mobilehome park similar to the sale of model homes within a residential subdivision, provided that such mobilehomes are not sold for delivery to any location other than within the mobilehome park in which sold, and that all mobilehomes are placed on mobilehome sites and connected to all utility services. No more than four mobilehomes shall be offered for sale at any one time, and advertising for sale shall be limited to one non-illuminated sign not exceeding eight square feet in area on the site of each mobilehome offered for sale. 
(Ord. 92-11 § 1 (part), 1992: Ord. 408 (part), 1982) 
17.56.040 - Regulation of signs and outdoor advertising. 
A.  Purposes and application. In order to maintain and enhance the attractiveness and orderliness of the city's appearance, and to protect the public safety and general welfare, the location, size, height, illumination and maintenance of signs and outdoor advertising structures are regulated as prescribed below. It is the intention of this section to foster the expansion of the Swedish architectural motif which characterizes the city's commercial and industrial areas under the provisions of Chapter 17.80 of this title. If provisions of the City of Kingsburg Form Based Code, adopted on September 16, 2015, conflict with provisions in this Section 17.56.040, the provisions of this Section 17.56.040 shall prevail. 
B.  General provisions and exceptions. 
1.  Application. The provisions set forth in this section shall be applicable to all signs permitted by the ordinance codified in this title. 
2.  Computation of sign area or display surface. For purposes of this section, measurements for computing the areas of a given sign shall be made as follows. 
a.  For signs comprised of individual letters attached to the business structure, including module letters and logographic symbols, the effective sign area shall mean any area(s) enclosed by the minimum imaginary rectangle or parallelogram of vertical and horizontal lines which fully contains all extremities of each word and/or logographic symbol of the sign. Each word and/or logographic symbol shall be measured separately in computing total sign area. Shadow box borders and other border trims which are an intrinsic part of the building, either architecturally or structurally, shall not be included in such area computations. 
b.  Where the sign consists of module letters only, and such letters are separated a minimum distance of one and one-half (11/2) times the width of the individual module, the space between such letters shall not be included when computing sign area. 
c.  For single unit signs containing letters or logographic symbols on cabinets or panels, the effective sign area shall mean the area enclosed by the minimum imaginary rectangle or parallelogram of vertical and horizontal lines which fully contains the perimeter of the cabinet or panel sign. 
d.  For projecting signs and free-standing detached signs containing letters and/or logographic symbols, the effective sign area means the area enclosed by the minimum imaginary rectangle of vertical and horizontal lines which fully contains all extremities of the sign, exclusive of its supports and/or ornamental and decorative trim on cabinets or support columns. 
e.  For free-standing and projecting signs intended to be read from both sides along a single frontage, both sides of the sign shall be counted in computing the total sign area for that frontage. 
f.  The effective sign area of a ball or sphere shall be seventy-five (75) percent of the surface area of the ball or sphere. 
3.  Projection and height. 
a.  No sign shall project more than fourteen (14) inches beyond the property line, except that a free-standing sign shall not extend beyond the property line. The minimum height clearance for any free-standing sign, projecting building sign or sign located on a building marquee shall be not less than eight (8) feet as measured from ground level to the lowest portion of the sign display area. 
b.  No sign other than a directional sign shall project more than twelve (12) inches into a required rear yard or interior side yard. 
c.  In an RCO, UR, RA, R, RM or PO district, a sign attached to a building shall not project above the parapet or roof line, whichever is higher. 
4.  Number of free-standing signs. Not more than one (1) free-standing on-premise sign, or free-standing outdoor advertising structure, may be located on each parcel of property within a zoning district in which a free-standing sign or free-standing outdoor advertising structure is permitted. 
5.  Traffic hazards. 
a.  No sign or outdoor advertising structure shall be placed within thirty (30) feet of the intersecting curb lines of a street intersection, unless placed on a single pole with a ground clearance of at least ten (10) feet, or unless placed so that the top of the sign and its supporting structure is a maximum of two and one-half (21/2) feet above the ground. 
b.  No red, green or amber lights or illuminated signs or outdoor advertising structures illuminated by or including flashing lights, shall be placed in such position that they reasonably could be expected to interfere with or be confused with any official traffic control device, traffic signal or official directional guide sign. 
6.  Movement. A moving sign shall be permitted only in C or I districts, provided that movement shall be slow (not to exceed ten (10) r.p.m.) and shall not simulate effects obtained by varying the intensity, color, pattern or illumination. 
7.  Utility lines and easements. No sign or outdoor advertising structure shall be located within a utility easement, or erected or located in a manner which will reduce the vertical or horizontal clearance from communication lines or energized electric power lines as required by laws, rules and regulations of the State of California and agencies thereof. 
8.  Special signs-Exceptions. The following types of signs shall be exempt from the provisions of this Section 17.56.040: 
a.  Temporary signs: Signs of a temporary or transitory nature and constructed and erected in a non-permanent manner. 
i.  Signs used to announce an upcoming event or sale, such as a fundraising event, school or community event, grand opening or holiday sale subject to the issuance of a temporary sign permit; 
ii.  Signs used exclusively for the posting or display of official notices by a public agency or official, or by a person giving legal notice; 
iii.  Signs erected or maintained by a public agency or official or required by law to be displayed by a public utility for directional, warning or informational purposes; 
iv.  Signs announcing garage or yard sales, which shall be removed immediately after the completion of the sale; 
v.  Unless otherwise specified in the applicable temporary sign permit, all temporary signs shall be removed by the applicant, agency, entity, group or individual responsible for their placement within thirty (30) days after the date of the sign's original erection, or when the sign becomes damaged or is no longer legible, whichever first occurs. 
b.  Signs or displays of patriotic or religious nature erected upon residential property and non-illuminated, non-verbal religious symbols erected upon residential property. 
9.  Special signs-Prohibition. Animated signs, the movement of which is simulated by variations in the intensity, color, pattern or illumination of the sign, and flashing signs, shall be prohibited in all districts, subject to the following exceptions: 
a.  A sign changing so as to show time and/or temperature. 
b.  An on-premise barber pole. 
10.  Area identification signs. Area identification signs intended to identify a neighborhood, subdivisions, shopping or industrial district, complex or other area composed of multiple ownerships, shall be limited to a maximum single surface area of twenty-five (25) square feet, and total sign area not exceeding fifty (50) square feet. 
11.  Outdoor advertising signs. Outdoor advertising signs are signs having part or all of their area devoted to directing attention to a business, profession, commodity, product or service that is not the primary business, profession, commodity, product or service sold, manufactured, conducted or offered on the site on which the sign is located, and shall be subject to the following conditions: 
a.  Outdoor advertising signs shall not be permitted in the RCO, UR, RA, R, RM, PO, IP or C districts. 
b.  The maximum single surface area per site of an outdoor advertising structure in the I district shall be five hundred (500) square feet; the maximum aggregate area per site of outdoor advertising signs in the district shall be one thousand (1,000) square feet. No outdoor advertising signs shall be placed within one thousand (1,000) feet of another such sign on the same side of a street or highway. 
c.  Signs in the RCO, UR, RA, R, RM and PO districts. No sign of any character shall be permitted in the RCO, UR, RA, R, RM or PO districts, except as follows: 
1.  One (1) name plate, not directly illuminated, with a maximum of two (2) square feet in area (e.g., dimensions of 1' × 2'), containing the name or names of occupants of a residence or office. 
2.  One (1) identification sign, not directly illuminated, located flat against a wall and not projecting above the roof line, with a single surface area of not more than sixteen (16) square feet pertaining to a permitted or conditional use conducted on the site. 
3.  One (1) non-illuminated sign, with a single surface area of not more than eight (8) square feet, pertaining to the sale, lease, rental or display of a structure or site. 
4.  Non-illuminated directional signs, with a single surface area of not more than six (6) square feet, pertaining to vehicular or pedestrian traffic directions and located along a driveway or within a parking lot. Arrows painted on pavement are not included in this regulation. 
5.  One (1) bulletin board, not directly illuminated, with a single surface area of not more than twenty (20) square feet, located on the site of a church, school, auditorium or other similar place of public assembly. 
6.  One (1) non-illuminated temporary construction sign, with a single surface area of not more than sixteen (16) square feet, on the site of a construction project, which shall be removed at the owner's expense at the time of project completion. 
7.  One (1) temporary subdivision sales sign, not directly illuminated, with a single surface area of not more than thirty-two (32) square feet, on the site of a residential subdivision. 
D.  Regulation of signs within the C districts. 
1.  Purposes and application. The purpose of sign regulation within the C districts is to avoid unsightly, inharmonious, competing, cluttered and hazardous location and appearance of signs, and to encourage the replacement of existing non-conforming signs. Sign regulations of this section shall apply to any permitted or conditional use listed within a C district. 
2.  Maximum total aggregate area in the CC district. 
a.  Primary frontage. An allowable minimum sign area of up to fifty (50) square feet shall be permitted for each primary building frontage (portion of building occupied by the business and facing a street), regardless of the width of such primary building frontage. A maximum total sign area, not to exceed three hundred fifty (350) square feet, shall be permitted for each primary building frontage based on two (2) square feet of sign area for each lineal foot of primary building frontage occupied by the business. 
b.  Secondary frontage. An allowable minimum sign area of up to thirty-five (35) square feet shall be permitted for each secondary building frontage (portion of building occupied by the business and facing an alley, an adjacent building, parking lot, or the like), regardless of the width of such secondary frontage. A maximum total sign area, not to exceed two hundred (200) square feet, shall be permitted for each secondary frontage based on one (1) square foot of secondary building frontage occupied by the business. 
3.  Maximum total aggregate area in the CS and CH districts. 
a.  Primary frontage. An allowable minimum sign area of up to one hundred (100) square feet shall be permitted for each primary business frontage along a street, regardless of the width of such primary business frontage. A maximum total sign area, not to exceed five hundred (500) square feet, shall be permitted for each primary building frontage based on two (2) square feet of sign area for each lineal foot of primary business frontage occupied by the business. 
b.  Secondary frontage. An allowable minimum sign area of up to fifty (50) square feet shall be permitted for each secondary business frontage, regardless of the width of such secondary frontage occupied by the business. A maximum total sign area, not to exceed two hundred (200) square feet shall be permitted for each secondary business frontage based on two (2) square feet of sign area for each lineal foot of secondary business frontage occupied by the business. 
4.  Directional signs. Directional signs for off-street parking and off-street loading facilities shall not exceed six (6) square feet for each sign; parking lot identification signs shall not exceed six (6) square feet per face of sign. 
5.  Sale, lease and rental signs. Signs pertaining to the sale, lease, rental, or display of a structure or land shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet per single face of sign. 
6.  Projecting signs. No sign, other than a directional sign, shall project more than twenty-four (24) inches into a required rear yard or required interior side yard. No sign, other than a sign required by law or a marquee sign, shall project more than fourteen (14) inches into a public right-of-way. 
7.  Signs attached to buildings. Signs attached to buildings shall be installed parallel with the building, with no more than a fourteen (14) inch projection from the wall except where permitted under Subsection D.8., below and/or attached directly to the vertical or sloped face of the marquee. 
8.  Marquee or canopy signs. Signs attached below the marquee or canopy shall not exceed six (6) square feet per face of sign and shall have a minimum ground clearance of eight (8) feet above the sidewalk grade in order not to impede or interfere with pedestrian traffic and safety. Where the marquee or canopy is attached at an angle from a building, signs may be affixed to the sloped portion above the horizontal extension of the marquee or canopy as an integral part of the facade. 
9.  Painted wall signs. Within each of the C districts, signs painted upon a wall exterior surface shall be included when computing the allowable sign area. 
10.  Free-standing signs. 
a.  New free-standing signs shall have a permanently landscaped area at their bases, and shall be maintained with live plant materials around the base of such signs equal to at least ten (10) percent of the total sign area, and with a minimum landscaped area of ten (10) square feet. 
b.  Free-standing area identification signs displaying the name and/or logographic symbol of a shopping center and/or the names of other groupings of businesses, offices, services, or combinations thereof, shall not exceed a total sign area of three hundred fifty (350) square feet. 
c.  No more than one (1) free-standing sign shall be permitted for a single business or for a grouping of businesses on a single site, except that an additional free-standing sign shall be permitted for a grouping of ten (10) or more businesses on a single site, and one (1) freeway oriented sign may be located on a site in the CH district, subject to site plan review, not exceeding an aggregate area of three hundred (300) square feet or a height of ninety (90) feet. 
11.  Announcement and bulletin boards. Announcement and bulletin boards or structures for any public, philanthropic, civic, religious, or charitable organization or agency, non-illuminated or illuminated by indirect lighting only, may not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in area in any district when appurtenant to the premises on which they are located. 
12.  Public service signs. Electronic public service signs displaying such information as time of day, temperature, or events of community interest, with the purpose of augmenting on-premise identification shall be permitted. The area of such signs shall be included when computing the total sign area of a business or site. 
13.  Portable signs. Portable signs, including, but not limited to, sandwich board, "A" board, movable free-standing, tire stack, and wind signs, shall be prohibited, with the exception of those signs allowed by approval of the planning director pursuant to City of Kingsburg Downtown Form Based Code, § 17.42.122. 
14.  Public utility signs. Non-advertising signs of public utility companies shall be permitted as required in their operation, providing service for the health, safety, and welfare of the general public, including, but not limited to, the following: informational signs for public telephone facilities or marking the location of underground facilities, directional signs for public utility services, signs notifying the public of "danger", "emergency", "construction", and similar conditions. No sign or other item shall be attached to private utility company poles and/or light standards or supports without prior written approval from the utility company to which such poles belong. 
15.  Sight distance at intersections. No sign permitted by this section shall be placed within thirty (30) feet of a street intersection (intersecting curb lines) unless placed so that the top of the sign is at a maximum of two and one-half (21/2) feet above the ground or unless the bottom of the sign is a minimum of ten (10) feet above the ground level. 
16.  Height of signs. Except for freeway oriented free-standing signs in the CH district, the height of signs within the C districts shall not exceed the height of the structure which houses the business being advertised, and in no case shall any sign exceed the height limitations of the district in which it is located. 
17.  Signs expressly prohibited. 
a.  No red, green, or amber light or illuminated sign may be placed in such a position that it could reasonably be expected to interfere with, or be confused with, any official traffic control device, traffic signal, or official directional guide sign. 
b.  Outdoor advertising structures shall not be permitted. 
c.  Glaring, flashing, and scintillating signs shall not be permitted. 
d.  Open letter signs which may be viewed from the reverse shall not be permitted. 
e.  Canvas, plastic, cloth, paper, or other types of banners or streamers suspended across public or private property, buildings, or structures shall not be permitted, except temporary banners which extend over or across a street announcing civic events such as parades, homecomings, festivals and publicly or privately sponsored promotional events as may be approved by the city council. 
18.  Brand name advertising. Up to thirty (30) percent of the signing allowance for any frontage may be devoted to the advertising or identification of an individual brand or brands of products. This provision shall not apply to the identification of one (1) primary brand name identifying a service station. 
19.  Design of signs. All signs shall be designed in scale and harmony with the architectural design of the buildings and uses they are intended to relate to or identify. 
20.  Alteration and removal. Achieving the alteration or removal of dangerous, obsolete and nonconforming signs is a major policy of this section. To this end, certain signs are hereby declared to be dangerous, obsolete, or nonconforming, and shall be removed or altered to conform as follows: 
a.  A dangerous sign is hereby defined as any sign which is an immediate peril or a potential menace to the safety of persons or property. The building inspector shall give a written order for the repair or removal of any unsafe or dangerous sign to the owner of the real property upon which such sign is located. If such owner shall fail to remove or repair such sign or advertising structure, within six (6) months of notification by the building inspector, the building inspector may cause the removal of such sign and may enter upon such property for such purpose. Any cost accrued by the city in the removal of such sign shall be charged to the owner of the real property upon which such sign is located and added to the real taxes thereon for the ensuing tax year or be collected in civil action at the option of the city. 
b.  Any sign hereafter existing which no longer advertises a bona fide business conducted or product sold on the premises where such sign exists shall be removed or made to conform by the owner of the building, structure, or property upon which such sign is located within ninety (90) days after written notification by the building inspector, or the building inspector may cause the removal of such sign. Any cost accrued by the city shall be treated in the same manner as provided, above, for dangerous or unsafe signs. 
c.  Signs which are non-conforming because of their lighting, movement or animation shall be made to conform or be removed within one hundred twenty (120) days after written notification by the building inspector. 
21.  Appeals procedure. If, because of any ambiguity, inadvertent omission, or error, the interpretation of the provisions and/or intent of this section by the building official is disputed, the applicant or any aggrieved person may appeal, in writing, setting forth reasons for such appeal to the planning commission. The appeal shall be filed with the planning commission within fifteen (15) days after an adverse decision of the building official. The appeal shall be placed on the regular meeting agenda of the commission at the first opportunity. 
The commission shall review the sign proposal and shall approve, approve with conditions, or disapprove it, based on the findings set forth in Section 17.84.060 A. of this Code. 
E.  Regulation of signs. Within the I districts. No sign, outdoor advertising structure or display of any character shall be permitted in the I districts, except as follows: 
1.  Outdoor advertising signs in accordance with the district limitations and standards prescribed in Section 17.56.040 B.11. 
2.  The maximum permissible area of all faces of all permanent and temporary signs pertaining to a permitted use or conditional use, excluding outdoor advertising signs, directional signs and signs identifying products within a window display area, shall be as follows: one (1) square foot of sign area per lineal foot of property line adjoining a street, or one hundred (100) square feet per acre of site area in use, whichever is greater, to a maximum of sixty (60) square feet of sign area. 
3.  Temporary signs shall be permitted in all I districts, provided that their combined area shall not exceed fifty (50) square feet. 
4.  One non-illuminated sign, not exceeding a single surface areas of sixteen (16) square feet, pertaining to the sale, lease, rental or display of a structure or site. 
5.  Non-illuminated directional signs along driveways or within parking lots, not exceeding a single surface area of six (6) square feet, pertaining to vehicular and pedestrian traffic direction. 
6.  One (1) bulletin board not directly illuminated, not exceeding a single surface area of twenty (20) square feet located on the site of a place of public assembly. 
7.  One (1) non-illuminated temporary construction sign, not exceeding a single surface area of thirty-two (32) square feet, on the site of a construction project, to be removed at the owner's expense at the time of project completion. 
F.  Political signs. 
1.  No person except a duly authorized public official shall erect any sign, outdoor advertising structure or display of any character upon any public property other than a public right-of-way and no such sign, outdoor advertising structure or display shall be erected or maintained within any city street right-of-way without first obtaining written approval from the city. 
2.  No political signs are permitted within the city street right-of-way. 
3.  No political signs shall be erected prior to sixty (60) days before the date of the election to which they pertain. 
4.  Each candidate or person/group named on such political sign shall be responsible for the removal of all such signs within six (6) days after the polls close. After that date, the cost of removal of any sign shall be assessed to the candidate or person/group named on the sign. 
Political signs shall not require a temporary sign permit, but shall be subject to the requirements in this section F. 
G.  Non-conforming signs and outdoor advertising structures. Non-conforming signs and non-conforming outdoor advertising structures shall be subject to the regulations prescribed in Chapter 17.60. 
H.  Abandoned and dilapidated signs. No person shall maintain or permit to be maintained on any premises owned or controlled by him, any sign which has been abandoned or which is physically dilapidated. Any such sign shall be promptly removed by the owner or such other person. Any sign which is located on property which becomes vacant and unoccupied for a period of six (6) months or more, or any sign which was erected for an occupant or business unrelated to the present occupant or his/her business, or any sign which pertains to a time, event or purpose which no longer is applied, shall be presumed to have been abandoned. Where the owner or other person responsible for maintaining an abandoned or dilapidated sign fails to remove the sign in conformance with these provisions, the city shall cause the sign to be removed and shall assess the owner or other person responsible at a rate established by resolution of the city council to cover the costs of such removal. 
I.  Authority to modify sign regulations. Notwithstanding other provisions of this chapter, the planning commission has the authority to modify or adjust regulations of this chapter in order to prevent or lessen practical difficulties or unnecessary physical hardships inconsistent with the objectives of the zoning ordinance codified in this title and the purpose of this section as would result from a strict or literal interpretation and enforcement of certain of the regulations of this title. 
(Ord. 92-11 § 1 (part), 1992; Ord. 408 (part), 1982) 
(Ord. No. 2016-001, § 1, 3-16-2016) 
17.56.050 - Regulation of manufactured housing within residential districts. 
A.  Application. The provisions of this section shall apply to all single family dwellings and mobilehomes on permanent foundations listed as permitted uses within UR, RA, R, RM and PO districts. 
B.  Developmental/Architectural Standards. All single family dwellings and mobilehomes on permanent foundations shall meet the following developmental/ architectural standards: 
1.  Garages or Carports. A garage or carport shall be provided for every dwelling located on a lot which is not a part of a mobilehome subdivision. 
2.  Minimum Floor Area. The minimum floor area for every dwelling located which is not a part of a mobilehome subdivision, shall be eight hundred (800) square feet, excluding the area of the garage or carport. 
3.  Roof Overhang. All main buildings shall have a pitched roof with a minimum twelve (12) inch roof overhang on each of the dwelling's perimeter walls such that the overhang is architecturally integrated into the design of the dwelling unit. 
4.  Roofing Material. All main buildings, and all detached garages and carports located on the front half of the lot shall have a roof constituted of either wood shakes, asphalt, composition or wood shingles, clay, tile, concrete or metal tile, slate or built-up asphaltic-gravel materials. 
5.  Siding Material. All main buildings and all detached garages located on the front half of the lot shall have exterior siding material consisting of either wood, masonry, concrete, stucco, masonite or metal lap. The exterior siding material shall extend to ground level, except that when a solid concrete or masonry perimeter foundation is used, the siding material need not extend below the top of the foundation. 
6.  Foundations. All main buildings shall be placed on a permanent foundation which meets applicable building code requirements and/or the provisions of Section 18551 of the California Health and Safety Code, such that the floor elevation of the dwelling is reasonably compatible with the floor elevations of the surrounding dwelling units. 
7.  Minimum Width. The minimum width of a dwelling located on a lot outside of a mobilehome subdivision shall be twenty (20) feet. 
8.  Surrender of Registration. Subsequent to applying for a building permit, and prior to occupancy of a mobilehome on a permanent foundation, the owner shall request a certification of occupancy be issued by the building official pursuant to Section 18557 (a) (2) of the California Health and Safety Code. Thereafter, any vehicle license plate, certificate of ownership and certificate of registration issued by a State Agency is to be surrendered to the issuing State Agency. Any mobilehome on a permanent foundation must bear a California insignia or Federal label pursuant to Section 18550 (b) of the California Health and Safety Code. 
9.  Tow Bars, Wheels and Axles. All mobilehome tow bars, wheels and axles shall be removed when the dwelling is installed on a residential lot. 
10.  Deviations. The planning director may approve deviations from one or more of the standards of this section on the basis of a finding that the architectural style proposed provides compensating design features and that the proposed dwelling will be compatible and harmonious with existing structures in the vicinity. The determination of the director may be appealed to the city council in accordance with the provisions of Section 17.64.050 of this code. 
(Ord. 92-11 § 1 (part), 1992: Ord. 408 (part), 1982) 
17.56.060 - Second unit housing. 
A.  Application. This section provides standards by which the city shall administratively process applications for the siting and construction of a second housing unit to be attached to or detached from an existing one-family residence located in either the UR, RA, R or RM zoning districts. 
B.  Development Standards. All second housing units shall meet the following standards unless the special circumstances cited in subsection C apply: 
1.  Maximum Floor Area. A second housing unit which is detached from the existing residence shall not exceed one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet of floor area. The area of a second housing unit which is attached to an existing residence shall not exceed thirty percent (30%) of the existing residence. In either case, the second unit shall not, in combination with the existing structures, exceed the maximum site area coverage prescribed by this section for residential sites within the zoning district involved. 
2.  Location. A second housing unit shall be located either to the side or to the rear of the existing one-family dwelling unit, and shall be either attached to the existing dwelling, or be separated from it by not less than ten (10) feet. 
3.  Access. Doorway access shall be provided either to the side or rear of the second housing unit. Direct doorway access to the front yard is prohibited. Access to a second housing unit from the street side yard of a corner lot is prohibited. 
4.  Owner Occupancy. Either the existing one-family residence or the second unit shall be occupied by the owner of the property. 
5.  Off-Street Parking. In addition to the off-street parking spaces required for the existing dwelling, one covered parking space must be provided for a second unit with fewer than two bedrooms; two off-street parking spaces, one of them covered, must be provided for a second unit with two or more bedrooms. 
6.  Utility Service and Kitchen Facilities. A second housing unit shall be provided with adequate water, sewer and other utilities, and full kitchen facilities including range, oven, sink and refrigerator, as determined by the city building official. 
7.  Visual Appearance. If it is attached, a second housing unit shall be constructed with roofing and siding materials and colors that match the existing one-family dwelling and be designed to blend in with the appearance of the existing dwelling. If it is detached, a second housing unit shall resemble or complement the existing dwelling in terms of height, materials and color. 
8.  Mobilehomes or Manufactured Housing. Mobilehomes or manufactured housing on permanent foundations shall be permitted as a second housing unit within the intent of this section. 
9.  Compliance with Other Regulations. Notwithstanding the above standards, each second housing units established under this section shall meet all of the requirements of the applicable UR, RA, R or RM zoning districts as to: fences; walls; hedges; site area; frontage; width and depth of site; coverage; yard requirements; height of structures; distance between structures; signs; and general provisions and exceptions. 
C.  Special Circumstances. If an existing single-family dwelling located toward the rear of a parcel can meet all of the second unit development standards of subsection B except those that refer to sequence of construction, that dwelling can be designated as a second unit for the purposes of this section. If such a second-unit house is the only dwelling on the parcel, a new house can be built in front of that existing dwelling in conformance with all provisions of the applicable zoning district. The new house may exceed one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet of area provided it conforms to setback and building separation regulations, and all structures combined do not exceed coverage limitations. 
(Ord. 2005-03 § 1, 2005: Ord. 92-11 § 1 (part), 1992: Ord. 408 (part), 1982) 
Chapter 17.60 - GENERAL PROVISIONS AND EXCEPTIONS 

17.60.010 - Addition of permitted uses. 
    Upon receipt of an application, or on its own initiative, the planning commission may, by resolution, add a use to the lists of permitted uses, permitted uses subject to administrative approval, and conditional uses prescribed in Chapters 17.16 through 17.48 of this code, if the commission makes the following findings, as applicable: 
A.  That the addition of the use to the list of permitted uses will be in accordance with the purposes of the district in which the use is proposed. 
B.  That the use has the same basic characteristics as the uses permitted in the district. 
C.  That the use reasonably can be expected to conform with the required conditions for the district. 
D.  That the use will not be detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare, or adversely affect the character of any district in which it would be located. 
E.  That the use will not create more vehicular traffic than the volume normally created by the uses permitted in the district. 
F.  That the use will not create more odor, dirt, smoke, noise, vibration, illumination, glare, unsightliness or any other objectionable influence than the amount normally created by any of the other uses permitted in the district. 
G.  That the use will not create any greater hazard of fire or explosion than the hazards normally created by any of the uses permitted in the district. 
    When a use has been added to a list of permitted uses, permitted uses subject to administrative approval or conditional uses in accordance with the procedure prescribed in this section, the use shall be deemed to be listed as a permitted use in the appropriate section and shall be added to the text of that section of this ordinance when it is next published with a notation of the date when the use was added to the list. 
(Ord. 92-11 § 1 (part), 1992: Ord. 408 (part), 1982) 
17.60.020 - Coverage-Measurement. 
    The percent of the site area covered by structures shall be measured by dividing the number of square feet of horizontal floor area covered by structures, open or enclosed, by the total horizontal area within the property lines of the site. 
(Ord. 92-11 § 1 (part), 1992: Ord. 408 (part), 1982) 
17.60.030 - Yard spaces. 
A.  No yard space about any structure in compliance with the regulations for the district in which it is located shall be deemed to provide a yard for any other structure, and no yard on one site shall be deemed to provide a yard space for a structure on another site. 
B.  Where two or more dwellings are located on the same lot, and any one of them has a door facing a side yard, such dwelling shall be located not less than ten (10) feet from the adjacent side lot line. A door shall be deemed to face a side yard if the wall in which the door is set is located at an angle of forty-five (45) degrees or less to the side yard. 
(Ord. 92-11 § 1 (part), 1992: Ord. 408 (part), 1982) 
17.60.040 - Yard requirements-Measurement. 
    Required yards shall be measured as the minimum horizontal distance from the property line of the site or street line to a line parallel thereto on the site: provided that where a precise street plan has been adopted by the city council, required front yards shall be measured from the plan line, and no provision of this ordinance shall be construed to permit a structure or use to extend beyond such line. Where a site abuts on a street having only a portion of its required width dedicated or reserved for street purposes, site area and required yards shall be measured from a line representing the boundary of the additional width required for street purposes abutting the site. Where a site abuts a public alley, required yards shall be measured from the nearest line of the alley, except that garages and carports having access perpendicular from the alley right-of-way shall be located a minimum of twenty-seven (27) feet from the opposite alley right-of-way line. 
(Ord. 92-11 § 1 (part), 1992: Ord. 408 (part), 1982) 
17.60.050 - Yard requirements-Exceptions. 
A.  Architectural features including sills, chimneys, fireplaces, cornices and eaves may extend into a required side yard, a required rear yard, or a space between structures not more than thirty-six (36) inches and may extend into a required front yard not more than six feet, provided that where an architectural feature extends more than twenty-four (24) inches into a required side yard, said extension shall be protected by a minimum one hour fire resistant standard. No building or projection thereof, except a garden structure, may extend into a public easement. 
B.  Open, unenclosed, uncovered metal fire escapes and depressed ramps or stairways may project into any required yard or space between buildings not more than four feet; planter boxes attached to a building, may be extended into a required front yard by not more than three feet. 
C.  Fences, walls, hedges, garden structures walks, driveways and retaining walls may occupy any required yard or other open spaces, subject to the limitations prescribed in the district regulations, and except that the provisions of this ordinance shall not apply to a fence or wall necessary for public safety or as required by any law or regulation of the State of California or any agency thereof, and further that a chainlink fence up to seven feet in height may be located in any required front yard in conjunction with public and quasi-public uses. 
(Ord. 92-11 § 1 (part), 1992: Ord. 408 (part), 1982) 
17.60.060 - Through lots. 
    A front yard shall be provided on each frontage of a through lot, except where a waiver-of-access has been dedicated to one of the frontages. 
(Ord. 92-11 § 1 (part), 1992: Ord. 408 (part), 1982) 
17.60.070 - Maintenance of landscaped areas. 
    A landscaped area provided in compliance with the regulations prescribed in this ordinance or as a condition of a site plan review, a use permit or variance shall be planted with live and healthy plant materials suitable for screening or ornamenting the site, whichever is appropriate, and plant materials shall be replaced as needed to screen or ornament the site. Landscaped areas shall be watered, weeded, pruned, fertilized, sprayed or otherwise maintained to assure compliance with the regulations requiring landscaped areas. Landscaped areas within sites subject to site plan review shall be watered by automatic systems. 
(Ord. 92-11 § 1 (part), 1992: Ord. 408 (part), 1982) 
17.60.080 - Maintenance and elimination of non-conforming sites, uses, and structures. 
A.  Purposes and Application. 
1.  A non-conforming use is a use of a structure or land which was lawfully established and maintained prior to the adoption of this ordinance, but which does not conform with the use regulations for the district in which it is located. This section is intended to limit the number and extent of nonconforming uses by limiting their enlargement and prohibiting their reestablishment after abandonment, and by prohibiting the alteration of the structures they occupy and their restoration after destruction. 
2.  A non-conforming structure is a structure which was lawfully erected prior to the adoption of the ordinance codified in this section, but which does not conform with the standards of coverage, yard space, height of structures or distance between structures prescribed in the regulations for the district in which the structure is located. While permitting the use and maintenance of non-conforming structures, this section is intended to limit the number and extent of non-conforming structures by prohibiting their being moved, altered or enlarged so as to increase the discrepancy between existing conditions and the standards prescribed in this title and by prohibiting their restoration after destruction, within a reasonable period of time. 
3.  Priorities for enforcement under this section shall be as follows, in descending order of importance: 
a.  Uses and structures listed under Section 17.60.080 G. 
b.  Non-conforming uses. 
B.  Continuation and Maintenance. 
1.  A use lawfully occupying a structure or a site on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section or of amendments thereto which does not conform with the use regulations for the district in which the use is located shall be deemed to be a nonconforming use and may be continued, except as otherwise provided in this section. 
2.  A structure lawfully occupying a site on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section or of amendments thereto, which does not conform with the standards of coverage, front yard, side yards, rear yard or distances between structures prescribed in the regulations for the district in which the structure is located, shall be deemed to be a non-conforming structure and may be used and maintained except as otherwise provided in this section. 
3.  A sign or outdoor advertising display of any character lawfully occupying a site on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section or amendments thereto, which does not conform with the standards for subject matter, location, size, lighting, or movement prescribed for the district in which it is located, shall be deemed to be a non-conforming sign or outdoor advertising structure, and may be displayed and maintained except as otherwise provided in this section. 
4.  Routine maintenance and repairs may be performed on a structure or site, the use of which is non-conforming, on a nonconforming structure, and on a non-conforming sign or outdoor advertising structure. 
C.  Alterations and Additions to Non-Conforming Uses and Signs. Except as provided in Sections 17.60.080 D. through I., no structure, the use of which is non-conforming, and no non-conforming sign shall be moved, altered, or enlarged unless required by law or unless the moving, alteration or enlargement will result in the elimination of the non-conforming use. No structure partially occupied by a non-conforming use shall be moved, altered or enlarged in such a way as to permit the enlargement of the space occupied by the non-conforming use. 
D.  Alterations and Additions to Non-Conforming Structures. No non-conforming structure shall be altered or reconstructed so as to increase the amount of floor space or the discrepancy between existing conditions and the standard of coverage, front yards, side yards, rear yard, height of structure or distances between structures prescribed in the regulations prescribed for the district in which the structure is located, except as may be permitted through the granting of a conditional use permit under the provisions of Chapter 17.68. The modest expansion of a non-conforming use which may be allowed within any zoning district under conditional use permit procedures shall not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the existing floor area of the structure. 
E.  Abandonment of a Non-Conforming Use. Whenever a non-conforming use has been abandoned, discontinued or changed to a conforming use for a continuous period of one year, the non-conforming use shall not be reestablished, and the use of the structure or site thereafter shall be in conformity with the regulations for the district in which it is located. 
F.  Restoration of a Damaged Structure. 
1.  Whenever a non-conforming use, or a non-conforming structure shall be destroyed by fire or other calamity, or by an act of God or by the public enemy to the extent of less than sixty (60) percent, the structure may be restored and the non-conforming use may be resumed, provided that restoration is started within six months and diligently pursued to completion. The extent of damage to any structure shall be determined by the building official, and shall be based upon the ratio of the estimated cost of restoring the use or structure to its condition prior to such damage to the estimated cost of duplicating the entire structure as it existed prior thereto. 
2.  Whenever a non-conforming use or structure is destroyed to the extent of sixty (60) percent or more of square foot of the structure by fire, weather related causes, or any other cause, the structure shall not be restored except in full conformity with the uses and regulations for the zone district in which the non-conforming use or structure is located, and the non-conforming use shall not be resumed. Except that, the provisions of this Subsection F.2. shall not apply to non-conforming residential structures and incidental and accessory structures and uses located in the Central Commercial Zone District and the Resource Conservation and Open Space Zone District. Such non-conforming residential structures and incidental and accessory structures and uses may be fully restored and resumed even though the damage to the non-conforming residential structure and incidental and accessory structures exceeds sixty (60) percent or more of the square footage of the non-conforming residential structure and/or incidental and accessory structures. Subject to the provisions of this Subsection F.2. the restoration of any non-conforming residential structure and incidental and accessory structures and uses in the Central Commercial Zone District and the Resource Conservation and Open Space Zone District must comply with all applicable provisions of this Code and all applicable City requirements including, without limitation, setbacks, lot coverage, and parking requirements existing on the date of issuance of the building permit for the restoration of the non-conforming residential structure and incidental and accessory structures and uses. This exception to the provisions of Subsection F.2. may be exercised only by the person or entity owning the non-conforming residential structure and incidental and accessory structures on the date of destruction of the non-conforming residential structure and incidental and accessory structures. 
G.  Elimination of Non-Conforming Uses and Structures. 
1.  The following non-conforming uses and structures shall be discontinued and completely removed or altered and converted to a conforming status within five years after the effective date of this ordinance: 
a.  A non-conforming use which does not occupy a structure. 
b.  A non-conforming use occupying a structure having an assessed valuation of less than two hundred (200) dollars. 
c.  A non-conforming outdoor advertising structure. 
d.  Abandoned or dilapidated signs in accordance with the provisions of Section 17.56.040 D.11. 
2.  A non-conforming home occupation shall be discontinued within one year of the adoption of the ordinance codified in this section. 
3.  Uses permitted only within a RA, R or RM district which are located in a C or I district, and uses permitted only within a C or I district which are located within a RA, R or RM district shall be completely removed or altered and converted to a conforming status upon abandonment of the previous use for six months or more. When a non-conforming use is removed, every future use shall be in conformity with the provisions of this title. Repairs necessary to maintain a non-conforming use and other maintenance (excluding signs), not exceeding an assessed valuation of two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) shall not be construed as lengthening the useful life of the non-conforming use. 
4.  Fences, walls and hedges which do not conform to the provisions of this ordinance governing the erection of fences, walls and hedges in relation to street intersections shall, within one month of receipt of written notification by the community development department, be removed or made to conform. 
H.  Time When a Use, Structure or Sign Becomes Non-Conforming. Whenever a use or structure becomes non-conforming because of a change of zoning district boundaries or a change of regulations for the district in which the site is located, the period of time prescribed in this section for the elimination of the use shall be computed from the effective date of the change of district or regulations, and the building official shall carry out the provisions of Section 17.60.080 I. In respect thereto. 
I.  Records and Notification of Non-Conforming Status. 
1.  Within one hundred eighty (180) days after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section, and amendments thereto, the planning department shall compile a list of all structures or uses which shall have become non-conforming by the adoption of the ordinance codified in this section under the provisions of Section 17.60.080 H., together with a description of their locations and the names and addresses of all persons whose names appear on the latest adopted tax roll of San Joaquin County as owning such non-conforming structures, uses or signs, which list shall be recorded in the office of the San Joaquin County Recorder with copies placed on file with each title company operating within San Joaquin County. 
2.  Within one year after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section, the planning department shall notify, in writing, the owners of all non-conforming structures, uses, signs and fences, walls and hedges, of the non-conforming status of their property and the date when such structure or use shall be removed or made conforming by said owners, if such removal or conformance is required by the provisions of this ordinance. An excerpt of the ordinance codified in this section will be attached to said notice which excerpt shall include all of the provisions of Section 17.60.080 of this chapter. 
J.  Effect of Eminent Domain. If any land, right-of-way or easement be taken by eminent domain, or be granted to the condemnor under actual threat of suit in eminent domain, the following provisions and exceptions shall apply: 
1.  If the area of a lot is reduced below the minimum requirement thereby, such lot shall be deemed to be a legal substandard lot under the provisions of Section 17.08.030 G., and any existing building or structure thereon shall be deemed to be non-conforming. 
2.  If a required yard is reduced or eliminated thereby, any affected building or structure shall be deemed non-conforming, provided, however, that such building or structure may be structurally altered or enlarged as long as such alterations or enlargements comply with all other requirements of the zoning district. 
3.  If any required parking space on a lot is reduced or eliminated thereby, the provisions of Chapter 17.84 shall not be construed to require the replacement of the required parking space. 
K.  Change of Non-Conforming Use. Except as otherwise set forth in this section, the nonconforming use of a structure or site may be changed to another nonconforming use provided the change of use is approved by the planning commission in accordance with the following procedure: 
1.  An application for a change of use shall be made to the commission on a form prescribed by the commission, which form shall include the following data: 
a.  The name and address of the applicant; 
b.  A statement that the applicant is the owner of the property or is the authorized agent of the owner; 
c.  The address or description of the property; and 
d.  A statement of the precise nature of the existing or pre-existing nonconforming use, the proposed nonconforming use, and any other data pertinent to the findings prerequisite to the granting of the application as set forth in Subsection 4 of this Subsection, below. 
    The application shall be filed with the planning department. Notice shall be given to the applicant of the time when the application will be considered by the council, and notice may be given of the time to any other interested party. 
2.  The commission shall hold a public hearing on an application for a change of use. Notice of the hearing shall be given not less than ten (10) days nor more than thirty (30) days, prior to the date of the hearing in the manner set forth in Chapter 17.68 of this code. 
3.  The planning director shall make an investigation of the application and shall prepare a written report thereon, which report shall be submitted to the commission. The commission shall consider the report of the director before taking action on the application. 
4.  The commission may grant an application for a change of use if, on the basis of the application and the evidence submitted, the commission makes the following findings: 
a.  That the proposed use is classified in a more restricted category than the existing or pre-existing use by the district regulations of this title. The classification of a nonconforming use shall be determined on the basis of the district in which it is first permitted; provided, however, a conditional use shall be deemed to be in a less restrictive category than a permitted use in the same district; 
b.  That the proposed use will not more adversely affect the character of the district in which it is proposed to be located than the existing or pre-existing use; 
c.  That the proposed use will not create more vehicular or rail traffic than the volumes created by the existing or pre-existing use; 
d.  That the proposed use will not create more odor, dust, dirt, smoke, noise, vibration, illumination, glare, unsightliness, or any other objectionable influence than the amount created by the existing or pre-existing use; and 
e.  That the proposed use will not be detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare, or materially injurious to properties or improvements in the vicinity. 
5.  The planning commission may grant an application for a change of use for a limited time period, or subject to such conditions as the commission may prescribe. The commission may deny an application for a change of use. 
6.  An action of the commission granting an application for a change of use shall become null and void six months following the date of the action unless, prior to the expiration of six months, a building permit is issued and construction is commenced and diligently pursued toward completion on the site which was the subject of the application. The action of the commission may be made effective for an additional six months if, within six months of the original application, an application to continue the action in effect is made to the commission. The commission may grant or deny an application to continue its action in effect. 
7.  An action of the commission granting an application for a change of use subject to conditions shall be revoked by the commission for lack of compliance with any of the conditions. 
8.  Following the date of denial of an application for a change of use or the revocation of an action of the commission granting an application, no application for the same, or substantially the same, structure or on the same, or substantially the same, site shall be filed within six months of the denial of the application or the revocation of the action of the commission. 
L.  Use of Non-Conforming Sites. Except as otherwise provided in this section, a site having an area, frontage, width or depth, less than the minimum prescribed for the district in which the site is located, which is shown on a duly approved and recorded subdivision map, or for which a deed or valid contract of sale was of record prior to the adoption of the ordinance codified in this title, and which had a legal area, frontage, width and depth at the time that the subdivision map, deed or contract of sale was recorded, may be used for any permitted use listed for the district in which the site is located, but shall be subject to all other regulations for such district. 
(Ord. 92-11 § 1 (part), 1992: Ord. 408 (part), 1982) 
(Ord. No. 2015-02, § 1, 4-15-2015) 
17.60.090 - Clarification of ambiguity-Interpretation. 
A.  In event of need for any clarification or interpretation of the provisions of this title, the planning commission shall ascertain all pertinent facts and by resolution shall set forth its findings and transmit the resolution to the city council. If approved by the council, said clarifications or interpretation shall govern until modified by resolution adopted in like manner or by appropriate amendment to this title. 
B.  The authority of the planning commission and city council prescribed by this section shall apply in all of the following cases: 
1.  If ambiguity arises concerning the appropriate classification of a particular use within the meaning and intent of this title, subject to the requirements of Section 17.60.010; 
2.  If ambiguity exists with reference to matters of height, yard area, and other requirements; 
3.  If uncertainty exists with reference to a zone district boundary; 
4.  If an unforeseen condition arises or technological changes have been introduced which require interpretation of their impact on the provisions of this ordinance. 
5.  If ambiguity or uncertainty arises as to the meaning of any word or provision contained in this title. 
(Ord. 92-11 § 1 (part), 1992: Ord. 408 (part), 1982) 
17.60.100 - Height limitations-Measurement and exceptions. 
A.  The height of a structure shall be measured vertically from the average elevation of the surface of the ground covered by the structure to the highest point of the structure; provided, however, the provisions of this section shall not apply to the height of any structure necessary for public safety or as required by any law or regulation of the state or an agency thereof. 
B.  Penthouses or roof structures for the housing of elevators, stairways, tanks, ventilating fans, air conditioning equipment or similar equipment required to operate and maintain buildings, and fire and parapet walls, skylights, towers, spires, cupolas, road signs (where permitted), flagpoles, chimneys, smokestacks, television and radio masts, or similar structures, may be erected above the height limit but shall not be allowed for the purpose of providing additional floor space. 
(Ord. 92-11 § 1 (part), 1992: Ord. 408 (part), 1982) 
17.60.110 - Yard sales and garage sales within residential areas. 
    The sale of personal possessions, whether within or outside of a dwelling within an RA, R, RM or PO zoning district shall be limited to no more than two such sales per year. Commonly referred to as yard sales or garage sales, such sales shall be conducted for periods no longer than three days, and un-sold possessions shall be removed from public view and stored within the premises. Materials to be sold shall be personal possessions. No materials shall be offered for sale which have been acquired solely for the purposes of the "yard sale" or "garage sale". Possessions offered for sale shall be neatly displayed. The driveway, yard, or other space used for purposes of the sale shall be restored to its normal residential character at the conclusion of the sale. 
(Ord. 92-11 § 1 (part), 1992: Ord. 408 (part), 1982) 
Chapter 17.64 - USES PERMITTED BY ADMINISTRATIVE APPROVAL 

17.64.010 - Purposes and application. 
    The purpose of requiring administrative approval of certain enumerated uses is to determine whether or not, in any particular case, a use listed under a section of district regulations entitled "Permitted Uses: Administrative Approval" should be treated as a conditional use because of the peculiar circumstances and conditions of the case. This chapter sets forth the procedure for approval of such use by an administrative act where findings can be made that such use is in conformance with the intent and provisions of the district regulations and other applicable regulations of the ordinance codified in this title. The provisions of this chapter take cognizance of the impracticality of listing certain uses as categorically possessing the characteristics of those uses listed under either the permitted use or conditional uses-commission approval sections of the various districts provided in the ordinance codified in this title. 
    Except as provided in Sections 17.64.050 and 17.64.070 of this chapter, the provisions of Sections 17.64.010 through 17.64.060 shall apply to all uses listed as permitted uses, subject to administrative approval. 
    As a matter of policy, any use listed as subject to administrative approval shall be considered as if it were a permitted use in the district where listed unless otherwise found to require modifications under the review procedures provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. 92-11 § 1 (part), 1992: Ord. 408 (part), 1982) 
17.64.020 - Procedure. 
A.  An application for administrative approval shall be submitted to the planning department on a form prescribed by the department. The application shall include a statement of the use proposed and a site plan prepared in accordance with Chapter 17.68. 
B.  The planning director shall review the proposed use to ascertain all facts pertinent thereto, and in writing, shall state either approval or approval with conditions of the proposed use, together with his/her findings and reasons for such decision within fifteen (15) working days of the filing of the application. 
C.  In approving the use, the director shall impose such conditions and requirements as may be applicable as listed under Sections 17.68.080 and 17.72.060. 
(Ord. 92-11 § 1 (part), 1992: Ord. 408 (part), 1982) 
17.64.030 - Findings. 
    The director may grant an application for administrative approval as the permit was applied for or in modified form, if, on the basis of the application and evidence submitted, the director is able to make the findings prescribed under Section 17.68.070, plus the following additional findings: 
A.  That the use will not involve any process, equipment or materials which, in the opinion of the director, will be objectionable to persons living or working in the vicinity by reasons of odor, fumes, dust, smoke, cinders, dirt, refuse, water-carried wastes, noise, vibration, illumination, glare or unsightliness or to involve any hazard of fire or explosion. 
B.  That the proposed use will be harmonious with existing structures and use of land in the vicinity. 
(Ord. 92-11 § 1 (part), 1992: Ord. 408 (part), 1982) 
17.64.040 - Notice of decision. 
    One copy of the written decision of the director shall be signed and dated by the director and mailed to the applicant. 
(Ord. 92-11 § 1 (part), 1992: Ord. 408 (part), 1982) 
17.64.050 - Appeals. 
A.  In the event the applicant is not satisfied with any condition or conditions of approval imposed by the director, the applicant may submit an application to the planning commission for a conditional use permit in the manner prescribed in Chapter 17.68. In submitting an application for a conditional use permit, only that information and data required under Chapter 17.68 need be submitted which is required in addition to that previously submitted as part of the application for administrative approval. 
B.  Except as provided in Subsection C, of this section, in the event the application for administrative approval is disapproved by the director, the application, upon written appeal from the applicant within ten (10) days following the notice of the decision date pursuant to the provisions in Section 17.64.040 this chapter, shall automatically become an application for conditional use permit and shall be processed in the manner prescribed in Chapter 17.68. The applicant shall submit such additional information and data required by the provisions of Chapter 17.68 as not previously submitted with his/her application for administrative approval, within five days following the filing of an appeal. 
C.  Appeals filed in the event of director disapproval of an application for a mobilehome on a permanent foundation shall be processed as provided under Subsections D., E., and F. of this subsection. 
D.  Within ten (10) days following the date of a decision by the director, the decision may be appealed in writing to the planning commission by the applicant or any interested party. An appeal shall be filed with the planning department, and shall state specifically wherein it is claimed that there was an error or abuse of discretion by the director, or wherein the decision is not supported by the evidence in the record. 
E.  The director shall give notice in writing to the applicant and to the appellant (if the applicant is not the appellant) of the time when the appeal will be considered by the commission. 
F.  The commission shall hear the appeal at its next regular meeting to be held not less than fourteen (14) days after the filing of the appeal. The commission may affirm, modify or reverse a decision of the director, provided that if the decision is modified or reversed, the commission shall, on the basis of the record and such additional evidence as may be submitted, make the determination required under Section 17.68.070 of this title. 
(Ord. 92-11 § 1 (part), 1992: Ord. 408 (part), 1982) 
17.64.060 - Revocation. 
    Upon violation of any applicable provisions of this title, or, if granted subject to a condition or conditions, upon failure to comply with the condition or conditions, a use permit shall be suspended automatically. Notice of such suspension shall be sent immediately to the person or persons responsible for non-compliance by the building official. Within thirty (30) days of the suspension, the city council shall consider the suspension. If not satisfied that the regulation, general provision, condition or conditions are being complied with, the city council may revoke the use permit or take such action as may be necessary to ensure compliance with the regulation, general provision, condition or conditions. 
(Ord. 92-11 § 1 (part), 1992: Ord. 408 (part), 1982) 
17.64.070 - Building permit. 
    Before a building permit shall be issued for any building or structure proposed as part of an approved application for administrative approval, the building official shall determine that the proposed building location, facilities and improvements are in conformity with the site plan and conditions as approved. 
(Ord. 92-11 § 1 (part), 1992: Ord. 408 (part), 1982) 
17.64.080 - Review of utility towers and lines. 
A.  Application. The provisions of this title shall not be construed as to limit or interfere with the construction, installation, operation and maintenance of any use coming under the jurisdiction of the public utilities commission, which uses are related to the public utility purposes of water and gas pipes, mains and conduits, telegraph and telephone lines, pole mounted repeaters, telephone booths, sewers and sewer mains, electric light and power distribution and transmission lines, except as provided in Subsection B. of this section. 
B.  Procedure. 
1.  The routes of proposed gas or electric transmission lines shall be submitted to the planning department for review and recommendations. The department shall confine its review to the route, placement and height of such towers or lines and the effect on land use. Power transmission lines shall be those lines which are intended to transmit gas or electric energy from the source of such energy to a receiving substation, or from a receiving substation to a distribution substation. 
2.  Prior to the acquisition of rights-of-way, the following plans and information shall be submitted to the director for review and recommendations: 
a.  The location of the proposed route. 
b.  Type of towers and transmission lines. 
c.  Approximate height of towers or size of lines. 
d.  Widths of rights-of-ways. 
e.  Other pertinent data. 
3.  The director may, when in the public interest, recommend such modifications as deemed necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare. 
4.  The director shall complete the review and make findings within sixty (60) days after the filing of said plans and data. 
C.  Appeals. The recommendations of the director may be appealed to the planning commission within ten (10) days of the completion of the review and findings. The appeal shall be placed on the agenda of the commission's next regular meeting. The commission shall review the findings and recommendations and shall act to uphold, modify or disapprove the recommendations of the director. 
D.  Effect of Regulations. These regulations are intended to provide constructive advice by the city to a public utility engaged in the routing of electrical or gas transmission lines through the city, thereby assisting in the selection of those transmission line routes which will best meet the needs of the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(Ord. 92-11 § 1 (part), 1992: Ord. 408 (part), 1982) 
Chapter 17.68 - PERMITS FOR CONDITIONAL USE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2, adopted Mar. 7, 2012, deleted the former Ch. 17.68, §§ 17.68.010-17.68.180, and enacted a new Ch. 17.68 as set out herein. The former Ch. 17.68 pertained to permits for conditional use and derived from Ord. 92-11 § 1 (part), 1992: Ord. 408 (part), 1982. 

17.68.010 - Purposes. 
    In certain districts, conditional uses are permitted subject to the granting of a use permit. Because of their unusual characteristics, conditional uses require special considerations so that they may be located properly with respect to the objectives of the zoning ordinance and their effects on surrounding properties. In order to achieve these purposes, and thus give the district use regulations of this title additional flexibility necessary to achieve the objectives of this title, the planning commission is empowered to grant or to deny applications for use permits and to impose reasonable conditions upon the granting of use permits. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2(exh. A), 3-7-2012) 
17.68.020 - Powers of the planning commission. 
    The planning commission may grant use permits for such conditional uses in such districts as are prescribed in the district regulations of this ordinance, in accordance with the procedure prescribed in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2(exh. A), 3-7-2012) 
17.68.030 - Application and fee. 
    Application for a use permit shall be made to the planning department, which shall include the following data: 
A.  Name and address of applicant. 
B.  Statement that the applicant is the owner of the property or is the authorized agent of the owner or the plaintiff in an action of eminent domain to acquire the property involved. 
C.  Address or description of the property. 
D.  Statement setting forth the precise circumstances or conditions applicable to the land, structure or use which makes the granting of a use permit necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a substantial property right, together with any other data pertinent to the findings prerequisite to the granting of a use permit. 
E.  Preliminary floor plans and front, side and rear elevations of proposed structures, if available. 
F.  Prints of a site plan, drawn to scale, which shall indicate clearly and with full dimensions, the information prescribed by the planning director. Such information may include, but shall not be limited to, the following: 
1.  Lot or site dimensions. 
2.  All buildings and structures: location, size, height, proposed use. 
3.  Yards and space between buildings. 
4.  Walls and fences: location, height and materials. 
5.  Off-street parking and off-street loading location, number of spaces and dimensions of parking and loading areas, internal circulation pattern. 
6.  Access: pedestrian, vehicular, service; points of ingress and egress; internal circulation. 
7.  Signs: location, size height and type of illumination, including hooding devices. 
8.  Lighting: location and general nature; hooding devices. 
9.  Street dedications and improvements. 
10.  Landscaping: location and type. 
11.  Refuse containers: location and type. 
12.  North arrow and scale of the drawing. 
13.  Such other data as may be required by the planning commission to make the required findings. 
G.  The application shall be accompanied by a fee set by resolution of the city council sufficient to cover the cost of handling the application as prescribed in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2(exh. A), 3-7-2012) 
17.68.040 - Public hearing-Notice. 
    The planning commission shall give notice and hold a public hearing on each application for a conditional use permit. 
    Notice of the public hearing shall be given not less than ten (10) days prior to the date of the hearing by (1) mailing a notice of the time and place of the hearing to all property owners within three hundred (300) feet of the area occupied by the proposed use; and by (2) publishing a notice at least once in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2(exh. A), 3-7-2012) 
17.68.050 - Public hearing-Procedure. 
    At the public hearing, the commission shall review the application and the statement and drawings submitted therewith, and shall receive pertinent evidence and testimony concerning the proposed use and the proposed conditions under which it would be operated or maintained, particularly with respect to the findings prescribed in Section 17.68.070 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2(exh. A), 3-7-2012) 
17.68.060 - Investigation, report and notice. 
    The planning director shall give written notice to the applicant of the time when the application will be considered by the commission. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2(exh. A), 3-7-2012) 
17.68.070 - Action by the planning commission. 
    The planning commission shall act on the application within thirty (30) days following the closing of the public hearing. The commission may grant an application for a conditional use permit as the use permit was applied for or in modified form if, on the basis of the application and the evidence submitted, the commission makes all of the following findings: 
A.  That there are circumstances or conditions applicable to the land, structure or use which makes the granting of a use permit necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a substantial property right. 
B.  That the proposed location of the conditional use is in accordance with the objectives of the zoning ordinance codified in this title and the purposes of the district in which the site is located. 
C.  That the proposed use will comply with each of the applicable provisions of this title. 
A use permit may be revocable, may be granted for a limited time period, or may be granted subject to such conditions as the commission may prescribe. The commission may deny an application for a use permit. A use permit may not grant variances to the regulations prescribed by this ordinance for which variance procedures are prescribed by Chapter 17.84. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2(exh. A), 3-7-2012) 
17.68.080 - Conditions of approval. 
    In approving a conditional use permit, the planning commission shall state those conditions of approval necessary to protect the public health, safety and general welfare. Such conditions may cover any of the considerations listed in Section 17.72.040 of this title. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2(exh. A), 3-7-2012) 
17.68.090 - Appeals to city council. 
    The decision of the planning commission on a conditional use permit shall be subject to the appeal provisions of Section 17.04.090 of this title. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2(exh. A), 3-7-2012) 
17.68.100 - Building permit. 
    Before a building permit shall be issued for any building or structure proposed as part of the approved conditional use permit application, the planning director shall determine that the proposed building location, facilities and improvements are in conformity with the site plan and conditions approved by the planning commission. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2(exh. A), 3-7-2012) 
17.68.110 - Lapse of use permit. 
    A use permit shall lapse and shall become void one year following the date on which the use permit became effective unless by conditions of the use permit, a lesser or greater time is prescribed in accordance with Section 17.68.120, or unless prior to the expiration of one year, a building permit is issued by the building official and construction is commenced and diligently pursued toward completion on the site which was the subject of the use permit application. A use permit may be renewed for an additional period of one year or for a lesser or greater period as prescribed in Section 17.68.120, provided that, prior to the expiration of the time period granted, an application of renewal of the use permit is filed with the planning department. The planning commission may grant or deny an application for renewal of a use permit. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2(exh. A), 3-7-2012) 
17.68.120 - Time limit for development-Extension. 
    The planning commission, or city council if appealed, may establish a lesser or greater time limit than that provided by Section 17.68.110, within which the subject property and use or any stage or phase thereof shall be commenced and completed. The time limits set by the commission or council shall be reasonable, based on the size, nature and complexity of the proposed development. Said time limit may be extended by the commission or council for good cause, such as proof of an unusual hardship not of the applicant's own making. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2(exh. A), 3-7-2012) 
17.68.130 - Pre-existing conditional uses and use permits. 
    A conforming conditional use established prior to enactment of this ordinance shall be permitted to continue. A conditional use permit granted under the provisions of the Fresno County Zoning Code and amendments thereto prior to the enactment of this ordinance shall, upon the annexation of the property affected to the city, become null and void at the end of six months following the date of its original approval or extension thereof granted by the county prior to the annexation, unless a building permit has been issued by the county and construction has commenced. Alteration or expansion of a conditional use established prior to enactment of this ordinance may be permitted upon the granting of a use permit. Accessory structures may be permitted under the provisions of Chapter 17.64 of this title. 
    A use permit shall be required for the reconstruction of a structure housing a conditional use established prior to enactment of the ordinance codified in this title if the structure is destroyed by fire, or other calamity, or by act of God, or by the public enemy, to the extent of sixty (60) percent or more. The extent of damage or partial destruction shall be determined by the building official on the basis prescribed in Section 17.60.080 F. of this title. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2(exh. A), 3-7-2012) 
17.68.140 - Revocation. 
    Upon violation of any applicable provisions of this title, or, if granted subject to a condition or conditions, upon failure to comply with the condition or conditions, a use permit shall be suspended automatically. Notice of such suspension shall be sent immediately to the person or persons responsible for non-compliance by the planning department. Within thirty (30) days of the suspension, the planning commission shall consider the suspension. If not satisfied that the regulation, general provision, condition or conditions are being complied with, the planning commission may revoke the use permit or take such action as may be necessary to ensure compliance with the regulation, general provision, condition or conditions. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2(exh. A), 3-7-2012) 
17.68.150 - Reserved. 
17.68.160 - New application. 
    Following the denial of a use permit application or the revocation of a use permit, no application for a use permit for the same or substantially the same conditional use on the same or substantially the same site shall be filed within six months from the date of denial or revocation of the use permit, except when the city council has acted to deny without prejudice. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2(exh. A), 3-7-2012) 
17.68.170 - Use permit to run with the land. 
    A use permit granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall run with the land and shall continue to be valid upon a change of ownership of the site or structure which was the subject of the use permit application. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2(exh. A), 3-7-2012) 
17.68.180 - Minor revisions to a previously approved conditional use permit. 
    A use permit granted under the provisions of this chapter or a conforming conditional use established prior to the enactment of the ordinance codified in this title may be revised as to features of the site plan previously approved, provided that such revisions are minor, as determined by the planning commission. Application for minor revisions to the site plan shall be made in writing, including three copies of the revised site plan, to the commission. The commission may approve such revisions without public hearing, provided that the commission can determine that the revisions will not substantially change the intensity or character of the use as previously approved by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2(exh. A), 3-7-2012) 
Chapter 17.72 - SITE PLAN REVIEW[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2, adopted Mar. 7, 2012, deleted the former Ch. 17.72, §§ 17.72.010-17.72.140, and enacted a new Ch. 17.72 as set out herein. The former Ch. 17.72 pertained to site plan reviews and derived from Ord. 92-11 § 1 (part), 1992: Ord. 408 (part), 1982. 

17.72.010 - Purposes and application. 
A.  The purposes of the site plan review process are to assure that developments are reviewed and found in conformity with the intent and purpose of this chapter and other applicable city codes, standards and design guidelines, and to guide the building department and planning department in the issuance of building permits. More specifically, site plan review is provided to ensure the following: 
1.  That structures, parking areas, walks, refuse containers, landscaping and street improvements are properly related to their sites and to surrounding sites and structures; 
2.  To prevent excessive grading of the land and creation of drainage hazards; 
3.  To prevent the indiscriminate clearing of property and the destruction of trees and shrubs of ornamental value; 
4.  To avoid unsightly, inharmonious, monotonous and hazardous site development, and to encourage originality in site design and development in a manner which will enhance the physical appearance and attractiveness of the community. The site plan review process is intended to provide for expeditious review of environmental impact assessments required by official policy of the city and laws of the state of California. 
B.  Site plan review provisions of this chapter shall apply to the following uses: 
1.  Any new or expanded use within all zone districts, excepting single-family residential uses which are to be constructed on a site with complete street improvements. 
2.  Any use subject to an environmental impact assessment under applicable provisions of city policy as adopted by resolution pursuant to the California Environmental Quality Act of 1970, as amended or as otherwise required by the California Environmental Quality Act of 1970, as amended or as otherwise required by applicable law. 
C.  Site plan review is required to be completed prior to the submittal of any future applications for entitlements. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2(exh. A), 3-7-2012) 
17.72.020 - Site plan review committee. 
A.  The site plan review committee shall be comprised of staff representatives of the fire, engineering, planning, building, solid waste, police, community services and public works departments. In addition, the planning department may request input from any other city department or public agency such as the school district and Selma-Kingsburg-Fowler County Sanitation District. 
B.  Powers and Duties. The site plan review committee shall review and approve, conditionally approve or deny a site plan review application in accordance with city codes and ordinances. If additional permits or entitlements are required, the site plan review committee determinations will be forwarded to the appropriate decision making body. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2(exh. A), 3-7-2012) 
17.72.030 - Application procedure. 
    The applicant shall submit an application to the planning department on a form prescribed by the planning department. The application shall be submitted with twelve (12) full size copies of a site plan, drawn to scale, and one copy reduced to dimensions of 8-1/2" × 11" or 11" × 17", which shall indicate clearly and with full dimensions the information prescribed by the planning department. Such information may include, but shall not be limited to, the following: 
A.  Lot or site dimensions; 
B.  All buildings and structures: location, size, height, proposed use; 
C.  Yards and space between buildings; 
D.  Walls and fences: location, height and materials; 
E.  Off-street parking and off-street loading: location, number of spaces and dimensions of parking and loading areas, internal circulation pattern. 
F.  Access: pedestrian, vehicular, service, points of ingress and egress, internal circulation; 
G.  Signs: location, size, height and type of illumination, if any, including hooding devices. 
H.  Lighting location and general nature, hooding devices. 
I.  Names of all adjacent streets, roads or alleys, showing rights-of-way and dedication widths, reservation widths, and all types of improvements existing or proposed. 
J.  A preliminary or conceptual landscape plan must be submitted for site plan review. A final landscape plan must be submitted prior to issuance of building permits. The final landscape plan shall include the species, quantity, size, location and irrigation system. 
K.  Refuse enclosures: location, type and material. 
L.  Existing utilities to the site. 
M.  Any phasing of the project shall be included in part of the application. 
N.  Projects located within Level 1 or Level 2 as defined in Subsection 17.80.010B shall be required to submit elevations in compliance with Chapter 17.80 of this title. 
O.  North arrow, scale of drawing and name, address and phone number of the person who prepared the site plan. 
P.  Such other data pertaining to site development as may be required by the planning department to make the required findings. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2(exh. A), 3-7-2012) 
17.72.040 - Conditions of approval. 
A.  Within fifteen (15) city working days after submission of the site plan, the site plan review committee shall review the site plan. The committee shall approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove the site plan. Any approved site plan shall satisfy all the following conditions: 
1.  That all applicable provisions of this code are complied with; 
2.  That the following are so arranged that traffic congestion is avoided, pedestrian and vehicular safety and welfare are protected with no adverse effect on surrounding property and the site plan conforms with city standards, specifications and policies: 
a.  Special yards, spaces and buffers. 
b.  Fences and walls. 
c.  Surfacing of parking areas and provisions for surface water drainage subject to city specifications. 
d.  Requiring street dedications and improvements, subject to the provisions of Section 17.72.060, including service roads or alleys when practical, and the requiring of drainage, sewer and water connection fees, and other development fees, when applicable. A traffic study may be required if impacts to roads are anticipated. 
e.  Regulation of points of vehicular ingress and egress. 
f.  Regulation of signs, in accordance with the standards prescribed under Chapter 17.56 of this title. 
g.  Requiring maintenance of the grounds and the undergrounding of utilities. 
h.  Requiring landscaping and refuse enclosures and maintenance thereof. 
i.  Regulation of noise, vibration, odors and other similar characteristics. 
j  Measures necessary to eliminate or to effect mitigation to acceptable levels of environmental impact. 
k.  Regulation of time for certain activities to be conducted on the site. 
l.  Regulation of the time period within which the proposed use shall be developed. 
m.  A bond, deposit of money, or letter of credit for the completion of street and site improvements and other facilities or for the removal of such use within a specified period of time to assure conformance with the intent and purposes set forth in this title. 
n.  Such other requirements which reasonably may be required to ensure compliance with city codes and policies. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2(exh. A), 3-7-2012) 
17.72.050 - Required findings. 
    To approve a site plan, the site plan review committee must make all of the following findings: 
A.  That the site plan complies with all applicable provisions of this code and all applicable city standards and specifications. 
B.  The following are so arranged that traffic congestion is avoided and that pedestrian and vehicular safety and welfare are protected and there will not be adverse effect on surrounding property: 
1.  Facilities and improvements. 
2.  Vehicular ingress, egress, internal circulation and off-street parking and loading. 
3.  Setbacks. 
4.  Height of buildings. 
5.  Location of services. 
6.  Walls and fences. 
7.  Landscaping, including screen planting and street trees. 
8.  Drainage of site. 
9.  Refuse enclosures. 
C.  Proposed lighting is so arranged as to deflect the light away from adjoining properties. 
D.  Proposed signs will comply with all of the applicable provisions of Chapter 17.56 of this title. 
E.  That adequate provision is made to reduce adverse or potentially adverse environmental impacts to acceptable levels. 
F.  The site plan conforms with all other applicable laws, rules and regulations relating to traffic safety, street dedications and street improvements, environmental quality, and zoning, fire, police, building and health and safety codes. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2(exh. A), 3-7-2012) 
17.72.060 - Street dedications and improvements. 
    Because of changes that may occur due to drainage conditions, utility service requirements, or vehicular traffic generated by projects requiring a site plan review, the following dedications and improvements may be deemed necessary and may be required as a condition or conditions to the approval of any site plan: 
A.  Development Bordering or Traversed by an Existing Street. If the development borders or is traversed by an existing street, the applicant may be required to: 
1.  Dedicate all necessary rights-of-way to widen a bordering minor or collector street to the extent of one-half the ultimate width established by the city as the standard for such minor or collector street, or the full extent required for a frontage road. 
2.  Dedicate all necessary rights-of-way to widen a traversing minor or collector street to its ultimate width established by the city as the standard for such minor or collector street. 
3.  Dedicate all necessary rights-of-way to widen a bordering or traversing arterial street to the standards of width established by the city for the arterial street. 
4.  Set back all facilities the required distance from ultimate property lines along an arterial street as shown on any master, official or precise plan of streets and highways, or by the city's general plan. 
5.  Install curbs, gutters, sidewalks, street signs, street lights and street trees along one side of a bordering or along both sides of a traversing minor, collector or arterial street. 
6.  Install utilities and drainage facilities to the full extent of the service requirements generated by the development. 
7.  Grade and improve bordering minor or collector streets from curb to the center line of the ultimate right-of-way. 
8.  Grade and improve traversing minor or collector streets from curb to curb. 
9.  Grade and improve the parking lane and one traffic lane adjacent to the development, or the full half width along a bordering arterial street. 
10.  Grade and improve both parking lanes and the two outside traffic lanes, or the full width of, a traversing arterial street. 
11.  The extent of improvements required for arterial street improvements will be based on the extent of traffic generated by the proposed project, with reimbursement by agreement with the city to be provided where the extent of improvement is greater than that generated by the proposed project. 
B.  Except as provided in Sections 17.72.060C and D, all new roads shall be dedicated and improved in accordance with the requirements of Section 17.72.060A. 
C.  Where a frontage road is provided and improved along an arterial street in accordance with city standards, the curb, gutter, sidewalk, street sign, street light, grading and paving requirements of Sections 17.72.060A.5 and 10, pertaining to arterial streets may be waived. 
D.  Where total access to or from a bordering or traversing arterial street is prohibited as a condition of approval, or by law, the curb, gutter, sidewalk, street sign, street light, grading and paving requirements of Sections 17.72.060A.5 and 10, pertaining to arterial streets, may be waived. 
E.  All improvements shall be to city standards existing at the time the improvements are constructed and installed and shall be installed at the time of construction of the proposed development. Where it is determined by the city that it is impractical to construct and install any or all improvements at the time of construction of the proposed development, an agreement to construct and install such improvements may be accepted in lieu thereof. In any event, the applicant shall enter into an agreement with the city for the construction and installation of improvements before a building permit may be issued, at which time there shall be money deposited with or in favor of the city, or a letter of credit or performance and labor and materials bonds posted with the city, in an amount equal to one hundred fifty (150) percent of the estimated cost of improvements, as estimated by the city engineer, to guarantee the construction and installation of such improvements. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2(exh. A), 3-7-2012) 
17.72.070 - Appeal to the planning commission. 
A.  Within ten (10) calendar days after the date of decision on a site plan application by the site plan review committee, the decision may be appealed to the planning commission by the applicant or any other interested party. An appeal shall be filed with the planning department. The appeal shall specifically identify the error or abuse of discretion by the site plan review committee or other reasons for the appeal. 
B.  The appeal shall be placed on the agenda of the planning commission's next regular meeting after expiration of the ten-day appeal period. The planning commission shall approve, approve with conditions, or disapprove the site plan, based on the findings set forth in Section 17.72.050. The decision of the planning commission shall be final unless appealed to the city council pursuant to Section 17.04.090 of this title. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2(exh. A), 3-7-2012) 
17.72.080 - Building permit. 
    Before a building permit shall be issued for any building, structure or sign proposed as part of an approved site plan, the building official shall determine the proposed building location, facilities and improvements are in conformity with the approved site plan and any applicable environmental mitigation monitoring agreement. Before a building may be occupied or a sign erected, the building official shall certify to the planning department that such improvements have been made in conformity with the approved site plan, the project plans and all applicable provisions of this code, all applicable city standards and specification and all other applicable fire, building and health and safety codes, rules and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2(exh. A), 3-7-2012) 
17.72.090 - Expiration of site plan approval. 
A.  A site plan approval shall automatically expire and be of no further force or effect one year following after the date of approval by the site plan review committee, or if appealed, the approval by planning commission or city council, unless, prior to the expiration of one year, a building permit is issued by the city and construction is commenced and diligently pursued toward completion of the site or structures which were the subject of the site plan. 
B.  Site plan approval may be extended only once for an additional period of up to one year upon written application to the planning commission before expiration of the initial one year approval. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2(exh. A), 3-7-2012) 
17.72.100 - Revocation. 
    Upon violation of any of the applicable provisions of this chapter or the violation or failure to complete or satisfy any of the provisions of an approved site plan, including, without limitation, compliance or satisfaction of any site plan conditions of approval, a site plan approval shall be automatically suspended. Notice of such suspension shall be sent to the person responsible for non-compliance by the building official. Within thirty (30) days after the suspension, the planning commission shall consider the suspension. If the violation or failure to satisfy a condition has not been cured, the planning commission may revoke the site plan approval or take such other action as may be necessary to ensure compliance. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2(exh. A), 3-7-2012) 
17.72.110 - Site plan approval to run with the land. 
    A site plan approved pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall run with the land and shall continue to be valid upon a change of ownership of the site which was the subject of the site plan. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2(exh. A), 3-7-2012) 
17.72.120 - Minor revisions to a previously approved site plan. 
    A site plan granted under the provisions of this chapter may be revised as to features of the site plan previously approved, provided that such revisions are minor as determined by the planning director. Application for minor revisions shall be made in the same manner as prescribed by Section 17.72.030 of this code. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2(exh. A), 3-7-2012) 
17.72.130 - Multi-family development policies and standards. 
    All residential development, other than single-family detached housing on individual lots, on land designated by the general plan for medium density or high density shall be developed in accordance with the following standards: 
A.  Multi-family residential projects involving ten (10) or more dwelling units shall be reviewed under planned unit development (PUD) provisions of this code. 
B.  The extent and rate at which multi-family development is allowed to occur during a given year shall be governed, in part, by realistic demands in the housing market as established by competent housing market analysis to be submitted by the applicant. Unsubstantiated market analysis shall be grounds for project disapproval by the city, even though multi-family use is designated for the property being considered by the general plan. The extent and rate of multi-family development shall also be governed by the policies and criteria for growth management as contained in the city's general plan and this code. 
C.  For projects intended to meet the housing needs of low and moderate income, market potential which depends solely on meeting the needs of households which reside in other cities or parts of Fresno or Tulare Counties, and which exceeds the city's regional "fair-share" housing commitment under the housing element of the general plan may be grounds for project disapproval by the city. 
D.  Multi-family projects involving twenty (20) or more dwelling units shall include a minimum of twenty (20) percent of net site area developed as landscaped open space, including front, side and rear yard areas required by this title. A minimum of ten (10) percent net site area, excluding required yard areas, shall be developed for the common recreation use of tenants, and shall include the following: 
1.  One tot lot having a minimum area of four hundred (400) square feet for preschool children for each increment of fifty (50) dwelling units or less, excluding studio and one bedroom units and units intended solely for the elderly. Such tot lots shall contain a confined sand base, safe play equipment and security fencing where appropriate, as determined by the city. 
2.  An area or areas aggregating at least five thousand (5,000) square feet for passive recreation (e.g., lounging, sun bathing, barbecue, reading, conversation), and including areas to be shaded by trees and/or structures. 
E.  Multi-family projects involving less than twenty (20) dwelling units shall include a minimum of ten (10) percent of net site area developed as landscaped open space, excluding required yard areas, for the recreation use of tenants. 
F.  For multi-family projects where the applicant requests a partial waiver of recreation impact fees required by city ordinance, all of the following areas and facilities shall be provided on a minimum of one acre of aggregate site area: 
1.  Recreational open space for either passive or active recreational use, including at least one-half acre of lawn area that is irrigated by an automatic system. 
2.  Court areas involving any combination of area for tennis, badminton, volleyball, shuffleboard or similar hard-surfaced court game areas. 
3.  Recreational swimming areas devoted primarily to swimming and wading, including lap pools and training pools, and further including adjacent area in lawn, decks, cabanas or similar pool-side facilities, at a standard of eight hundred (800) square feet of water surface area per pool and one thousand six hundred (1,600) square feet of land area for related facilities, for each forty (40) dwelling units. 
G.  Where multi-story dwelling units are proposed adjacent existing or planned low density residential areas, building elevations and the locations of windows, balconies and air conditioning units above the first floor shall be reviewed by the city to assure visual compatibility and residential privacy. 
H.  Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection 17.52.020D.1 of this title, all multi-family developments shall provide off-street parking for visitors at locations reasonably central to the units to be served at a ratio of one space for each four dwelling units. On-street parking spaces may be substituted for visitor parking at the ratio of one space for each eight units. 
I.  Excluding visitor parking, at least one-half of all off-street parking spaces in multi-family developments shall be covered by a garage or carport. 
J.  Site development and maintenance shall be in accordance with a comprehensive landscape development plan approved by the planning department, including automatic irrigation. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2(exh. A), 3-7-2012) 
Chapter 17.76 - PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS 

17.76.010 - Purposes. 
    Planned unit developments (PUD's), involving the careful application of design, are encouraged to achieve a more functional, aesthetically pleasing and harmonious living and working environment within the city which otherwise might not be possible by strict adherence to the regulations of this title. 
    In certain instances, the objectives of the general plan and zoning title may be achieved by the development of planned units which do not conform in all respects with the land use pattern designated on the zone plan or the district regulations prescribed by this title. A planned unit development may include a combination of different dwelling types and/or a variety of land uses which are made to complement each other and harmonize with existing and proposed land uses in the vicinity, by design. In order to provide locations for such well-planned developments, the planning commission is empowered to grant use permits for planned unit developments, provided that such developments comply with the regulations prescribed in this article. The commission is also empowered to zone lands for PUD under the provisions of Chapter 17.48 of this title. The approval of a PUD that is not designated by the general plan is intended to be discretionary on the part of the city rather than an entitlement of a landowner. 
(Ord. 92-11 § 1 (part), 1992: Ord. 408 (part), 1982) 
17.76.020 - Districts. 
    A PUD may be located in any district other than a R-1-7X district upon the granting of a use permit in accordance with the provisions of this article, or by applying the PUD combining district in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 17.48 of this title. 
(Ord. 92-11 § 1 (part), 1992: Ord. 408 (part), 1982) 
17.76.030 - Permitted uses. 
    A PUD shall include only those uses permitted, either as permitted uses or conditional uses, in the zoning district in which the planned unit development is located, subject to the following exceptions: 
A.  Any combination of uses permitted in any RA, R, RM or PO district as a permitted use, a use permitted by administrative approval, or a conditional use, may be included in a PUD located in a RA, R or RM district. 
B.  Any combination of uses permitted within any PO, C, or IL district as a permitted use, a use permitted by administrative approval, or a conditional use, may be included in a PUD located in a PO or C district. 
C.  Any combination of uses permitted in any CS, CH, IL or IH district as a permitted use, a use permitted by administrative approval, or conditional use, may be located in a PUD located in a IL or IH district. 
D.  Within the redevelopment project area and redevelopment corridor depicted for mixed use by the general plan, any use permitted within any zoning district except single-family residential and schools. 
(Ord. 92-11 § 1 (part), 1992: Ord. 408 (part), 1982) 
17.76.040 - Site area. 
    The minimum site area for a PUD shall be five acres, provided however that a smaller parcel may be permitted if the proposal meets the purposes described in Section 17.76.010, as determined by the planning director. 
(Ord. 92-11 § 1 (part), 1992: Ord. 408 (part), 1982) 
17.76.050 - Standards. 
A.  The standards of site area and dimensions, site coverage, yard spaces, distances between structures, off-street parking and off-street loading facilities and landscaped areas need not be equivalent to the standards prescribed for the regulations for the district in which the PUD is located if the applicant has demonstrated by the design proposal that the objectives of the zoning title and the objectives of this chapter will be achieved. Since planned unit development may also involve the subdivision process, the applicant must be prepared to show what changes in conventional street and lot design will be necessary to achieve desired goals. 
B.  In any R-l-7X zoning district, the average population density and number of dwelling units per net acre may be increased only if the PUD application meets the requirements of Section 65915 of the California Government Code pertaining to housing development for very low, low or moderate income households. 
C.  In any R or RM zoning district, the average housing density per net acre may exceed by not more than twenty-five (25) percent the maximum population and housing density prescribed by the general plan or the site area per dwelling unit regulations for the district in which the PUD is to be located, if the applicant can demonstrate that the proposal qualifies under applicable provisions of Section 65915 of the California Government Code pertaining to the granting of density bonuses and other incentives for housing development intended for very low-, low- or moderate-income households. 
(Ord. 92-11 § 1 (part), 1992: Ord. 408 (part), 1982) 
17.76.060 - Required conditions. 
    No use shall be permitted and no process, equipment or materials shall be employed which is found by the planning commission to be objectionable to persons residing or working in the vicinity or injurious to property located in the vicinity by reason of odor, fumes, dust, smoke, cinders, dirt, refuse, water-carried wastes, noise, vibration, illumination, glare, unsightliness or heavy truck traffic, or to involve any hazard of fire or explosion. 
(Ord. 92-11 § 1 (part), 1992: Ord. 408 (part), 1982) 
17.76.070 - Use permit procedure. 
    The regulations prescribed in Sections 17.68.020 though 17.68.170 shall control the procedure for making application for and processing of a planned unit development, subject to the following procedures: 
A.  In lieu of the drawing of the site prescribed in Section 17.68.030 G., the application shall be accompanied by a general development plan of the entire planned unit development, drawn to scale and showing provisions for the following: draining of surface waters, water courses, public utility rights-of-way, streets, driveways and pedestrian walks, off-street parking and loading facilities, reservations and dedications for public uses, private uses including dwelling types, lot layout, locations, heights and elevations of structures and landscaped areas. 
B.  In addition to the data and drawings prescribed in Section 17.68.030 and subsection A. of this section, the application shall be accompanied by a tabulation of the area proposed to be devoted to each land use and a tabulation of the average population density and number of housing units per net acre in the area or areas proposed to be devoted to residential use. 
C.  When a PUD involves proposals which necessitate the filing of a tentative parcel map or subdivision map, and/or which would also necessitate the granting of exceptions of the regulations of Title 16, the planning commission may grant tentative approval of the proposal. Where such tentative approval is requested by the applicant, the requirements of subsections A. and B. of this section may be waived temporarily, provided the applicant submits the following: 
1.  In lieu of the drawing of the site prescribed in subsection A. of this section, the application shall be accompanied by a schematic drawing drawn to a minimum scale of one inch equals one hundred feet (1? = 100'), showing the general relationships contemplated among all public and private uses and existing and proposed physical features. An alternate scale may be approved by the planning director for projects of large scale. 
2.  A written statement setting forth the source of water supply, method of sewage disposal, means of drainage, dwelling types, non-residential uses, lot layout, public and private access, height of structures, lighting, landscaped areas and provisions for maintenance of landscaped areas, area to be devoted to various uses and population density per net acre contemplated by the applicant. 
    Upon approval of a tentative subdivision map, in accordance with the procedures prescribed by Title 16, the applicant shall submit a development plan in accordance with the requirements of subsections A. and B. of this section before the commission may grant a final approval of the proposal. 
D.  The planning director shall give written notice to the applicant of the time when the application will be considered by the planning commission. 
E.  The commission may grant a use permit for a PUD as the use permit was applied for or in modified form if, on the basis of the application and the evidence submitted, the commission makes the following findings: 
1.  That the proposed location of the PUD is in accordance with the objectives of the zoning title. 
2.  That the proposed location of the PUD and the conditions under which it would be operated or maintained will not be detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare or materially injurious to properties or improvements in the vicinity. 
3.  That the proposed PUD will comply with each of the applicable provisions of this section. 
4.  That the standards of housing density, site area and dimensions, site coverage, yard spaces, height of structures, distance between structures, off-street parking and off-street loading facilities, landscaped areas and street design will produce an environment of stable and desirable character consistent with the objectives of the zoning ordinance, and will not generate more traffic than the streets in the vicinity can carry without congestion and will not overload utilities. 
5.  That the combination of different dwelling types and/or variety of land uses in the development will complement each other and will harmonize with existing and proposed land uses in the vicinity. 
6.  That the proposed PUD will satisfactorily mitigate potential environmental impacts in accordance with the provisions of Section 17.72.080 of this title. 
F.  The planning commission may deny an application for a use permit for a planned unit development. 
(Ord. 92-11 § 1 (part), 1992: Ord. 408 (part), 1982) 
17.76.080 - Review by city council. 
    At the first regular meeting of the city council held more than ten (10) days after a decision on a PUD application by the planning commission, the council shall review the decision. The council may affirm, reverse or modify the decision of the planning commission, provided that if a decision denying the use permit is reversed or a decision granting the use permit is modified, the council shall, based on the record transmitted by the planning commission and such additional evidence as may be submitted, make the findings prerequisite to the granting of a use permit for a PUD as prescribed in Subsection 17.76.070.E. of this chapter. A PUD permit shall become effective immediately after it is granted by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. 92-11 § 1 (part), 1992: Ord. 408 (part), 1982) 
Chapter 17.80 - ARCHITECTURAL DESIGN REVIEW[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2, adopted Mar. 7, 2012, deleted the former Ch. 17.80, §§ 17.80.010-17.80.040, and enacted a new Ch. 17.80 as set out herein. The former Ch. 17.80 pertained to architectural design review and derived from Ord. No. 2010-01, § 1, 7-7-2010. 

17.80.010 - Purpose and application. 
A.  The purpose of the architectural design review process is to avoid the unsightly, inharmonious and monotonous appearance of structures and signs by the review of the design, materials, textures, colors and other elements of construction which affect the exterior appearance of structures; to encourage originality in building design and construction in a manner which will enhance the physical appearance and attractiveness of the community; to preserve the investments in properties which exhibit tasteful consideration of the external physical appearance of the site and structures thereon and to encourage and enhance the desirability of private investment within the surrounding area. The architectural design review process is also intended to foster the Swedish architectural theme called for by policies of the city general plan. 
B.  The provisions of this chapter shall apply to any permitted or conditional use identified in Title 17 of this code other than single-family dwellings or multiple-family dwellings consisting of no more than two units. There shall be no exceptions to the application of this chapter except as granted for historic structures designated by resolution of the city council. Application of the Swedish architectural design review guidelines identified in Section 17.80.020 of this chapter will apply at different levels of intensity depending on the location of the proposed project: 
1.  Level 1 intensity shall apply to the downtown triangle bounded by the State Route Freeway 99, 18th Avenue and Sierra Street, with parcels on the north side of Sierra Street within the downtown triangle also included. Level 1 intensity shall also apply to shopping centers, strip malls and parcels adjacent to Sierra Street west of State Route Freeway 99 to Rafer Johnson Drive; on the north side of Sierra Street west from Rafer Johnson Drive to the city limit line; and adjacent to the west side of State Route Freeway 99 north of Sierra Street to the city limit line. 
2.  Level 2 intensity shall apply to that portion of the city within the triangle area bounded by Sierra Street, State Route Freeway 99 and Bethel Avenue; between State Route Freeway 99 and Simpson Street north of Sierra Street to the city limit line; and along Draper Street west of State Route Freeway 99. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2(exh. A), 3-7-2012) 
17.80.020 - Swedish design standards. 
    The city council is empowered to adopt by resolution Swedish Village Design Standards and Guidelines, which contains specific criteria and guidelines for review of applications for new construction and exterior remodels within the Level 1 and Level 2 areas described in Section 17.80.010 and in accordance with Section 17.80.030. The city council may amend these standards from time to time, by resolution. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2(exh. A), 3-7-2012) 
17.80.030 - Architectural design review. 
    As part of the site plan review process, any project located within a Level 1 or Level 2 area as described in Section 17.80.010, shall be reviewed for compliance with the Swedish Village Design Standards and Guidelines as follows: 
    Level 1. All new construction and exterior remodeling shall conform to the Swedish Village Design Standards and Guidelines as adopted by the city council. 
    Level 2. 
A.  The project applicant shall make a good faith effort to conform new construction and exterior remodeling to the traditional and historic theme of the Swedish Village Design Standards and Guidelines with emphasis on the use of wood or wood in combination with brick, stone or stucco masonry, in the design of exterior walls. 
B.  Taking into consideration the type and size of the project, the project applicant shall make good faith efforts to incorporate as many Level 1 intensity elements as possible, including, without limitation, flower boxes, planers, awnings, mullion windows, use of brick or stone, and emulation of half-timbering, and/or such additional decorative features as window shutters, Dala horses, banners, Swedish and American flags, and other items with a Swedish theme. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2(exh. A), 3-7-2012) 
17.80.040 - Drawings to be submitted. 
    Projects subject to architectural review are required to submit an application to the planning department. Applications should be submitted concurrent with site plan review applications, if applicable. 
    Included in the project application package submitted to the planning department shall be architectural drawings or sketches, drawn to scale, showing all elevations of the proposed structures as they will appear upon completion of construction. All exterior surfacing materials and colors shall be specified. Scale drawings of all signs shall be submitted showing size, location, material, colors and illumination (if any). 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2(exh. A), 3-7-2012) 
17.80.050 - Referral and action. 
A.  The planning department shall review all project application drawings subject to review within fifteen (15) days after the project application is deemed complete by the city. 
B.  The planning department shall determine whether the project complies with the Swedish Village Design Standards and Guidelines and either approve, approve with conditions ensuring compliance, or deny the architectural review. 
C.  For projects requiring subsequent approvals by the planning commission and/or city council, the planning department determination shall be included in the reports to the planning commission or city council. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2(exh. A), 3-7-2012) 
17.80.060 - Appeals to planning commission. 
A.  Within ten (10) calendar days after the date of decision on an architectural review application by the planning department, the decision may be appealed to the planning commission by the applicant or any other interested party. An appeal shall be filed with the planning department. The appeal shall specifically identify the error or abuse of discretion by the planning department or other reasons for the appeal. 
B.  The appeal shall be placed on the agenda of the planning commission's next regular meeting after expiration of the ten-day appeal period. The planning commission shall approve, approve with conditions, or disapprove a project based on the findings set forth in Section 17.72.050 of this title. The decision of the planning commission shall be final unless appealed to the city council pursuant to Section 17.04.090 of this title. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2(exh. A), 3-7-2012) 
Chapter 17.84 - VARIANCES[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2, adopted Mar. 7, 2012, deleted the former Ch. 17.84, §§ 17.84.010-17.84.120, and enacted a new Ch. 17.84 as set out herein. The former Ch. 17.84 pertained to variances and derived from Ord. 92-11 § 1 (part), 1992: Ord. 408 (part), 1982. 

17.84.010 - Purposes. 
    The planning commission is empowered to grant variances only when, because of special circumstances applicable to the property, including size, shape, topography, location or surroundings, the strict application of the zoning ordinance deprives such property of privileges enjoyed by other property in the vicinity and under identical zoning classification. The power to grant variances does not extend to use regulations, because the flexibility necessary to avoid results inconsistent with the objectives of the zoning title is provided by the conditional use, planned unit development and amendment provisions of this title. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2(exh. A), 3-7-2012) 
17.84.020 - Authority of the planning commission. 
    The planning commission may grant variances to the regulations prescribed by this title only with respect to size, shape, topography, location or surroundings, and including fences and walls, site areas, coverage, yards, height of and distances between structures, off-street parking facilities and off-street loading facilities. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2(exh. A), 3-7-2012) 
17.84.030 - Application and fee. 
A.  Application for a variance shall be made to the planning department on a form prescribed by the department which shall include the following data: 
1.  Name and address of applicant. 
2.  Statement that the applicant is the owner of the property or is the authorized agent of the owner or the plaintiff in an action of eminent domain to acquire the property involved. 
3.  Address or description of property. 
4.  Statement of the precise nature of the variance requested and why approval is necessary under the purposes described in Section 17.84.010, together with any other data pertinent to the findings prerequisite to the granting of variance prescribed in Section 17.84.060. 
B.  The application shall be accompanied by a drawing of the site and any adjacent property affected, showing all existing and proposed locations of streets, property lines, uses, structures, driveways, pedestrian walks, off-street parking and off-street loading facilities and landscaped areas. 
C.  The application shall be accompanied by a fee set by resolution of the city council sufficient to cover the cost of processing the application. 
D.  The secretary of the planning commission shall give notice to the applicant of the time when the application will be considered, and may give notice of the time to any other interested party. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2(exh. A), 3-7-2012) 
17.84.040 - Hearing and notice. 
    The planning commission shall give notice and hold a public hearing on each application for a variance. 
    Notice of the public hearing shall be given not less than ten (10) days prior to the date of the hearing by (1) mailing a notice of the time and place of the hearing to all property owners within three hundred (300) feet of the area occupied by the proposed use; and by (2) publishing a notice at least once in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2(exh. A), 3-7-2012) 
17.84.050 - Public hearing-Procedure. 
    At a public hearing, the commission shall review the application and the statements and drawings submitted therewith and shall receive pertinent evidence concerning the variance, particularly with respect to the findings prescribed in Section 17.84.060. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2(exh. A), 3-7-2012) 
17.84.060 - Action of the planning commission. 
A.  The commission shall act on the application within thirty (30) days after the close of the public hearing. The commission may grant a variance to regulations prescribed by this title, as the variance was applied for or in modified form, if, on the basis of the application, investigation and evidence submitted, the commission makes the following findings: 
1.  That there are special circumstances or conditions applicable to the property involved, such that strict or literal interpretation and enforcement of the specified regulation would deprive the applicant of privileges enjoyed by the owners of other properties classified in the same zoning district. 
2.  That the granting of the variance will not constitute a grant of special privilege inconsistent with the limitations on other properties classified in the vicinity and in the same zoning district. 
The commission may grant a variance with respect to off-street parking or loading requirements as the variance was applied for or in modified form if the commission makes the following additional findings: 
3.  That neither present nor anticipated future traffic volumes generated by the use of the site or the uses of sites in the vicinity reasonably require strict or literal interpretation and enforcement of the specified regulation. 
4.  That the granting of the variance will not result in the parking or loading of vehicles on public streets in such a manner as to interfere with the free flow of traffic on the streets. 
5.  That the variance will not create a safety hazard or any other condition inconsistent with the objectives of the zoning title. 
B.  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection A. of this section, the commission may grant a variance with respect to off-street parking for non-residential development in order that some or all of the required parking spaces can be located offsite, including locations outside of the city limits, or that in-lieu fees or facilities be provided instead of the required parking spaces, if both of the following conditions are met: 
1.  The variance will be an incentive to, and a benefit for the non-residential development. 
2.  The variance will facilitate access to the non-residential development by patrons of public transit facilities. 
C.  In approving a variance, the commission shall add such conditions of approval as it deems necessary to assure that the variance adjustment shall not constitute a grant of special privilege as described under subsection A. of this section. 
D.  A variance may be revocable, may be granted for a limited time period, or may be granted subject to such conditions as the commission may prescribe. The commission may deny a variance application. 
E.  A variance shall become effective ten (10) calendar days following the date on which the variance was granted by the commission unless an appeal is filed with the city council. The first day being the day following the approval. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2(exh. A), 3-7-2012) 
17.84.070 - Appeal to city council. 
    The decision of the planning commission on a variance shall be subject to the appeal provisions of Section 17.04.090 of this title. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2(exh. A), 3-7-2012) 
17.84.080 - Building permit. 
    Before a building permit shall be issued for any building or structure proposed as part of the approved variance application, the planning director shall determine that the proposed building location, facilities and improvements are in conformity with the site plan and conditions approved by the planning commission. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2(exh. A), 3-7-2012) 
17.84.090 - Lapse of variance. 
    A variance shall lapse and shall become void one year following the date on which the variance becomes effective unless by condition of the variance a greater time is allowed, or unless prior to the expiration of one year, a building permit is issued by the building official and construction is commenced and diligently pursued toward completion on a site which was the subject of the variance application. A variance may be renewed for an additional one year, provided that prior to the expiration of one year from the date when the variance originally became effective, a request for renewal of the variance is made in writing to the planning commission. The commission may grant or deny a request for renewal of a variance. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2(exh. A), 3-7-2012) 
17.84.100 - Revocation. 
    Upon violation of any applicable provisions of this chapter, or the violation of failure to complete or satisfy any of the provisions of an approved variance, including without limitation, compliance or satisfaction of any variance conditions of approval, a variance shall automatically be suspended. Notice of such suspension shall be sent to the person or persons responsible for non-compliance by the planning department. Within thirty (30) days after the suspension, the planning commission shall consider the suspension, if the violation or failure to satisfy a condition has not been cured, the planning commission may revoke the variance approval or take such other action as may be necessary to ensure compliance with the regulation, general provision, condition or conditions. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2(exh. A), 3-7-2012) 
17.84.110 - New application. 
    Following the denial of a variance application or the revocation of a variance, no application for the same or substantially the same variance on the same or substantially the same site shall be filed within six months of the date of denial of the variance application or revocation of the variance. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2(exh. A), 3-7-2012) 
Chapter 17.85 - MINOR DEVIATIONS 

17.85.010 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to provide a mechanism whereby the planning director/head building official can grant minor deviations from zone district regulations. A minor deviation may be granted up to a ten percent (10%) deviation from the zone district regulations and setback distances. Any minor deviation that exceeds the ten percent (10%) deviation stated above shall be processed as a variance consistent with the provisions in Chapter 17.84, Variances. 
    Minor deviations shall only be granted when practical difficulties, unnecessary hardships and conditions, inconsistent with the purpose and objectives of this Title 17, result from the strict application of certain provisions of this Title 17. The granting of a minor deviation and its associated conditions shall not constitute a special privilege inconsistent with the limitations on other properties in vicinity and in other zone districts in Kingsburg. 
(Ord. No. 2017-002, § 2(Exh. A), 5-17-2017) 
17.85.020 - Applicability. 
    The planning director/head building official may grant a ten percent (10%) minor deviation from zone district regulations, including setbacks, lot dimensions, height of structures and fences, walls and hedges, lot coverage, parking standards and sign regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2017-002, § 2(Exh. A), 5-17-2017) 
17.85.030 - Application and Fee. 
    An application for a minor deviation shall be made to the planning department on a form prescribed by the planning department. A processing fee set by resolution of the city council shall accompany the application. 
(Ord. No. 2017-002, § 2(Exh. A), 5-17-2017) 
17.85.040 - Report and Findings. 
    The planning director/head building official shall prepare a report on the minor deviation application and shall make the following findings with regard to a minor deviation. 
A.  There are special circumstances applicable to the property, including, without limitation, size, shape, topography, location, surroundings, or unclear property lines, where the strict application of this Title 17 deprives such property a right possessed by other property in the same vicinity or other properties that have the same zone district classification; 
B.  That granting a minor deviation is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a substantial property right possessed by other property in the same vicinity or other properties that have the same zone district classification; 
C.  That granting the minor deviation will not be materially detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare, or injurious to the property or improvements in the vicinity and zone district in which the property is located; and 
D.  That granting the minor deviation does not constitute a special privilege inconsistent with the limitations upon other properties in the vicinity and zone district in which the property is located. 
(Ord. No. 2017-002, § 2(Exh. A), 5-17-2017) 
17.85.050 - Action of the Planning Director/Head Building Official. 
    The planning director or head building official shall process minor deviations as an administrative action. Following a review of a minor deviation application and the findings listed above, the planning director/head building official shall issue a written decision on the minor deviation. The written decision will either approve, approve with conditions or deny the application for minor deviation based on the findings listed above. The written decision will be signed and dated by the planning director/head building official, and mailed to the applicant. The decision of the planning director/head building official shall be final unless appealed to the planning commission within ten (10) days after the date the written decision is mailed to the applicant. The planning commission will be notified of all minor deviations granted by the planning director/head building official. 
(Ord. No. 2017-002, § 2(Exh. A), 5-17-2017) 
17.85.060 - Conditions. 
    The planning director/head building official can approve a minor deviation subject to conditions. Conditions will assure that the approved minor deviation shall not constitute a grant of a special privilege inconsistent with the limitations upon other properties in the vicinity and zone district in which such property is situated. 
(Ord. No. 2017-002, § 2(Exh. A), 5-17-2017) 
Chapter 17.86 - ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS 

17.86.010 - Title. 
    This chapter shall be titled "Adult Entertainment Establishments." 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, § 1, 3-4-09) 
17.86.020 - Purpose and intent. 
(a)  It is the purpose of this chapter to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the concentration of adult entertainment establishments, as defined herein, within the city. 
(b)  It is the intent of this chapter that these regulations be utilized to prevent problems of blight and deterioration which accompany and are brought about by the concentration of adult entertainment establishments. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, § 1, 3-4-09) 
17.86.030 - Definitions. 
(a)  It is the purpose of this section to provide clear and concise definitions of those words, terms and phrases most commonly used in the provisions of this chapter in order to assist in the uniform interpretation of said provisions and to ensure uniformity in their application. 
(b)  It is intended that the following words, terms and phrases, whenever used in this chapter, shall be construed as defined in the following subsections, unless from the context, a different meaning is specifically defined and more particularly directed to the use of such words, terms and phrases. 
    Adult bookstore is an establishment that devotes more than ten percent (10%) of the total display, shelf, rack, table, stand or floor area of the premises to the display for sale, rent or display of merchandise, books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, tapes, records, DVDs, CD-ROMs, or other forms of visual or audio representations which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas or instruments, devices or paraphernalia which are designed for use in connection with specified sexual activities. 
    Adult cabaret is any nightclub, bar, restaurant, or other similar establishment that regularly features live performances or features films, motion pictures, video cassettes, DVDs, CD-ROMs, slides or other photographic reproductions that are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons. 
    Adult drive-in theater means an open lot or part thereof, devoted primarily to the presentation of live performances, motion pictures, films, theatrical productions or other forms of visual productions, to persons in motor vehicles or on outdoor seating, where the material being presented is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Adult mini-motion picture theater is an establishment, with a capacity of more than five but less than fifty (50) persons, where films, motion pictures, video cassettes, DVDs, CD-ROMs, slides or similar photographic reproductions are shown and where the material shown is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Adult model studio is any establishment open to the public where figure models who display specified anatomical areas are provided to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted by other persons. This provision shall not apply to any school of art which is operated by an individual, firm, association, partnership, corporation, or institution that is authorized under the California Education Code to issue or confer a diploma. 
    Adult motel is a motel or similar establishment offering public accommodations which provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, DVDs, CD-ROMs or other photographic reproductions distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Adult motion picture arcade (peep show) is any place where coin- or slug-operated or electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors or other image-producing devices are available for observation to show images and the images so shown or displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Adult motion picture theater is an establishment with a seating capacity of fifty (50) or more persons where films, motion pictures, video cassettes, DVDs, CD-ROMs, slides or similar photographic reproductions are shown and where the material is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Adult theater is any theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar business either indoor or outdoor, which regularly features live performances that are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or exposure of specified anatomical areas. 
    Adult video cassette, DVD and CD-ROM sales and rental has the same meaning as "adult bookstore." 
    Adult video games are coin-operated or electronic game machines having visual displays and animation that depict in any manner any sort of activity characterized by emphasis upon depiction or description of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities. 
    Body painting studio is an establishment or business which provides the service of applying paint or other substance, whether transparent or nontransparent, to or on specified anatomical areas. 
    Establishing an adult entertainment business as used in this chapter, means and includes the opening or commencement of any such business as a new business; the conversion of an existing business, whether or not an adult entertainment business, to any of the adult entertainment businesses defined in this chapter; the addition of any of the adult entertainment businesses defined herein to any other existing adult entertainment business; or the relocation of any adult entertainment business. 
    General bookstore is an establishment engaged in the buying, selling and/or trading of new and/or used books, manuscripts, and periodicals of general interest. A general bookstore does not include an establishment that is encompassed by the definition of adult bookstore. 
    General motion picture theater is a building or part of a building intended to be used for the specific purposes of presenting entertainment as defined in this chapter, or displaying motion pictures, DVDs, CD-ROMs, slides or closed circuit television pictures before an individual or assemblage of persons whether such assemblage be of a public, restricted or private nature, except a private home provided, however, that any such presentations are not distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the depiction or description to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas but such depiction or description is only incidental to the plot or story line. 
    Headshop is an establishment or place where more than fifteen percent (15%) of the floor area in any room is used for the sale and display of such paraphernalia and literature commonly associated with the use of narcotics and controlled substances, including, but not limited to cocaine; and sniffing kits; glass mirrors for cutting narcotics or controlled substances; snorting spoons and tubes; strainers to sift narcotics or controlled substances; water pipes (bongs); everyday items with special removable tops that have been converted to conceal narcotics and drugs, including beer cans, oil cans and plastic photographic film vials; roach clips (for holding marijuana cigarettes); books and magazines extolling the use of narcotics or controlled substances. Such a place is an adult entertainment establishment. This definition does not limit licensed pharmacies in selling and displaying medicinal equipment prescribed by licensed medical practitioners. 
    Legitimate or live theater is a theater, concert hall, auditorium or similar establishment which regularly features live performances which are not distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas in that any such depiction or description is only incidental to the primary purpose of the performance. 
    Massage parlor is an establishment and any appurtenant facilities that are primarily where massage, alcohol rub, fomentation, body scrub, body shampoo, electric or magnetic treatment, or similar treatment or manipulation of the human body is administered, unless the treatment or manipulation is administered by a medical practitioner, chiropractor, acupuncturist, physical therapist, or similar professional person licensed by the State of California. This definition does not include an athletic club, health club, pool, gymnasium, reducing salon, spa or similar establishment where massage or similar manipulation of the human body is offered as an incidental or accessory service. 
    Outcall entertainment business means any person who, for a fee, commission, hire, reward or profit, furnishes or offers to furnish an outcall entertainer, as defined in this section, for any individual or group at a location other than a fixed business establishment identified in section 17.86.040. Outcall entertainment business includes businesses that provide outcall entertainers such as lingerie models and strippers. 
    Outcall entertainer includes strippers for bachelor and bachelorette parties, lingerie models, and other similar entertainers or any person who entertains while nude or whose performance is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the display of specific anatomical areas or specified sexual activities. 
    Public park is a publicly owned area that is designated by the city as a park. 
    Private viewing room is an area separated from the sales display area of an establishment by a curtain, wall, door, shade or similar obstruction thus allowing the private viewing by customers of the establishment of video tapes, movies, DVDs, CD-ROMs, transparencies, films or projectable motion picture the content of which is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing specific sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Religious institution is any church, synagogue, mosque, temple or building which is used primarily for religious worship and related religious activities. 
    School is an institution of learning for minors, whether public or private, which offers instruction in those courses of study required by the California Education Code and which is maintained pursuant to standards set by the state board of education. This definition includes a nursery school, kindergarten, elementary school, junior high school, senior high school, or any special institution of learning under the jurisdiction of the state department of education, but it does not include a vocation or professional institution or an institution of higher education, including a community college. 
    Sexual encounter establishment is an establishment, other than a hotel, motel or similar establishment offering public accommodations, which provides a place where two or more persons may congregate, associate, or consort in connection with specified sexual activities or the exposure of specified anatomical areas. This definition does not include an establishment where a medical practitioner, psychologist, psychiatrist or similar professional person licensed by the State of California engages in sexual therapy. Sexual encounter establishment shall include massage parlor and other similar establishments. 
    Social service institution is an organization engaged in activities that promote social welfare, including philanthropic assistance to the sick or needy. 
    Specified anatomical areas means and includes less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus or female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areolae, or human male genitals in a discernible turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
    Specified sexual activities means and includes any fondling or other touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus or female breasts; sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation, or sodomy; masturbation, actual or simulated; or excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in this subsection. 
    Transfer of ownership or control, as used in this chapter, means and includes the sale, lease or sublease of an adult entertainment business; the transfer of securities, membership or partnership interests or other type of ownership interest which constitute a controlling interest in such business, whether by sale, exchange or similar means; or the establishment of a trust, gift or other similar legal device which transfers the ownership or control of such business, except for transfer by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the person possessing such ownership or control. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, § 1, 3-4-09) 
17.86.040 - Prohibitions. 
(a)  No person or entity shall own, establish, operate, control or enlarge, or cause or permit the establishment, operation, enlargement or transfer of ownership or control of any of the following adult entertainment establishments unless such adult entertainment establishment is located more than five hundred (500) feet from another adult entertainment establishment and more than one thousand (1,000) feet from any religious institution, school, public park, social service institution, or any residentially zoned property located within the city measured from property lines: 
1.  Adult bookstore; 
2.  Adult cabaret; 
3.  Adult drive-in theater; 
4.  Adult mini-motion picture arcade (peep show); 
5.  Adult mini-motion picture theater; 
6.  Adult model studio; 
7.  Adult motel; 
8.  Adult motion picture arcade (peep show); 
9.  Adult theater; 
10.  Adult video cassette and DVD sales and rentals; 
11.  Adult video games; 
12.  Body painting studio; 
13.  Headshop; 
14.  Massage parlor; 
15.  Outcall entertainment business; 
16.  Sexual encounter establishment; or 
17.  Any other business which involves specified sexual activities or display of specified anatomical areas. 
(b)  An establishment listed in subsection (a) of this section shall not be established, operated, enlarged or transferred unless the zone district in which the site or proposed site is located permits such a use. The conduct of such establishment and the use of premises shall otherwise comply with all applicable federal, state, county and city laws, ordinances, rules and regulations. 
(c)  All adult entertainment establishments as listed in subsection (a) of this section shall only be permitted within any Light Industrial zone district in the city provided the minimum distance requirements as set forth in subsection (a) of this section are met and upon the prior issuance by the city of a conditional use permit in accordance with the provisions of chapter 17.68 of the Kingsburg Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, § 1, 3-4-09) 
17.86.050 - Measure of distance. 
    The required minimum distance between any two adult entertainment businesses shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures, from the closest property line of each such business. The distance between any adult entertainment business and any religious institution, school, public park, social service institution, or residentially zoned land shall be measured in a straight line without regard to intervening structures, from the closest property line of the adult entertainment business to the closest property line of the religious institution, school, public park, social service institution, or residential zone. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, § 1, 3-4-09) 
17.86.060 - Development and maintenance standards. 
    To further accomplish the purpose of this chapter, all adult entertainment businesses shall comply with the following: 
(a)  Signs. In addition to the requirements of Section 17.56.050 of Chapter 17.56 of Title 17 of the Kingsburg Municipal Code, all signs shall be subject to the following regulations: 
1.  Each adult entertainment business shall be allowed one permanent sign, the area of which shall not exceed two hundred (200) square feet; 
2.  Temporary advertising signs are not permitted; 
3.  Except for theater signs, changeable copy signs are not permitted; and 
4.  No sign shall depict or describe any specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities. 
(b)  Exterior painting. Buildings and structures shall be painted or surfaced with colors or textures that are similar to neighboring buildings or structures as determined by the city planning department. Buildings and structures shall not be painted or surfaced with any design that would simulate a sign or advertising message. 
(c)  [Interior material.] Advertisements, displays of merchandise, signs or any other exhibit depicting adult entertainment activities placed within the interior of buildings or premises shall be arranged or screened to prevent public viewing from outside such buildings or premises. 
(d)  [Outdoor sound equipment.] Outdoor loudspeakers or other outdoor sound equipment advertising or directing attention to an adult entertainment are prohibited. 
(e)  [Alcohol consumption.] No consumption of alcohol shall be allowed in conjunction with, or on the premises of, any adult entertainment establishment. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, § 1, 3-4-09) 
17.86.070 - Application. 
    Notwithstanding any other provision of the Kingsburg Municipal Code to the contrary, the provisions of this chapter shall be applicable to all land within the city, including all redevelopment project areas now in existence or hereafter established. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, § 1, 3-4-09) 
17.86.080 - Other regulations, permits or licenses. 
    The provisions of this chapter do not waive or modify any other provision of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, § 1, 3-4-09) 
17.86.090 - Protection of persons under the age of 21. 
    The operation of adult entertainment establishments shall specifically prohibit the admission of persons under the age of twenty-one (21). 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, § 1, 3-4-09) 
17.86.100 - Private viewing rooms. 
    It is unlawful for any person or entity which is subject to the regulations of this chapter, and which sells or rents prerecorded video tapes, movies, transparencies, films, DVDs, CD-ROMs, projectable motion pictures or equipment used for showing any or all of these items, to offer or allow the viewing of these materials in private viewing rooms, as defined in section 17.86.040. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, § 1, 3-4-09) 
17.86.110 - Regulations governing existing adult entertainment establishments. 
    An adult entertainment establishment hereinafter permitted and legally operating as a conforming use is not rendered a nonconforming use by the location of a religious institution, school, public park, social service institution or a residential (including office residential) zone within one thousand (1,000) feet of the adult entertainment establishment. This provision does not apply after a conditional use permit has expired, been suspended or revoked. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, § 1, 3-4-09) 
17.86.120 - Enforcement. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced in accordance with the applicable provisions of the Kingsburg Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, § 1, 3-4-09) 
Chapter 17.88 - AMENDMENTS 

17.88.010 - Purpose. 
    As the Kingsburg general plan is carried out over the years, there will be a need for changes in district boundaries and other regulations of this title. As the general plan is reviewed and revised periodically, other changes in the regulations of this code may be warranted. Such amendments shall be made in accordance with the procedure prescribed in this chapter. 
(Ord. 92-11 § 1 (part), 1992: Ord. 408 (part), 1982) 
17.88.020 - Initiation. 
A.  A change in the boundaries of any district may be initiated by the owner of the property within the area for which a change of district is proposed, or the authorized agent of the owner, as prescribed in Section 17.88.030, provided, however, that the city may not accept an application for an amendment which is not consistent with the general plan. 
B.  A change in boundaries of any district, or a change in a district regulation, off-street parking or loading facilities requirement, general provision, exception or other provision may be initiated by action of the planning commission, or by action of the city council in the form of a request to the commission that it consider a proposed change, provided that in either case the procedure prescribed in Sections 17.88.040, 17.88.080 and 17.88.110 shall be followed. 
(Ord. 92-11 § 1 (part), 1992: Ord. 408 (part), 1982) 
17.88.030 - Application and fee. 
A.  A property owner or his/her authorized agent desiring to propose a change in the boundaries of the district in which his/her property is located, may file an application with the planning department for a change of district boundaries on a form prescribed by the department, which shall include the following information: 
1.  Name and address of the applicant. 
2.  Statement that the applicant is the owner of the property for which the change in district boundaries is proposed or the authorized agent of the owner, or the plaintiff in an action of eminent domain to acquire the property involved. 
3.  Address and description of the property. 
B.  The application shall be accompanied by a drawing of the site and the surrounding area for a distance of at least three hundred (300) feet from each boundary of the site, showing the location of streets and property lines and the names and last known addresses of the recorded legal owners of all properties shown on the drawing, as shown on the latest adopted tax roll of the County of San Joaquin. Assessor's maps may be used for this purpose. 
C.  The application shall be accompanied by a fee set by resolution of the city council, sufficient to cover the cost of processing the application as prescribed in this chapter. 
D.  Amendments to this title required as the result of general plan amendments initiated by the planning commission or city council shall be processed at the expense of the city. 
(Ord. 92-11 § 1 (part), 1992: Ord. 408 (part), 1982) 
17.88.040 - Public hearing-Notice. 
A.  The planning commission shall hold a public hearing on each application for a change in district boundaries or of a district regulation, off-street parking or loading facilities requirement, general provision, exception or other provision of this ordinance initiated by the city council within forty-five (45) days of the date when the application was filed or the proposal was initiated. 
B.  Notice of a public hearing shall be given not less than ten (10) days prior to the date of the hearing by publication in at least one newspaper of general circulation within the city, which notice shall contain the date, time and place of the public hearing, the identity of the hearing body (planning commission or city council), a general explanation of the matter being considered, and a general description either in text or by diagram of the location of the real property, if any, which is the subject of the hearing. 
C.  Notice of a public hearing for an amendment pertaining to real property shall be given not less than ten (10) days prior to the date of the hearing in all of the following ways: 
1.  Publication as specified under Subsection B. of this section. 
2.  First class mailing, postage prepaid, at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing, a notice of the time and place of the hearing to the owner of the subject real property or the owner's duly authorized agent, and to the project applicant. 
3.  First class mailing, postage prepaid, a notice of the time and place of the hearing to all persons whose names appear on the property owners list submitted under Section 17.88.030. 
4.  First class mailing, postage prepaid, a notice of the time and place of the hearing to any person who has filed a written request, therefore, with the city council. Such request may be submitted at any time during the calendar year and shall apply to the balance of such year. 
(Ord. 92-11 § 1 (part), 1992: Ord. 408 (part), 1982) 
17.88.050 - Hearing. 
A.  At the public hearing, the planning commission shall review the application or the proposal and may receive pertinent evidence and testimony as to why and how the proposed change is necessary to achieve the objectives of the zoning title prescribed in Section 17.04.020, or why and how the proposed change is consistent with the general plan and the stated purposes and application intended for the zone classification proposed. 
B.  The commission may review proposals for the use of the property for which a change in district boundaries is proposed, or plans or drawings showing proposed structures or other improvements, in light of the fact that under the provisions of this code, a change in district boundaries cannot be made conditionally, except as provided in Section 17.88.100, and the owner of the property is bound only to comply with the regulations prescribed in this title. 
(Ord. 92-11 § 1 (part), 1992: Ord. 408 (part), 1982) 
17.88.060 - Investigation and report. 
    The planning department shall make an investigation of the application and shall prepare a report thereon, which shall be submitted to the planning commission, including a recommendation as to the action to be taken by the commission and a statement supporting such recommendation. 
(Ord. 92-11 § 1 (part), 1992: Ord. 408 (part), 1982) 
17.88.070 - Action of the planning commission. 
    Within forty (40) days after the completion of the public hearing, the planning commission shall make a specific finding in writing as to whether the change is required to achieve the objectives set forth in Section 17.04.020 of the zoning title, whether the change is consistent with the purposes and intended application of the zoning district affected or proposed, and that the change will be consistent with applicable provisions of the general plan. The commission shall transmit a report to the city council that the application is granted or denied, or that the proposal be adopted or rejected, including a written statement of the reasons for the recommendation, together with one copy of the complete record developed by the commission. 
(Ord. 92-11 § 1 (part), 1992: Ord. 408 (part), 1982) 
17.88.080 - Action by city council. 
A.  Upon receipt of the resolution and report of the planning commission, the city council shall hold a public hearing; provided, however, that if the matter under consideration is an amendment to change property from one district classification to another, and the planning commission has recommended against the adoption of the amendment, the city council need not take any further action thereon unless an interested party shall request such a hearing by filing a written appeal with the city clerk within five days after the planning commission files its recommendations with the city council. 
B.  Notice of the hearing shall be given in the manner provided under Section 17.88.040 of this chapter. 
C.  Within thirty (30) days following the close of the hearing, the city council shall make a specific finding in writing as to whether the amendment is required in order to achieve consistency with the general plan, to achieve the objectives set forth in Section 17.04.020 of the zoning title, and the stated purposes and application intended for the zone district classification proposed. 
D.  The city council may approve, modify or disapprove the recommendation of the planning commission; provided, however, that any modification shall first be referred to the planning commission for report and recommendation, but the commission shall not be required to hold a hearing thereon. Failure of the commission to report within forty (40) days of the reference, or such longer period as may be designated by the council, shall be deemed approval of the proposed modification. 
E.  If the council finds that the proposed change is required, in its original or modified form, it shall enact an ordinance amending the regulations of this title, or grant a special zoning exception as prescribed in Section 17.88.100. If the council finds that a change is not required, it shall deny the application or proposal for change. 
(Ord. 92-11 § 1 (part), 1992: Ord. 408 (part), 1982) 
17.88.090 - Relationship to environmental impact assessment and environmental impact reporting process. 
    An amendment to the zoning title shall be subject to the same procedures and regulations with respect to environmental assessment as are set forth for site plan review under the provisions of Section 17.72.080 of this title. 
(Ord. 92-11 § 1 (part), 1992: Ord. 408 (part), 1982) 
17.88.100 - Special zoning exceptions-Alternate procedure for action of the planning commission and city council. 
    Whenever an application is filed with the city for a change in district boundaries, the planning commission and city council, in lieu of granting or denying said application, may grant to the applicant a special zoning exception by resolution which will permit said applicant (or his/her assignee) to develop or use said property in accordance with said application and the provisions of this section. 
A.  Before a special zoning exception may be granted by the planning commission, the commission may require the applicant to submit additional information relative to the application in the manner required in the filing of an application for a conditional use permit under this title. In any event, the provisions of Sections 17.88.010 through 17.88.080 and Sections 17.88.110 and 17.88.120 shall apply in addition to the provisions of this section. In filing an application, the applicant may request that the application be considered as a request for a special zoning exception. 
B.  The planning commission may grant a special zoning exception subject to any of the conditions prescribed in Section 17.72.040 and in accordance with the provisions of Sections 17.68.090 through 17.68.110 and Sections 17.72.030, 17.72.040 and 17.72.050 through 17.72.090 of this title. 
C.  Upon being granted a special zoning exception by the city council, the applicant shall develop his/her property in accordance with approved plans and conditions imposed under the provisions of this section. 
D.  Upon the development and use of property in accordance with the provision of Subsection C. of this section, the district or part thereof for which the special zoning exception was granted, shall be thereon rezoned, altered, amended and established in accordance with the original application, or as set forth in the order of the city council made at the time said zoning exception was granted. 
(Ord. 92-11 § 1 (part), 1992: Ord. 408 (part), 1982) 
17.88.110 - Change of zone plan. 
    A change in a district boundary shall be indicated on the zone plan with a notation of the date and number of the ordinance amending the plan. 
(Ord. 92-11 § 1 (part), 1992: Ord. 408 (part), 1982) 
17.88.120 - New application. 
    Following the denial of an application for a change in district boundary, no application for the same or substantially the same change shall be filed within six months of the date of denial of the application. 
(Ord. 92-11 § 1 (part), 1992: Ord. 408 (part), 1982) 
Chapter 17.90 - DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENTS 

17.90.010 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to provide a mechanism that assures the applicant of a development project that upon approval, the applicant may proceed with the project in accordance with existing policies, rules and regulations and conditions that were applicable at the time of project approval, and in a manner consistent with California Government Code 65864 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2(exh. A), 3-7-2012) 
17.90.020 - Objective. 
    The objective of a development agreement is to strengthen the public planning process, encourage private participation in comprehensive planning, reduce the economic costs of development and promote the construction of public improvements by the private sector by providing for provisions in the agreement whereby the applicant is reimbursed over time for the financing of the public improvements. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2(exh. A), 3-7-2012) 
17.90.030 - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this chapter, a development agreement shall mean the following: 
    "Development agreement." A contract duly executed and legally binding between the City of Kingsburg and a developer(s) that delineates the terms and conditions agreed upon by two or more parties. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2(exh. A), 3-7-2012) 
17.90.040 - Development agreement requirements. 
To enter into a development agreement, the city shall find that: 
A.  A person has a legal and/or equitable interest in real property for the development of such property; and 
B.  The development project is consistent with the Kingsburg General Plan any applicable specific plan and the applicable provisions of this code. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2(exh. A), 3-7-2012) 
17.90.050 - Development agreement contents. 
    A development agreement shall specify, among other necessary provisions as determined by the city or required by California Government Code Section 65864, et seq., the duration of the agreement, the permitted uses of the property, the density or intensity of use, the maximum height and size of proposed buildings, and provisions for reservation or dedication of land or facilities for pubic purposes. The development agreement may include conditions, terms, restrictions and requirements for subsequent discretionary actions, provided that such conditions, terms, restrictions and requirements shall not prevent development of the land for uses and to the density or intensity of development set forth in the agreement. The agreement may require that construction shall be commenced within a specified time and that the project or any phase thereof be completed within a specified time. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2(exh. A), 3-7-2012) 
17.90.060 - Application. 
    Should a person or entity wish to develop land pursuant to the provisions of a development agreement, the person or entity shall file an application for use of a development agreement with the planning department on a form prescribed by the planning department. The application shall be accompanied by a fee set by resolution of the city council. Also, the city may require the use of a development agreement for the development of any land within the city limits of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2(exh. A), 3-7-2012) 
17.90.070 - Hearings and notice. 
    The planning commission and city council shall each hold a public hearing on the adoption of a development agreement. The city shall give notice of intention to consider adoption o the development agreement. Notice of public hearing shall be given as provided in California Government Code Sections 65090 and 65901 in addition to any other notice required by law for other actions to be considered concurrently with the development agreement. The form of the public notice to consider adoption of the development agreement shall contain the time and place of the hearing; a general explanation of the matter to be considered including a general description of the area affected; and other information required by this code or applicable law or which the city considers necessary or desirable. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2(exh. A), 3-7-2012) 
17.90.080 - Report and findings. 
    The planning department shall prepare a report on the request for adoption of a development agreement. The planning department shall provide a recommendation to the planning commission and city council based on the following findings: 
A.  Is the project consistent with the Kingsburg General Plan and any applicable specific plan? 
B.  Is the project in compliance with the applicable city zoning and use in the applicable zone district, all applicable development standards and specifications and other applicable laws, rules and regulations? 
C.  The project will not be detrimental to the public health, safety and general welfare? 
D.  The project will provide sufficient benefit to the city to justify entering into the development agreement? 
E.  The project will not have a significant impact on the environment? 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2(exh. A), 3-7-2012) 
17.90.090 - Action of planning commission. 
    During the public hearing, the planning commission shall review the planning department's report and shall take action on the development agreement. The planning commission can approve, approve with conditions or deny the development agreement. The planning commission's action and findings shall be forwarded to the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2(exh. A), 3-7-2012) 
17.90.100 - Action of city council. 
    During a public hearing, the city council shall review the planning department's report and consider the planning commission's recommendation and shall take action on the development agreement. The council can approve, approve with modifications or deny the development agreement. Subsequent to a decision by the city council, the following actions shall be initiated: 
    If the council approves or approves with modification the development agreement, it shall initiate proceedings to adopt an ordinance. After the ordinance takes effect, the city may enter into the approved development agreement with the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2(exh. A), 3-7-2012) 
17.90.110 - Initiation of amendment or cancellation. 
    A development agreement may be amended, or cancelled in whole or in part, by mutual consent of the parties to the agreement or their successors in interest. Notice of intention to amend or cancel any portion of the agreement shall be given in the manner provided by California Government Code Section 65867. An amendment to an agreement shall be subject to the he provisions of the California Government Code Section 65867.5. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2(exh. A), 3-7-2012) 
17.90.120 - Recordation of development agreement. 
A.  Within ten (10) days after the city enters into the development agreement, the city shall have the agreement recorded with the county recorder against title to the real property upon which the development will be constructed. Unless otherwise agreed by the city, the development agreement shall be senior in title to all other liens or encumbrances of title to said real property. 
B.  If the parties to the development agreement or their successors in interest amend or cancel the development agreement, or if the city terminates or modifies the development agreement, the city shall have notice of such action recorded with the county recorder. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2(exh. A), 3-7-2012) 
17.90.130 - Review of development agreement. 
A.  The planning department shall review the development agreement at least once every twelve (12) months after the date of the development agreement is entered into. The planning department shall report the findings to the city council. The time for review may be modified by agreement between the parties. 
B.  Should the planning director find that the developer is in non-compliance or not performing consistent with the provisions of the development agreement, the director shall report this finding to the city council. The city council may terminate the development agreement consistent with Section 17.90.110 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2012-02, § 2(exh. A), 3-7-2012) 
Chapter 17.92 - ENFORCEMENT* 

17.92.010 - Permits, certificates and licenses. 
    All officials, departments and employees of the city of Kingsburg vested with the authority or duty to issue permits, certificates or licenses, shall comply with the provisions of this title and shall issue no permit, certificate or license which conflicts with the provisions of this title. Any permits, certificates or licenses issued in conflict with the provisions of this code shall be void. Before issuing a business license for any new business or for a new location for any existing business activity, the city finance director or other authorized licensing official shall obtain the approval of the building department with regard to compliance with the provisions of this title. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement) 
17.92.020 - Duties of officials. 
    The planning and development director, building official, chief of police, fire chief, and public works director, or their respective designees, shall be the officials responsible for the enforcement procedures set forth in this Chapter. In the discharge of their duties, these officials shall have the right to enter on any site, or to enter any structure for the purpose of investigation and inspection, provided the right of entry shall be exercised only at reasonable hours and that, in no case shall any structure be entered in the absence of the owner or tenant without the written order of a court of competent jurisdiction. These officials may serve notice requiring the removal of any structure or use in violation of the Kingsburg Municipal Code upon the owner or his/her authorized agent, on a tenant, or on an architect, builder, contractor, or other person who commits or participates in any violation. These officials may also serve notice requiring the termination and/or cure of any other violation of the Kingsburg Municipal Code upon the violator of any provision of the Kingsburg Municipal Code. These officials may call upon the city attorney to institute the necessary legal proceedings to enforce the provisions of the Kingsburg Municipal Code and the city attorney is hereby authorized to institute appropriate actions to that end. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement) 
(Ord. No. 2010-02, § 8, 7-21-2010) 
17.92.021 - Abatement. 
    Whenever the planning and development director, the building official, the chief of police, the fire chief, the public works director, or their respective designees (collectively "code enforcement officer") has inspected or determines that conditions constituting a violation of the Kingsburg Municipal Code and/or if a public nuisance exists, the code enforcement officer may use the procedures set forth in this Chapter for the abatement, termination and/or cure of such violation or nuisance. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement) 
(Ord. No. 2009-02, § 1, 2009; Ord. No. 2010-02, § 9, 7-21-2010) 
17.92.030 - Violations-Penalties. 
A.  Except as otherwise provided in Section 1.20.010B of Chapter 1.20 of Title 1 of the Kingsburg Municipal Code, any person, firm, corporation, or organization violating any provision of the Kingsburg Municipal Code shall be guilty of an infraction. A person, firm, corporation, or organization shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day a violation is committed and continues to exist. 
B.  Any violations of the Kingsburg Municipal Code shall be and are hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. The city attorney is authorized to institute legal proceedings in order to prosecute said infraction and/or for the abatement, removal, enjoinment, termination, or cure of any such violation or public nuisance in the manner provided by law and shall take such other steps as may be necessary in order to enforce the provisions of the Kingsburg Municipal Code. 
C.  A fine for violations of the Kingsburg Municipal Code may be assessed by means of an administrative citation issued by the code enforcement officer, and shall be payable to the city. 
D.  Fines assessed by means of an administrative citation shall be collected in accordance with the procedures specified in this chapter. 
E.  The city may seek any and all other civil and administrative remedies provided by law. 
F.  All remedies provided for herein shall be accumulative and not exclusive. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement) 
(Ord. No. 2009-02, § 1, 2009; Ord. No. 2010-02, § 10, 7-21-2010) 
17.92.040 - Property maintenance. 
A.  It is hereby declared to be a public nuisance for any person owning, leasing, occupying or having charge or possession of any property within the city of Kingsburg to maintain such premises in such manner that any of the following conditions are found to exist thereon: 
1.  The real property or any buildings, structures, or improvements which violate the city's building code by creating a fire hazard, danger to human life, or hazards to public health, safety and general welfare, including dilapidation, broken equipment, hazardous pools, excavations, neglected machinery, indiscriminate outdoor storage of household goods or equipment, the keeping and outdoor storage of vehicles incapable of moving under their own power, and other similar attractive nuisances. 
2.  Premises not maintained so as to constitute a fire hazard by reason of weeds, grass, rank overgrowth or accumulation of debris, or which could harbor rats or other vermin, create unsightly appearance, or create conditions which are detrimental to neighboring properties. 
3.  Broken windows or other structural defects which create hazardous conditions and invite trespassing and malicious mischief, including unsafe structural supports, boarded doorways and windows, dry rot, termites and similar hazards. 
4.  Clothes lines within front yard areas. 
5.  Garbage cans and garbage receptacles permanently stored within front yards which are visible from the public street and neighboring property owners. 
6.  Failure to maintain any wall, fence or hedge as to constitute a hazard to persons or property or to create an unsightly appearance. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement) 
17.92.041 - Issuance of administrative citations. 
    The code enforcement officer shall issue an administrative citation, and serve the same in accordance with the provision of Section 17.92.042 on the landowner and the person, if other than the landowner, occupying or otherwise in apparent charge or control of the property. The administrative citation shall contain the following: 
A.  The street address or assessor's parcel number and location description sufficient for identification of the property on which the violation and/or public nuisance exists; 
B.  A statement that the code enforcement officer has determined that a violation and/or a public nuisance exists on the property, with a brief description of the conditions that render the property in violation and/or as a public nuisance and identification of the section(s) of the Kingsburg Municipal Code or other law or regulation violated; 
C.  A statement to require the violator(s) to obtain all appropriate permits and correct the violation or abate the public nuisance within the time period identified in the administrative citation which time period shall not exceed ten (10) days from the date of service of the administrative citation, unless the code enforcement officer identifies a longer period of time on the administrative citation; 
D.  A statement advising that the disposal of material removed from the property in order to comply with the administrative citation shall be disposed of in the manner required by law; 
E.  A statement advising that if the required work is not commenced within the time specified, the code enforcement officer may proceed to cause the work to be done, and bill the persons named in the administrative citation for all abatement costs and administrative expenses of the city and/or levy the costs against the property by recordation of a notice of lien in accordance with Section 17.92.053 of this chapter; 
F.  Amount of fine imposed for the violation(s); 
G.  Explanation of how the fine shall be paid and the consequences of failure to pay the fine; 
H.  Signature of the code enforcement officer and the signature of the violator if the violator can be located. If the violator refuses or does not sign the administrative citation, the lack of such signature shall in no way affect the validity of the administrative citation and subsequent proceedings; 
I.  A statement advising the person or persons identified in the administrative citation that they may appeal the issuance of the administrative citation in accordance with Section 17.92.046 of this chapter. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement) 
17.92.042 - Service of administrative citation. 
    The administrative citation, and any documents related thereto shall be served by one of the following methods: 
A.  Personal service; or 
B.  First class mail, postage prepaid, to each person identified in Section 17.92.041 at the address as it appears on the last equalized assessment roll of the county, or as otherwise known to the code enforcement officer. The address of the property owner shown on the assessment roll shall be conclusively deemed to be the property address for the purpose of service of the administrative citation. Service by mail in the manner described above shall be effective on the date of mailing; 
C.  The failure of the person with an interest in the property to receive any administrative citation served in accordance with this section shall not affect the validity of any proceedings taken under this chapter. If the owner of record, after diligent search cannot be found, the administrative citation may be served by posting a copy thereof in a conspicuous place upon the property for a period of ten (10) days. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement) 
17.92.043 - Proof of service of administrative citation. 
    Proof of service of the administrative citation shall be documented at the time of service by a declaration under penalty of perjury executed by the person effecting service, declaring the date and manner in which service was made. If the administrative citation is published, an affidavit of publication shall be obtained from the newspaper publishing the administrative citation. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement) 
17.92.044 - Abatement work-Extension of time. 
    Upon receipt of a written request from any person required to comply with the administrative citation, the code enforcement officer may grant an extension of time within which to complete the work or abatement, if the code enforcement officer determines that such an extension of time will not create or perpetuate a situation imminently dangerous to life or property and if such person has begun and is diligently accomplishing the work or abatement. The code enforcement officer shall have the authority to place reasonable conditions on any such extensions. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement) 
17.92.045 - Fines assessed. 
A.  The city council by resolution shall establish the amount of the fine to be assessed for administrative citations issued by the code enforcement officer. 
B.  If the violator or property owner fails to correct the violation; subsequent administrative citations may be issued for the same violation(s). 
C.  Payment of the fine shall not excuse the failure to correct the violation nor shall it bar further enforcement action by the city. 
D.  All fines assessed shall be payable to the city. 
E.  The failure of any person to pay a fine assessed by administrative citation within the time specified on the citation shall result in the assessment of additional fines. 
F.  The failure of any person to pay a fine assessed by administrative citation within the time specified on the administrative citation constitutes a debt to the city. To enforce that debt, the code enforcement officer may file a claim with the small claims court; impose an assessment lien as set forth in section 17.92.053; or pursue any other legal remedy to collect such money. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement) 
(Ord. No. 2009-02, § 1, 2009) 
17.92.046 - Appeal of administrative citation. 
A.  Any person receiving an administrative citation may appeal the issuance of the administrative citation to the city council. The notice of appeal must be submitted on an appeal form provided by the building department, must specify the basis for the appeal in detail and must be filed with the building official within ten (10) calendar days after the date on the administrative citation. If the deadline falls on a weekend or city holiday, then the deadline shall be extended until the next regular business day. 
B.  If the notice of appeal is filed in accordance with the provisions of subsection A of this section, the enforcement of the violations identified in the administrative citation and the requirement to pay any fine shall be stayed until the date that the appeal hearing is held by the city council. Except that, if the code enforcement officer determines that the violations identified in the administrative citation constitute an immediate threat to the health or safety of the occupant of the property or the public in general, the code enforcement officer shall proceed with enforcement of the violations. 
C.  As soon as practicable after receiving the written notice of appeal, the building official or city clerk shall fix a date, time and place for the hearing. Written notice of the date, time and place for the hearing shall be served at least ten (10) calendar days prior to the date of the hearing to the party appealing the administrative citation by any one of the following means: 
1.  Personal service; 
2.  First class mail and posting the notice of hearing conspicuously on or in front of the property on which the violation is located. 
    The failure of any person with an interest in the property to receive such notice shall not affect the validity of any proceedings taken under this chapter. Service by normal delivery mail in the manner described above shall become effective on the date of mailing. 
D.  Failure of any person to file an appeal in accordance with the provisions of this section shall constitute waiver of that person's rights to administrative determination of the merits of the administrative citation and the amount of the fine. 
E.  The city council shall conduct an orderly proceeding and accept oral and written evidence regarding the administration citation in the following manner: 
1.  The director or the code enforcement officer shall present testimony and evidence relating to the violation and the appropriate means of correcting the violation. 
2.  The owner, agent or person responsible for the violation may present testimony or evidence concerning the violation and the means and time frame for correction. 
F.  The director shall establish all appropriate rules for conducting hearings and rendering decisions pursuant to this section. 
G.  The city council may sustain, notify or overrule the administrative citation. 
H.  The decision of the city council regarding any appeal is the final administrative order and decision. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement) 
17.92.047 - Performance of abatement-City authority. 
    If the violator and/or property owner fails to comply with the requirements of the administrative citation within the time periods set forth therein, the work to be performed and/or the abatement of the nuisance may, in the discretion of the code enforcement officer, be performed by the city or by a contractor retained by the city. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement) 
17.92.048 - Entering property for abatement work. 
    The code enforcement officer or any employee, contractor or authorized representative of the city may enter upon private property to abate the violation and/or nuisance in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. No person shall obstruct, impede or interfere with any officer, employee, contractor or authorized representative of the city whenever such person is engaged in the work or abatement, or in performing any necessary act preliminary to or incidental to such work or abatement, as authorized or directed pursuant to this chapter. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement) 
17.92.049 - Dangerous nuisance-Immediate abatement-Notice and costs. 
    Whenever the code enforcement officer determines that a violation or public nuisance is so imminently dangerous to life or adjacent property that such condition must be immediately corrected or isolated, the code enforcement officer may institute the following procedures: 
A.  Notice. The code enforcement officer shall attempt to make contact through a personal interview, or by telephone, with the landowner or the person, if any, occupying or otherwise in apparent charge or control of the property. In the event contact is made, the code enforcement officer shall notify such person or persons of the danger involved and require that such condition be immediately removed, repaired or isolated so as to preclude harm to any person or property. 
B.  Abatement. In the event the code enforcement officer is unable to make contact as herein above noted, or if the appropriate persons, after notification by the code enforcement officer, do not take action as specified by the code enforcement officer, within twenty-four (24) hours or such lesser time as circumstances may warrant in the discretion of the code enforcement officer, then the code enforcement officer may, with the approval of the building official take all steps deemed necessary to repair, remove or isolate such dangerous condition, or conditions with the use of city forces or a contractor retained by the city. 
C.  Costs. The code enforcement officer shall keep an itemized account of the work and abatement costs and administrative expenses incurred by the city in repairing, removing, or isolating such condition or conditions. Administrative expenses may be recovered in the same manner that work and abatement costs are recovered. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement) 
17.92.050 - Administrative and abatement costs. 
    Whenever a violation or public nuisance is found to exist as a result of an inspection, the actual work and abatement costs and reasonable administrative expenses as determined by the code enforcement officer shall be paid by the property owner. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement) 
17.92.051 - Costs of abatement-Record keeping. 
    The code enforcement officer shall keep an itemized account of the expenses and costs incurred by the city in the work and abatement of any violation or public nuisance. Upon completion of the work and abatement, the code enforcement officer shall prepare a report specifying the work and abatement performed, the itemized costs of the work on the property, including direct and indirect costs, a description of the property, and the names and addresses of the persons entitled to service pursuant to Section 17.92.042 of this chapter. Any such report may include expenses and costs on any number of properties, whether or not contiguous to each other. Each person named in the administrative citation shall be jointly and severally liable for such work and abatement costs and administrative expenses, and the amount of such costs and expenses shall be a debt owed to the city. Such report shall be served upon the persons identified therein in accordance with Section 17.92.042, together with a demand that the amount identified therein be paid within thirty (30) days of receipt of the report. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement) 
17.92.052 - Appeal of costs of abatement. 
    The written demand for payment identified in Section 17.92.051 shall advise the person or persons identified in the written demand that they may appeal the demand for payment and the calculation of the amounts identified in the code enforcement officer's report, within ten (10) days from the date of service of the written demand, which appeal must be made in accordance with the provisions of Section 17.92.046. The appeal shall be conducted in accordance with the provisions of Section 17.92.046. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement) 
17.92.053 - Notice of lien. 
A.  Notice of Lien. If a violator fails to pay a fine within the time period identified on the administrative citation or should the violator fail to pay the costs of abatement within the time period identified in Section 17.92.051 or within ten (10) days after the date of the decision of the hearing officer should the hearing officer affirm the collection of a fine or the costs of abatement, the code enforcement officer shall execute and file in the office of the county recorder a notice of lien of substantially the following form: 
NOTICE OF LIEN 
 Pursuant to the authority vested in the Code Enforcement Officer of the City of Kingsburg Municipal Code, said Code Enforcement Officer, by the provisions of the City of Kingsburg Municipal Code, and on or about, said Code Enforcement Officer did assess a fine and/or, on or administrative expenses and abatement costs upon that certain real property commonly known as, Kingsburg, California, and more particularly described in Exhibit "A", which is attached hereto and made a part hereof ("Real Property"), and neither the same has been paid. The City of Kingsburg hereby claims a lien on the Real Property for said fine and/or administrative expenses and abatement costs in the amount of $. This amount shall be a lien upon the Real Property until the sum has been paid in full and discharged of record. 
Dated: This day of _______, 2007. 
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER OF THE CITY OF KINGSBURG 
(ACKNOWLEDGMENT) 
B.  Recordation. Immediately upon the recording of the notice of lien, the assessment shall constitute a lien on the real property assessed. Such lien shall, for all purposes, be upon a parity with the lien of state and local taxes. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement) 
17.92.054 - Confirmed assessment-Collection. 
A.  Assessment Book. The notice of lien, after recording, shall be delivered to the tax assessor of Fresno or Tulare County, who shall enter the amount on the county assessment book opposite the description of the real property, and the amount shall be collected together with all other taxes levied thereon against the real property. 
B.  Collection. Thereafter, the amount set forth in the notice of lien shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary county taxes are collected, and shall be subject to the same penalties and interest and to the same procedure under foreclosure and sale in case of delinquency as provided for ordinary county taxes. All laws applicable to the levy, collection and enforcement of county taxes are made applicable to such assessment. The amount set forth in the notice of lien shall be returned to the city to the fund designated for code enforcement activities. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement) 
17.92.055 - Remedies of private parties. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall not affect the rights of private parties to pursue any and all legal remedies. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement) 
17.92.056 - Alternatives. 
    Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the city council from requesting the city attorney to commence a civil or criminal proceeding to abate a violation and/or a public nuisance as an alternative to the proceedings set forth in this chapter. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement) 
17.92.057 - Enforcement authority. 
    Enforcement of this chapter by the city may be accomplished by the code enforcement officer in any manner authorized by law. The procedures set forth in this chapter shall not be exclusive and shall not in any manner limit or restrict the city from enforcing other city ordinances or abating violations and/or public nuisances in any other manner provided by law. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement) 
17.92.058 - Violation-Penalty. 
A.  Any person who removes any notice or order posted as required in this chapter without the consent of the city is guilty of an infraction. 
B.  Any person who obstructs, impedes or interferes with any representative or contractor of the city or with any person who owns or holds any estate or interest in real property, buildings or premises which has been ordered to be vacated, repaired, rehabilitated or demolished or brought into compliance with this chapter, when any of the aforementioned individuals are engaged in work involving the abatement, is guilty of an infraction. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement) 
17.92.059 - Violation-Abatement. 
A.  It is unlawful for a person to violate any provision or to fail to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter. A violation of any of the provisions or failing to comply with any of the mandatory requirements of this chapter shall constitute an infraction which shall be punishable by fine as established by the resolution of the city council. 
B.  Each such person may be charged with a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted by such person and shall, upon conviction, be punished accordingly. 
(Amended during 5-08 supplement) 
Chapter 17.94 - ABATEMENT OF SUBSTANDARD BUILDINGS 

17.94.010 - Abatement actions. 
    Actions instituted by the city to abate substandard buildings shall be in accordance with the provisions set forth in Article 3 (commencing with Section 17980) of Division 13, Part 1.5 of the Health and Safety Code. 
(Ord. No. 2017-007, § 2, 9-6-2017) 
17.94.020 - Abatement procedure. 
    The procedures for abatement, prescribed by this chapter, prescribed by applicable law or other procedures as determined by the city to be equivalent for the purpose intended, may be used. The planning and development director, building official, chief of police, fire chief, and public works director, or their respective designees, shall be the city officials responsible for the enforcement procedures set forth in this chapter. In the discharge of their duties, these officials shall have the right to enter on any site, or to enter any structure for the purpose of investigation and inspection. 
(Ord. No. 2017-007, § 2, 9-6-2017) 
17.94.030 - Substandard building as a nuisance-Notices. 
    Whenever the city determines any building or portion thereof has become substandard as described in Section 17920.3 of the California Health and Safety Code or is a building described in Section 17920.10 of the California Health and Safety Code and when determined to be a nuisance as defined in Section 17920 of the California Health and Safety Code by the city, the following procedures shall apply. 
    The city shall notify the owner of the building and any mortgagee or beneficiary under any deed of trust of record, as follows. The notice shall state the conditions causing the building to be substandard or in violation of Section 17920.10 of the Health and Safety Code, and may order the building or portion thereof, vacated and the owner shall institute proceedings for the correction or abatement of the building or portion thereof, either by demolition or repair, which correction or abatement shall be completed within thirty (30) days after the date of the notice. If, in the opinion of the city, these conditions can be corrected or abated by repair, the notice shall state the repairs which are required. 
    If the building is encumbered by a mortgage or deed of trust, of record and the owner of the building has not complied with the requirements identified in the notice from the city on or before the expiration of thirty (30) days after the date of mailing and posting of the notice, the mortgagee or beneficiary under the deed of trust may, within fifteen (15) days after the expiration of the thirty-day period, comply with the requirements of the notice from the city, in which event the cost to the mortgagee or beneficiary shall be added to, and become a part of, the lien secured by the mortgage or deed of trust, and shall be payable at the same time and in the same manner as may be prescribed in the mortgage or deed of trust for the payment of any taxes advanced or paid by the mortgagee or beneficiary for and on behalf of the owner. 
    If the notice from the city has not been complied with on or before the expiration of forty-five (45) days after the date of mailing and posting of the notice, the city may institute an appropriate action or proceeding to correct or abate the condition, as would be taken to correct or abate any nuisance or any violation of any other provision of this chapter or, as an alternative procedure, the city may institute proceedings for the abatement of the nuisance and substandard building, after notice and hearing, before the city council as provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2017-007, § 2, 9-6-2017) 
17.94.040 - Revolving fund. 
    For the purpose of providing for the advancement of costs in the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter, the city may create a revolving fund or funds from which may be paid the costs of enforcing the provisions of this chapter and into which may be paid the receipts from the collection of costs or fines imposed by the city in the enforcement of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2017-007, § 2, 9-6-2017) 
17.94.050 - Manner of giving notice. 
    The notices required in Section 17.94.030 shall be given in the following manner. The city shall post conspicuously at least one copy of the notice identified in Section 17.94.030 on the substandard building, and shall send another copy by registered or certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, to the person owning the land on which the building is located, as that person's name and address appear on the last equalized assessment roll, or as known to the city clerk and to any mortgagee or beneficiary under a deed of trust of record. If the address of the owner cannot be determined by the city, this fact shall be stated in the copy so mailed and the notice shall be addressed to the owner at the county seat of the county where the property is located. 
    The officer or employee of the city upon giving the notice, shall file an affidavit with the city clerk, certifying the time and the manner in which the notice was given along with any receipt card returned either acknowledging of the receipt of the notice by registered mail or acknowledging the notice was refused or undeliverable. The refusal of delivery of the notice or if the notice was undeliverable, shall satisfy the notice requirement set forth in this Section 17.94.050. The failure of any owner or other person to receive the notice, shall not affect in any manner the validity of any proceedings taken hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 2017-007, § 2, 9-6-2017) 
17.94.060 - Second notice. 
(a)  If the city elects to proceed with the abatement of the nuisance through proceedings instituted before the city council as provided in this chapter, it shall give a second notice in the same manner as set forth in Section 17.94.050 directing the owner of the building to appear before the city council at a stated time and place and show cause why the building should not be found to be a nuisance and the nuisance be abated as provided in this chapter. A copy of this notice shall be mailed to each mortgagee or beneficiary under any deed of trust of record in the manner prescribed in Section 17.94.050. The notice shall be headed "Notice to Abate Nuisance" in letters of not less than three-fourths of an inch in height and shall be substantially in the following form: 
NOTICE TO ABATE NUISANCE 
The owner of the building located at _______, Kingsburg, California ("building") is hereby notified to appear before the Kingsburg City Council at its regular/special meeting to be held _______, 20___, at the City Council Chambers, 1401 Draper Street, Kingsburg, California, at the hour of ___ o'clock _.m., or as soon thereafter as the owner may be heard, and show cause, if any, why the building should not be declared a public nuisance and the nuisance be abated by reconstructing or repairing the building or by razing or removing the building. 
Dated: _______, 20___ 
CITY OF KINGSBURG 
By: ___________ 
   ___________, City Clerk 
(b)  The officer or employee of the city giving such notice shall file an affidavit of posting and mailing in the manner required by Section 17.94.050. 
(Ord. No. 2017-007, § 2, 9-6-2017) 
17.94.070 - Abatement hearing. 
(a)  At the time fixed in notice identified in Section 17.94.060, the city council shall hold a hearing and receive testimony from city staff, the owner of the building or its representatives, if present at said hearing, and other persons who may be present and desire to testify, respecting the condition of the building, the estimated cost of its reconstruction, repair or removal, and any other matter which the city council may deem pertinent thereto. Upon the conclusion of the hearing, the city council shall, by resolution, declare its findings and decision whether the building is a nuisance and direct the owner to abate the nuisance within thirty (30) days after the date of posting on the building a notice of the passage of said resolution by properly reconstructing, repairing, or having the building razed or removed and notifying the owner of the building that if the nuisance is not abated within the thirty-day period, the nuisance will be abated by the city by reconstruction, repair or razing and removing the building and the expense thereof made a lien on the lot or parcel of land upon which said building is located. 
(b)  At any time within sixty (60) days after the passage of any resolution directing the abatement of a nuisance, the city shall post a copy of the resolution conspicuously on the building so declared to be a nuisance and mail another copy by registered mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, to the person owning the land on which the building is located as such person's name and address appear on the last equalized assessment roll or as known to the clerk of the city, and a copy of said notice shall be mailed to each mortgagee or beneficiary under any deed of trust, of record, at the last known address of such mortgagee or beneficiary, and if such addresses are unknown to the city, then said fact shall be stated in said copy so mailed and it shall be addressed to the owner of the land or the mortgage or beneficiary under the deed of trust at the county seat of the county where the property is located. The officer or employee of the city, upon giving the notice, shall file an affidavit thereof in the manner provided for in Section 17.94.050. The city council may grant any extension of time to abate the nuisance as it may deem justifiable upon good cause therefore being shown. 
(Ord. No. 2017-007, § 2, 9-6-2017) 
17.94.080 - Time to bring action. 
    The owner of the building or other interested person offering objections during the abatement hearing before the city council at which a resolution of abatement of the nuisance is passed, must bring an action in a court of competent jurisdiction within thirty (30) days after the date of posting on said premises a notice of the passage of the resolution declaring the nuisance to exist to contest the validity of any proceedings leading up to and including the adoption of the resolution; otherwise all objections will be deemed to have been waived. 
(Ord. No. 2017-007, § 2, 9-6-2017) 
17.94.090 - Jurisdiction to abate. 
    Thirty (30) days after the posting of the copies of the resolution declaring a building a nuisance, the city shall be deemed to have acquired jurisdiction to abate such nuisance by reconstructing, repairing, razing or removing the building, unless the nuisance is abated by the owner or other person within said thirty-day period or any extension thereof granted by the city council. In the event that the nuisance is not abated within the time prescribed, the city may thereupon take the abatement action identified in the city council resolution or have the abatement action performed by a contractor under its direction and supervision. 
(Ord. No. 2017-007, § 2, 9-6-2017) 
17.94.100 - Sale of materials. 
    The building materials contained in a building razed or removed may be sold by the city at public sale to the highest responsible bidder after not less than five (5) days' notice of the intended sale is published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation published in the city or county where the building is located, either before or after said building has been razed or removed. Any amount received from the sale of such building materials shall be deducted from the expense of razing or removing the building. The city shall keep an itemized account of the expenses involved in the razing or removing of any building and shall deduct therefrom the amount received from the sale of the building materials. The city shall cause to be posted conspicuously on the property from which the building was razed or removed a statement verified by the officer or employee of the city in charge of performing the work showing the gross and net expense of the razing or removing of such building together with a notice of the time and place when and where said statement shall be submitted to the city council for approval and confirmation and at which time said city council shall consider any objections or protests, if any, which may be raised by any property owner liable to be assessed for the cost of the abatement work and any other interested persons. A copy of said statement and notice shall be mailed in the manner prescribed in Section 17.94.050 and an affidavit of such posting and mailing shall be filed in the manner prescribed in that section. The time for confirmation shall be not less than five (5) days after the date of the posting and mailing of said statement and notice. 
(Ord. No. 2017-007, § 2, 9-6-2017) 
17.94.110 - Statement of expense. 
(a)  At the time fixed for the hearing of the statement of expense the city council shall consider the statement, together with any objections or protests which may be raised by any of the property owner liable to be assessed for the abatement work and any other interested persons. At the conclusion of the hearing, the city council may make such revision, correction, or modification to the statement of expense as it may deem necessary, after which, by motion, said statement of expenses as submitted, or in the event any revisions, corrections or modifications have been made by said city council said statement of expenses as revised, corrected or modified, shall be approved. 
(b)  In the event that the cost for abating the nuisance exceeds the proceeds received from the sale of any materials, the amount of the net expense of abating the nuisance, if not paid within five (5) days after the decision of the city council on the statement of expense, shall constitute a lien on the real property upon which the building is or was located, which lien shall continue until the amount thereof and interest thereon at the rate of ten percent (10%) per annum, computed from the date of approval and confirmation of the statement of expense until paid, or until it is discharged of record. This lien shall, for all purposes, be upon parity with the lien of state, county, and municipal taxes. In the event of nonpayment, the city council shall, at any time within sixty (60) days after the decision of the city council on the statement of expense, cause to be filed in the office of the county recorder of the county in which the property is located a certificate substantially in the following form: 
NOTICE OF LIEN 
Pursuant to the authority vested in the undersigned by Division 13, Part 1.5 of the Health and Safety Code and California Code of Regulations, Title 25, Chapter 1, Subchapter 1, of the State of California, the undersigned did on the ___ day of _______, 20___, cause a nuisance to be abated on the real property hereinafter described; and the undersigned did on the ___ day of _______, 20___, by action duly recorded in its official minutes as of that date, assess the cost of the abatement, less the amount received from the sale of any building materials upon the real property hereinafter described, and the same has not been paid nor any part thereof; and the City of Kingsburg does hereby claim a lien on the real property hereinafter described for the net expense of the abatement of the nuisance in the sum of $_____, and the same shall be a lien upon the real property until the sum, with interest at the rate of ten percent (10%) per annum, from the ___ day of _______, 20___, has been paid in full and discharged of record. The real property hereinbefore mentioned, and upon which a lien is claimed, is that certain real property located in the City of Kingsburg, County of _______, State of California, and particularly described as follows: 
Dated: _______, 20___ 
CITY OF KINGSBURG 
By: ___________ 
   ___________, City Clerk 
(c)  From and after the date of the recording of said notice of lien all persons shall be deemed to have had notice of the contents thereof. The statute of limitations shall not run against the right of the city to enforce the payment of said lien. 
(d)  In the event that the amount received from the sale of material exceeds the expenses of abating the nuisance, such excess shall be deposited with the finance director of the city to the credit of the owner of said property or to such other person legally entitled thereto, and such excess shall be payable to said owner or other person on demand and upon producing evidence of ownership of the property satisfactory to the finance director. 
(Ord. No. 2017-007, § 2, 9-6-2017) 
Chapter 17.96 - CONSTRUCTION AND DEFINITIONS 

17.96.010 - Construction. 
    The following rules of construction shall apply unless inconsistent with the plain meaning of the context of this title. 
A.  Tense. Words used in the present tense include the future tense. 
B.  Number. Words used in the singular include the plural, and words used in the plural include the singular. 
C.  Shall and May. The word "shall" is mandatory; the word "may" is permissive. 
D.  Gender. The masculine shall include the feminine and neuter. 
E.  Headings. In the event that there is any conflict or inconsistency between the heading of a chapter, section or subsection of this title and the context thereof, the said heading shall not be deemed to affect the scope, meaning or intent of such context. 
(Ord. 92-11 § 1 (part), 1992: Ord. 408 (part), 1982) 
17.96.020 - General terminology. 
    The word "city" shall mean the city of Kingsburg, California. The words "city council" and "council" shall mean the city council of the city of Kingsburg. The words "planning commission" and "commission" shall mean the planning commission of the city of Kingsburg. The words "planning department" and "department" shall mean the planning department of the city of Kingsburg. The words "planning director" and "director" shall mean the planning director of the city of Kingsburg. The words "city clerk" and "city engineer" shall mean the city clerk and city engineer of the city of Kingsburg. The words "building official" and "building inspector" shall mean the building official of the city of Kingsburg. The words "architectural design review committee" and "committee" shall mean the architectural design review committee of the city of Kingsburg. 
(Ord. 92-11 § 1 (part), 1992: Ord. 408 (part), 1982) 
17.96.030 - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this title, certain words and terms used herein are defined as follows: 
    "Accessory building" means a building or structure which is subordinate to, and the use of which is customarily incidental to that of the main building, structure or use on the same site, including patio covers. Except in the case of garden structures, if any accessory building is attached to the main building by a common wall or a connecting roof, such accessory building shall be deemed to be a part of the main building. 
    "Accessory use" means a use incidental, related, appropriate and clearly subordinate to the main use of the site or building, which accessory use does not alter the principle use of the site. 
    "Alter" means to make any change in the supporting or load-bearing members of a building, such as bearing walls, columns, beams, girders or floor joists. 
    "Animal hospital" means a place where animals or pets are given medical or surgical treatment and are cared for during the time of such treatment. Use as a kennel shall be limited to short-time boarding and shall be only incidental to such hospital use, and within an enclosed soundproof structure. 
    "Arcade" means any establishment operating or exhibiting more than five amusement devices. An amusement device is a machine operated for the purpose of gaming as a contest of skill, or for amusement of any description, for which a fee is charged. 
    "Automobile wrecking yard" means a site or portions of a site on which the dismantling or wrecking of used vehicles or the storage, sale or dumping of dismantled or wrecked vehicles or their parts are conducted. The presence on a site of three or more motor vehicles which have not been capable of operating under their own power for fifteen (15) days or more, or, in the case of vehicles not self-propelled, which have not been towable or from which parts have been removed for reuse or sales, shall constitute prima facie evidence of a motor vehicle wrecking yard. 
    "Billboard" means the same as outdoor advertising structure. 
    "Block" means the properties abutting on one side of a street and lying between two nearest intersecting or intercepting street and railroad right-of-way, unsubdivided land or watercourse. 
    "Boarding or rooming house" means a building where lodging and meals are provided for compensation for five but not more than fifteen (15) persons, not including rest homes. 
    "Borrow pit" means any place or premises where dirt, soil, sand, gravel or other materials are removed by excavation or otherwise below the grade of surrounding land for any purpose other than that necessary and incidental to grading or to building construction or operation on the premises. 
    "Breezeway" means a roofed passageway, open on at least two sides, connecting the main structure on a site with another main structure or accessory use on the same site. 
    "Building" means a permanently located structure, having a roof, for the housing or enclosure of persons, chattels or property of any kind. Mobilehomes, travel trailers and other vehicles, even though permanently immobilized, shall not be deemed to be buildings. 
    "Building, main" means a building within which is conducted the principle use permitted on the lot or site as provided by this title. 
    "Building setback line" means the minimum distance as prescribed by this chapter between any property line and the closest point on the foundation or any supporting post or pillar of any building or structure related thereto. 
    "Carport" means an accessory structure or portion of a main structure open on two or more sides designed for the storage of motor vehicles, without full enclosure. 
    "Cemetery" means land used or intended to be used for the burial of the dead, and dedicated for such purposes, including columbarium, crematoriums, mausoleums and mortuaries, when operated in conjunction with and within the boundaries of such premises. 
    "Clinic" means a place for the provision of group medical services. 
    "Club" means an association of persons for some common non-profit purposes, but not including groups organized primarily to render a service which is customarily carried on as a business. 
    "College" means an education institution offering advanced instruction in any academic field beyond the secondary level, but not including trade schools or business colleges. 
    "College, trade" means the same as school, trade. 
    "Commercial office" means any administrative or clerical office maintained as a business and any office established by a public service over which this ordinance has jurisdiction. 
    "Communications equipment building" means a building housing electrical and mechanical equipment necessary for the conduct of a public communication business, with or without personnel. 
    "Convalescent home" means the same as "rest home." 
    "Dump" means a place used for the disposal, abandonment or discarding by burial, incineration or by any other means of any garbage, sewage, trash, refuse, rubble, waste material, offal or dead animals. 
    "Drive-in restaurant" means an establishment which serves food or beverages to persons while seated in or on a motor vehicle, and/or which serves food or beverages for consumption off the premises. 
    "Dwelling" means a building or portion thereof, designed exclusively for residential purposes, including one-family, two-family, three-family and multiple dwellings; including mobile homes; not including hotels, apartment hotels, boarding and lodging houses, fraternity and sorority houses, rest homes, convalescent homes, nursing homes, child care nurseries, or house trailers even though permanently immobilized. 
    "Dwelling, one-family" means a detached building designed exclusively for occupancy by one family for residential purposes. 
    "Dwelling, two-family" means a building designed exclusively for occupancy by two families living independently of each other (e.g., duplex). 
    "Dwelling, three-family" means a building designed exclusively for occupancy by three families living independently of each other (e.g., triplex). 
    "Dwelling, multi-family" means a building designed exclusively for occupancy by four or more families living independently of each other (e.g., fourplex or apartment). 
    "Dwelling unit" means one or more rooms and a kitchen designed for occupancy by one family for living and sleeping purposes. 
    "Educational institutions" means public or other non-profit institutions conducting regular academic instruction at pre-school, kindergarten, elementary, secondary and collegiate levels, and including graduate schools, universities, non-profit research institutions and religious institutions. Such institutions must either: 1) offer general academic instruction equivalent to the standards prescribed by the State Board of Education, 2) confer degrees as a college or university of undergraduate or graduate standing, 3) conduct research or 4) give religious instruction. This definition does not include schools, academies or institutes, incorporated or otherwise, which operate for a profit, nor does it include commercial or trade schools. 
    "Electrical distribution substation" means an assemblage of equipment which is part of a system for the distribution of electric power where electric energy is received at a subtransmission voltage and transformed to a lower voltage for distribution for general consumer use. 
    "Electrical transmission substation" means an assemblage of equipment which is part of a system for the transmission of electric power where electric energy is received at a very high voltage from its source of generation by means of a network of high voltage lines and where, by means of transformers, said high voltage is transformed to a low subtransmission voltage for purposes of supplying electric power to large individual consumers, interchange connections with other power producing agencies or electric distribution substations for transformation to still lower voltages for distribution to smaller individual users. 
    "Emergency housing" means housing with minimal supportive services for homeless persons that is limited to occupancy of six (6) months or less by a homeless person. No individual or household may be denied emergency shelter because of an inability to pay. 
    "Family" means an individual, two or more persons who are related by blood or marriage, or a group of not more than five persons not necessarily related by blood or marriage, living together in a dwelling unit. 
    "Fence, open" means a fence, fifty (50) percent or more of the vertical surface of which is open to the transmission of light, air and vision. 
    "Fence, screened" means a fence, ninety (90) percent or more of the vertical surface of which is closed to the transmission of light, air and vision. 
    "Frontage" means the property line of a site abutting on a street, other than the side line of a corner lot. 
    "Garage, private" means a detached accessory building or a portion of a main building on the same lot as a dwelling for the housing of vehicles of the occupants of the dwelling, including carports. 
    "Garage, repair" means a structure or part thereof, other than a private garage, where motor vehicles are repaired or painted. 
    "Garden structure" means an arbor, deck, fountain, lath house, pergola, raised planting bed, trellis or other similar structure intended specifically to enhance the appearance of the garden or which has a function relating to the use of outdoor space, but not including a house, garage, carport or storage building. 
    "Guest house" means living or sleeping quarters within an accessory building for the sole use of occupants of the premises, guests of such occupants or persons employed on the premises. Such quarters shall have no kitchen facilities and shall not be rented. 
    "Hazardous waste" means any waste, or combination of wastes as specified in Title 22 of the California Code of Regulations, which because of its quantity, concentration, physical, chemical or infectious characteristics may either cause, or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an increase in serious irreversible or incapacitating irreversible illness, or pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or environment when improperly treated, stored, transported or disposed of, or otherwise managed. 
    "Home occupation" means the conduct of an art or profession, the offering of a service or the conduct of a business, or the handcraft manufacture of products within a dwelling in a residential district, which use is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the structure for dwelling purposes and which does not change the character thereof, in accordance with the regulations prescribed in Chapter 17.56. 
    "Homeowner's association" means a community association composed of individual owners of a development which is created for the purpose of holding title to, managing and maintaining the common property, and enforcing certain covenants and restrictions for the overall benefit of its members. 
    "Hotel" means a building in which there are sixteen (16) or more guest rooms where lodging with or without meals is provided for compensation, usually on a transient basis. "Hotel" shall not be construed to include motel, trailer court, sanitarium, hospital or other institutional building, or jail or other building where persons are housed under restraint. 
    "Junk yard" means a site or portion of a site on which waste, discarded or salvaged materials are bought, sold, exchanged, stored, baled, cleaned, packed, disassembled or handled, including used furniture and household equipment yards, house wrecking yards, used lumber yards and similar storage yards, excepting a site on which uses are conducted within a completely enclosed structure and excepting motor vehicle wrecking yards as defined in this section. An establishment for the sale, purchase or storage of used cars, farm equipment or salvaged machinery in operable condition and the processing of used or salvaged materials as part of a manufacturing operation shall not be deemed a junk yard. 
    "Kennel" means any lot or premises on which four or more dogs and/or cats at least four months of age are kept, boarded or trained, whether in special buildings or runways or not. 
    "Kitchen" means any room used or intended or designed to be used for cooking or the preparation of food. 
    "Lodge" means an order or society of persons organized for some common non-profit purpose, but not including groups organized primarily to render a service which is customarily carried on as a business. 
    "Lodging house" means a dwelling in which lodging or lodging and meals are provided for compensation for more than five but not more than fifteen (15) persons other than members of the resident family, excepting a nursing home as defined in this section. 
    "Lot" means a single parcel of land for which a legal description is filed of record, or the boundaries of which are shown on a subdivision map, or record of survey map filed in the office of the San Joaquin County Recorder. The term "lot" shall include a part of a single parcel of land when such part is used as though a separate lot for all of the purposes and under all of the requirements of this title. The term "lot" shall include two or more abutting lots when combined and used as though a single lot. 
    "Lot area" means the total horizontal area within the lot lines of a lot. 
    "Lot, corner" means a lot situated at the intersection of two or more streets which have an angle of intersection of not more than one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees. 
    "Lot, coverage" means that portion of a lot or building site which is occupied by any building or structure, excepting paved areas, walks and swimming pools, regardless of whether said building or structure is intended for human occupancy. 
    "Lot depth" means the depth of a lot shall be the horizontal length of a straight line connecting the midpoints of the front and rear lot lines. 
    "Lot, double frontage" means an interior lot having frontage on and with access on two parallel or approximately parallel streets. 
    "Lot, interior" means a lot other than a corner lot or reverse corner lot. 
    "Lot, key" means the first lot to the rear of a reversed corner lot, whether or not separated by an alley. 
    "Lot line, front" means in the case of an interior lot, a line separating the lot from the street. In the case of a corner lot, the line separating the narrowest street frontage of the lot from the street. 
    "Lot line, rear" means a lot line which is opposite and most distant from the front lot line, or, in the case of an irregular triangular or gore-shaped lot, a line ten (10) feet in length within the lot parallel to and at a maximum distance from the front lot line. 
    "Lot line, side" means any lot boundary line not a front lot line or a rear lot line. 
    "Lot, reversed corner" means a corner lot, the street side of which is substantially a continuation of the front lot line of the lot upon which it rears. 
    Lot, through. See "lot, double frontage." 
    "Lot, width" means the average horizontal distance between the side lot lines, measured at right angles to the lot depth at a point midway between the front and rear lot lines. 
    "Medical building" means clinics or offices for doctors, dentists, oculists, chiropractors, osteopaths, chiropodists or similar practitioners of the healing arts; including accessory laboratories and a prescription pharmacy, but not including offices for veterinarians. 
    "Mobilehome" means a structure or a structure having multiple sections equaling or exceeding exterior dimensions of eight feet in width and forty (40) feet in length, having a chassis and designed to be movable, with kitchen, bathroom and living facilities, designed for use as a single-family dwelling when connected to appropriate utility lines, with or without a permanent foundation. 
    "Mobilehome parks" means any parcel or contiguous parcels of land under single ownership, designed or intended to be used to accommodate mobile homes on a permanent or semi-permanent basis, in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 17.56. 
    "Motel" means a building or group of buildings containing individual sleeping or living units, designed primarily for use by automobile tourists or transients, where a majority of such units open individually and directly to the outside. An establishment shall be considered a motel, in any case, when required by the Health and Safety Code of the State of California, to obtain the name and address of the guests and a description of their vehicle and its license. The term "motel" shall include tourist court, auto court and motor lodge. 
    Motor vehicle wrecking yard. See "automobile wrecking yard." 
    "Non-conforming building" means a building or portion thereof lawfully existing at the time of the adoption of this ordinance, or amendments thereto, and which does not conform to the applicable regulations of such amendments or a subsequent amendment. 
    "Nursery school" means a school or the use of a site or a portion of a site for an organized program devoted to the education or day care of five or more pre-elementary school age children, including those residents on the site. 
    "Nursing home" means a structure operated as a lodging house in which nursing, dietary and other personal services are rendered to convalescents, not including persons suffering from contagious diseases, and in which surgery is not performed and primary treatment, such as customarily is given in hospitals and sanitariums, is not provided. A convalescent home shall be deemed a nursing home. 
    "Off-street loading facilities" means a site or a portion of a site devoted to the loading or unloading of motor vehicles or trailers, including loading berths, aisles, access drives and landscaped areas. 
    "Off-street parking facilities" means a site or a portion of a site devoted to the off-street parking of motor vehicles including parking spaces, aisles, access drives and landscaped areas. 
    "Outdoor advertising structure" means any structure of any kind or character erected or maintained for outdoor advertising purposes, upon which any outdoor advertising sign may be placed, located on a site other than the site on which the advertised use is located or on which the advertised product is produced. 
    "Parking district" means a government parking district maintained by the federal, state, county or city government, or special district. 
    "Public utility service yard" means a site or portion of a site on which a public utility company may store, house and/or service equipment such as service trucks and other trucks and trailers, pumps, spools of wire, pipe, conduit, transformers, cross-arms, utility poles, or any other material, tool or supply necessary for the normal maintenance of the utility facilities. 
    "Railroad right-of-way" means a strip of land of a maximum width of one hundred (100) feet only for the accommodation of main lines or branch line railroad tracks, switching equipment and signals, but not including lands on which stations, offices, storage buildings, spur tracks, sidings, section gang and other employee housing, yards or other uses are located. 
    "Recreation vehicle" means a motor home, travel trailer, truck camper or camping trailer, with or without motive power, designed for recreational human habitation. 
    "Residence" means a structure containing a dwelling unit designed for occupancy or occupied by one family or more. 
    "Restaurant" means an establishment which serves food or beverages primarily to persons seated within the building. This includes cafes and tea rooms, and outdoor cafes. 
    "Rest homes or homes for the aged" means an establishment or home intended primarily for the care and nursing of invalids and aged persons; excluding cases of communicable diseases and surgical or obstetrical operations. The term shall not include nursing home. 
    "School, elementary, junior high or high" means public and other non-profit institutions conducting regular academic instruction at kindergarten, elementary and secondary levels. Such institutions shall offer general academic instructions equivalent to the standards prescribed by the State Board of Education. 
    "School, private or parochial" means an institution conducting regular academic instruction at kindergarten, elementary or secondary levels, operated by a non-governmental organization. 
    "School, trade" means schools offering preponderant instruction in the technical, commercial or trade skills, such as real estate schools, business colleges, electronics schools, automotive and aircraft technicians schools and similar commercial establishments operated by a non-governmental organization. 
    "Service station" means an occupancy engaged in the retail sales of gasoline, diesel, liquified petroleum gas or other passenger vehicle fuels, which may also provide related oil, tires, batteries, accessories and servicing of such vehicles and operations, incidental thereto, including: occasional individual hand automobile washing, with or without incidental hand waxing and polishing; tire changing and repairing (but not including recapping); battery service, charging and replacement (but not including repair or rebuilding); radiator cleaning, flushing and repair; installation of minor accessories; lubrication of such vehicles; and testing, adjustment and replacement of minor or accessory motor parts and accessories. 
    "Sign" means any letter or symbol made of cloth, metal, paint, paper, wood or other material of any kind whatsoever, placed for advertising, identification or other similar purposes, on the ground or on any wall, post, fence, building, structure, vehicle or on any place whatsoever. The term "placed" shall include constructing, erecting, posting, painting, printing, tacking, nailing, gluing, sticking, carving or otherwise fastening, affixing or making visible in any manner whatsoever. 
    "Site: means a parcel of and, subdivided or unsubdivided, occupied or to be occupied by a use or structure. 
    "Site area" means the total horizontal area included within the property lines of a site. 
    "Site depth" means the average horizontal distance between the front and rear property lines of a site measured along a line midway between side property lines. 
    "Site width" means the average horizontal distance between the side property lines of a site measured at right angles to the depth at a point midway between the front and rear property lines. 
    "Stable" means a detached accessory structure including, but not limited to, a corral or paddock for the keeping of one or more horses owned by the occupants of the premises and which are not kept for remuneration, hire or sale. 
    "Stable, commercial" means a structure including, but not limited to, a corral or paddock for the keeping of horses for remuneration, hire or sale. 
    "Street" means a public or private way permanently dedicated or reserved as a primary means of access to abutting property. 
    "Street line" means the boundary line between street rights-of-way and abutting property. 
    "Structure" means anything constructed or erected which requires a fixed location on the ground, including a building or sign pole or standard, but not including a fence or wall used as a fence, a patio, walk, driveway or raised planting bed. 
    "Structure, main" means a structure housing the principle use of a site or functioning as the principle use. 
    "Structural alteration" means any change in the supporting members of a building, such as foundations, bearing walls, columns, beams, floor or roof joists, girders or rafters, or any change in the exterior dimensions of a building, excepting those changes which may result from providing minor repairs and building maintenance. 
    "Supportive housing" means housing with no limit on length of stay, that is occupied by the target population and that is linked to onsite or offsite services that assist the supportive housing resident in retaining the housing, improving his or her health status, and maximizing his or her ability to live and, when possible, work in the community. Supportive housing units are residential uses allowed in all zone districts that allow residential uses, subject only to those requirements, standards and restrictions that apply to other residential uses of the same type in the same zone district. 
    "Target population" means persons with low incomes who have one (1) or more disabilities, including mental illness, HIV or AIDS, substance abuse, or other chronic health condition, or individuals eligible for services provided pursuant to the Lanterman Developmental Disabilities Services Act (Division 4.5 (commencing with Section 4500) of the California Welfare and Institutions Code) and may include, among other populations, adults, emancipated minors, families with children, elderly persons, young adults aging out of the foster care system, individuals exiting from institutional settings, veterans, and homeless people. 
    "Trailer sales lot" means an open area where trailers are sold, leased or rented and where no repairs, repainting or remodeling are done. 
    "Trailer, utility" means a vehicle without motive power, designed and constructed to travel on the public thoroughfares in accordance with the provisions of the State Vehicle Code, and to be used only for carrying property. 
    "Transitional housing" means buildings configured as rental housing developments, but operated under program requirements that require the termination of assistance and recirculating of the assisted unit to another eligible program recipient at a predetermined future point in time that shall be no less than six (6) months from the beginning of the assistance. Transitional housing units are residential uses allowed in all zones districts that allow residential uses, subject only to those requirements, standards and restrictions that apply to other residential uses of the same type in the same zone district. 
    "Travel trailer" means a vehicle with or without motive power, designed and constructed to travel on the public thoroughfares in accordance with provisions of the State Vehicle Code, designed for human habitation, with no footing or foundation other than wheels and temporary stabilizing units, with exterior dimensions less than eight feet in width and less than forty (40) feet in length. The terms "camper" and "motor home" are included within the meaning of the term "travel trailer". 
    "Travel trailer parks" means a parcel, or contiguous parcels of land under single ownership, designed or intended to be used to accommodate travel trailers on a transient basis (one month continuous occupancy or less). 
    "Use" means the purpose for which a site or structure is arranged, designed, intended, constructed, moved, erected, altered or enlarged or for which either a site or structure is or may be occupied or maintained. 
    "Use, permitted" means a use which is listed as a permitted use in any given district in this title. Permitted uses need not meet special requirements as a condition precedent to be allowed to establish in a given district, except as required by the provisions of Chapters 17.56 and 16.64. 
    "Use, conditional" means a use which is listed as a conditional use in any given district in this title. Conditional uses may be required to meet certain requirements as a condition precedent to the granting of a use permit which will allow the establishing of a conditional use in any given district. 
    "Wetland" means an area that is inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances does support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, commonly known as hydrophytic vegetation. 
    "Yard" means open and unoccupied space on a lot. 
    "Yard, front" means a yard, the depth of which is the minimum required horizontal distance between the front lot line and the line parallel thereto on the lot, which yard extends across the full width of the lot. 
    "Yard, rear" means a yard, the depth of which is the minimum required horizontal distance between the rear lot line and a line parallel thereto on the lot, which yard extends across the full width of the lot. 
    "Yard, side" means a yard, the width of which is the minimum required horizontal distance between the side lot line and a line parallel thereto on the lot, not including any portion of a required front yard or required rear yard. 
(Ord. 2000-07 § 2, 2000; Ord. 92-11 § 1 (part), 1992: Ord. 408 (part), 1982) 
(Ord. No. 2015-05, § 5, 6-3-2015) 
Chapter 17.97 - MEDICAL AND RECREATIONAL MARIJUANA REGULATION[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2016-006, § 1, adopted Nov. 2, 2016, amended Ch. 17.97 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 17.97, §§ 17.97.010-17.97.060, pertained to medical marijuana dispensaries, cooperatives and cultivation, and derived from Ord. No. 2010-03, § 2, adopted Dec. 15, 2010. 

17.97.010 - Purpose and intent. 
    Acknowledging cannabis/marijuana continues to be recognized by the United States government as a Schedule 1 controlled substance the possession of which is a violation of United States Code Title 21, Chapter 13, Section 801 et seq., it is the purpose and intent of this chapter to promote the health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the residents and businesses within the city by regulating the cultivation, processing, extraction, manufacturing, testing, distribution, transportation, sale, and consumption of marijuana, whether for medical purposes as currently allowed under California law or for recreational use should recreational use become lawful under California law. 
(Ord. No. 2016-006, § 1, 11-2-2016) 
17.97.020 - Definitions. 
    For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply: 
    "Act" means the Medical Marijuana Regulation and Safety Act, now called the Medical Cannabis Regulation and Safety Act, including implementing regulations, as the Act and implementing regulations may be amended from time to time. The terms Act, Medical Marijuana Regulation and Safety Act, Medical Cannabis Regulation and Safety Act, may be used interchangeably, but shall have the same meaning. 
    "Cannabis" or "marijuana" shall have the meaning set forth in California Business and Professions Code Section 19300.5(f). Cannabis and marijuana may be used interchangeably, but shall have the same meaning. 
    "Collective" or "cooperative cultivation" means the association of two (2) or more persons, including, without limitation, qualified patients, persons with valid identification cards, and designated primary care givers to cultivate marijuana for medical or other purposes. 
    "Commercial marijuana operation" means any commercial cannabis activity as set forth in California Business and Professions Code Section 19300.5(k) and allowed under the Act, and all uses permitted under any subsequently enacted California law pertaining to the same or similar uses for recreational cannabis. 
    "Delivery" means the commercial transfer of medical or recreational use marijuana and marijuana products from any source as well as the use of any technology platform that enables persons, whether qualified patients, caregivers, or recreational users, to arrange for or facilitate the transfer and delivery of marijuana. 
    "Marijuana collective" or "cooperative" means the association of two (2) or more persons including, without limitation, qualified patients, persons with valid identification cards, and designated primary caregivers, who collectively or cooperatively cultivate, use, sell, transport, process, administer, deliver, dispense, or give away marijuana for medical or other purposes. 
    "Marijuana dispensary" or "dispensary" means any facility or location, whether fixed or mobile, and any building or structure, where cannabis is made available to, distributed by, or distributed to persons or entities. 
    "Marijuana products" means cannabis that has undergone a process whereby the plant material has been transformed into any form including, without limitation, concentrated cannabis, or an edible or topical product containing cannabis or concentrated cannabis and other ingredients. 
    "Medical marijuana" or "medical marijuana use" means the use of cannabis for the purposes set forth in the Compassionate Use Act and the Medical Marijuana Program Act, California Health and Safety Code Sections 11362.5 and 11362.7 et seq. 
    "Person" means any individual, partnership, limited liability company, corporation, association, trust, joint venture, society, club or other organization or group of persons. 
    "Recreational marijuana" or "recreational marijuana use" means all uses of cannabis not included within the definition of medical marijuana use. 
(Ord. No. 2016-006, § 1, 11-2-2016) 
17.97.030 - Regulations applicable to the cultivation of medical marijuana. 
    To the extent the city is required to allow the cultivation of medical marijuana under California law, the requirements set forth in this Section 17.97.030 shall apply. Nothing in this section shall be interpreted to permit medical or commercial marijuana operations, collective or cooperative cultivation of marijuana, marijuana collectives or cooperatives or marijuana dispensaries otherwise prohibited by this chapter. 
A.  Personal Use Cultivation. Only an individual qualified patient or person with a medical marijuana identification card may cultivate medical marijuana in his/her private residence. Cultivation shall be limited to a maximum of six (6) marijuana plants. A primary caregiver shall only cultivate medical marijuana in the residence of a qualified patient or person with a medical marijuana identification card for whom he/she is the primary caregiver. Medical marijuana cultivation for personal use shall be subject to the following requirements: 
1.  Area. The medical marijuana cultivation area in the residence shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet measured by the canopy of the marijuana plants and not exceed ten (10) feet in height in the residence. This limit applies regardless of the number of qualified patients or persons with an identification card residing in the residence. The cultivation area shall be a single designated area in the residence. 
2.  Lighting. Medical marijuana cultivation lighting in the residence shall not exceed a total of twelve hundred (1,200) watts. 
3.  Building Code Requirements. Any alterations or additions to the residence shall be subject to applicable building and fire codes, including, without limitation, plumbing and electrical, and all applicable municipal code requirements, including, without limitation, lot coverage, setback and height requirements. 
4.  Gas Products. The use of gas products (CO 2 , butane, etc.) for medical marijuana cultivation or processing is prohibited. 
5.  Evidence of Cultivation. There shall be no exterior evidence of medical marijuana cultivation occurring on the site of the residence that can be seen from neighboring properties, public rights-of-way or other public spaces. 
6.  Residence. The qualified patient or person with an identification card shall reside in the residence where the medical marijuana cultivation occurs. 
7.  Cultivation Elsewhere in City. The qualified patient or person with an identification card shall not participate in medical marijuana cultivation in any other location within the city. 
8.  Incidental Use. The residence shall maintain kitchen, bathrooms, and primary bedrooms for their intended use and not be used primarily for medical marijuana cultivation. 
9.  Ventilation. The medical marijuana cultivation area shall include a ventilation and filtration system designed to ensure that odors from the cultivation and use of marijuana are not detectable beyond the inside walls of the residence and designed to prevent mold and moisture and otherwise protect the health and safety of persons residing in the residence. The ventilation system shall include at a minimum, a system meeting the requirements of the current, adopted edition of the California Building Code Section 1203.4 Natural Ventilation, or Section 402.3 Mechanical Ventilation (or its equivalent(s)). 
10.  Storage of Chemicals. Any chemicals used for medical marijuana cultivation shall be stored outside of the habitable areas of the residence and outside of public view from neighboring properties and public rights-of-way. Any and all chemicals must be used, stored and disposed of in compliance with all limitations, restrictions, conditions, standards, prohibitions, requirements, obligations, schedules and timetables contained in all environmental laws. As used in this chapter, the term "environmental laws" means any past, present or future federal, state or local statutory or common law, or any regulation, ordinance, code, plan, order, permit, grant, franchise, concession, restriction or agreement issued, entered, promulgated or approved thereunder, relating to: (i) the environment, human health or safety, including, without limitation, emissions, discharges, releases or threatened releases of hazardous materials (as defined below) into the environment (including, without limitation, air, surface water, groundwater or land); or (ii) the use, treatment, receipt, storage, disposal, transport, arranging for transport, or handling of hazardous materials. As used in this chapter, the term "hazardous materials" shall mean and include any and all hazardous or toxic materials, substances, chemicals or wastes as now or hereafter designated or regulated under any law, statute, ordinance, rule, regulation, order or ruling of any agency of the State of California, the United States Government or any local governmental authority. 
11.  Nuisance. The medical marijuana cultivation area shall not adversely affect the health or safety of the residents of the city by creating dust, glare, heat, noise, noxious gasses, odor, smoke, traffic, vibration, or other impacts; and not be hazardous due to the use or storage of materials, chemicals, processes, products or wastes, or from other actions related to the cultivation. 
12.  Property Owner Authorization. For rental property, the tenant/lessee shall obtain written authorization and consent from the landlord/lessor prior to commencing cultivating medical marijuana at the residence. The landlord/lessor shall have the right to revoke such authorization and consent at any time. Upon the revocation of such authorization and consent, the cultivation of medical marijuana shall immediately terminate and all marijuana plants shall be immediately removed from the residence. 
13.  Notification. Prior to commencement of cultivation of medical marijuana within any residence the owner or landlord/lessor and tenant/lessee of the residence within which cultivation of medical marijuana will occur shall provide the Kingsburg Police Department with written notification ("notification"), using the notification form provided by the Kingsburg Police Department, of the intent to cultivate medical marijuana within the residence. Any person cultivating marijuana in their residence prior to the effective date of this chapter shall provide the notification required by this section to the Kingsburg Police Department within ten (10) days after the effective date of this chapter. Upon receipt of a notification, the Kingsburg Police Department shall direct the owner or landlord/lessee and tenant/lessee to the Kingsburg Planning Development to obtain a copy of this chapter and information regarding building code and permit requirements that may be applicable to the residence if alterations or additions to the residence are needed in order to comply with the provisions of this chapter. The Kingsburg Police Department and Planning Development shall keep patient information confidential to the extent required by law. 
14.  Posting of Physician Recommendation or Identification Card; Posting of Owner Authorization and Consent. A copy of a qualified patient physician recommendation or identification card shall be posted in a conspicuous place in the cultivation area for each patient residing in the residence that is cultivating medical marijuana. For rental properties, a copy of the owner's written authorization to cultivate marijuana within the residence shall also be posted in the same manner. 
B.  Collective or Cooperative Cultivation. The collective or cooperative cultivation of medical marijuana or the operation of a medical marijuana dispensary is prohibited in the city. 
(Ord. No. 2016-006, § 1, 11-2-2016) 
17.97.040 - Regulations applicable to the cultivation of recreational marijuana. 
    To the extent recreational marijuana use becomes legal under California law and the city is required to allow the cultivation of recreational marijuana under California law, the requirements set forth in Section 17.97.030 shall apply to the cultivation of recreational marijuana within a residence and upon the property where the residence is located. 
A.  California Law Requirements. In addition to the provisions of this chapter the cultivation of recreational marijuana shall be subject to all of the requirements set forth in California law. 
B.  Compliance with Medical Marijuana Personal Use Cultivation Requirements. All persons allowed under California law to cultivate recreational use marijuana shall be subject to and shall comply with the same rules, requirements, and limitations applicable to the personal use cultivation of medical marijuana set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2016-006, § 1, 11-2-2016) 
17.97.050 - Regulations applicable to marijuana operations, cooperatives, dispensaries and deliveries. 
A.  Commercial Marijuana Operations. Commercial marijuana operations as defined in Section 17.97.020 are prohibited within the city. 
B.  Collective or Cooperative Cultivation and Marijuana Collective or Cooperative. Collective or cooperative cultivation of marijuana as defined in Section 17.97.020 and marijuana collectives or cooperatives as defined in Section 17.97.020 are prohibited within the city. 
C.  Dispensaries. Marijuana dispensaries as defined in Section 17.97.020 are prohibited within the city. 
D.  Deliveries. The delivery of marijuana as defined in Section 17.97.020 is prohibited in the city regardless of whether the delivery is initiated within or outside of the city, and regardless of whether a technology platform is used for the ordering or delivery by the dispensary. 
E.  Exceptions. The following facilities providing medical marijuana to patients are not subject to the provisions of Section 17.97.050 B. provided the facilities operate in strict compliance with Health and Safety Code Sections 11362.5 and 11362.7 et seq., and all other California and local laws, including, without limitation, zoning, permitting, and licensing requirements: 
1.  A clinic licensed pursuant to Chapter 1 (commencing with Section 1200) of Division 2 of the Health and Safety Code. 
2.  A health care facility licensed pursuant to Chapter 2 (commencing with Section 1250) of Division 2 of the Health and Safety Code. 
3.  A residential care facility for persons with chronic life-threatening illness licensed pursuant to Chapter 3.01 (commencing with Section 1568.01) of Division 2 of the Health and Safety Code. 
4.  A residential care facility for the elderly licensed pursuant to Chapter 3.2 (commencing with Section 1569) of Division 2 of the Health and Safety Code. 
5.  A residential hospice, or a home health agency licensed pursuant to Chapter 8 (commencing with Section 1725) of Division 2 of the Health and Safety Code. 
(Ord. No. 2016-006, § 1, 11-2-2016) 
17.97.060 - Regulations applicable to the consumption of marijuana. 
    No person shall smoke, ingest, or otherwise consume marijuana or marijuana products, whether recreational or medical, in the city unless such smoking, ingesting or consumption is allowed by California law and occurs entirely within a private residence. "Within a private residence" shall mean inside habitable areas and shall not include garages, whether attached or detached, and other accessory buildings. Except that, medical marijuana may be consumed within the facilities identified in Section 17.97.050 E. of this chapter. 
    All consumption of marijuana or marijuana products permitted by this chapter shall be done in a manner that does not constitute a nuisance or that is adverse to the health and safety of the public. 
(Ord. No. 2016-006, § 1, 11-2-2016) 
17.97.070 - Penalties and enforcement. 
    Violations of this chapter for conduct that is not otherwise considered lawful under California law shall be considered misdemeanors and punishable in accordance with Chapter 1.16 of the municipal code. Each and every day, or portion thereof, a violation exists shall be a separate offense. The city may also pursue any and all applicable civil and administrative remedies, including but not limited to injunctive relief and administrative citations to terminate such conduct. 
(Ord. No. 2016-006, § 1, 11-2-2016) 
17.97.080 - Judicial review. 
    Judicial review of a decision made under this chapter may be had by filing a petition for a writ of mandate with the superior court in accordance with the provisions of the California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.5. Any such petition shall be filed within ninety (90) days after the day the decision becomes final as provided in California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1994.6, which shall be applicable for such actions. 
(Ord. No. 2016-006, § 1, 11-2-2016) 
17.97.090 - Severability. 
    If any section, subsection, subdivision, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion of this chapter or the application thereof to any person or place, is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by the decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remainder of this chapter. The city council hereby declares that it would have adopted this chapter, and each and every section, subsection, subdivision, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, subdivisions, sentences, clauses, phrases, or portions thereof be declared invalid or unconstitutional. 
(Ord. No. 2016-006, § 1, 11-2-2016) 
Chapter 17.100 - REPEALS AND CONSTITUTIONALITY 

17.100.010 - Inconsistent ordinances repealed. 
    All ordinances and parts of ordinances inconsistent with the provisions of this title are hereby repealed insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions hereof. 
(Ord. 92-11 § 1 (part), 1992: Ord. 408 (part), 1982) 
17.100.020 - Constitutionality. 
    If any chapter, section, subsection, paragraph, clause or phrase of this chapter for any reason shall be held to be invalid or unconstitutional, the decision shall not effect the remaining portions of this title. 
    The city council of the city of Kingsburg hereby declares that it would have enacted this title and each chapter, section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause and phrase hereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more chapters, sections, subsections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or phrases are declared to be invalid or unconstitutional. 
(Ord. 92-11 § 1 (part), 1992: Ord. 408 (part), 1982) 
STATUTORY REFERENCES FOR CALIFORNIA CHARTERED CITIES 
    The statutory references listed below refer the code user to state statutes relevant to California chartered cities. They are current with all 2017 Regular Session laws. 
General Provisions 
Adoption of city charters 
Cal. Const. Art. XI §§ 3 and 5 
Procedure for enactment or revision of city charters 
Government Code § 34450 et seq. 
Adoption of codes 
Government Code § 50022.1 et seq. 
Ordinances 
Government Code § 36900 et seq. 
Penalties for ordinance violations 
Government Code §§ 36900 and 36901 
Imprisonment 
Government Code §§ 36903 and 36904 
Citations for misdemeanors Penal Code § 853.5 et seq. 
Administrative fines and penalties 
Government Code § 53069.4 
Judicial review of city decisions 
Code of Civil Procedure § 1094.6 
Expedited judicial review of First Amendment cases 
Code of Civil Procedure § 1094.8 
Elections 
Government Code §§ 34050 and 36503 and Elections Code §§ 1301, 9200 et seq. and 10100 et seq. 
Classification of cities 
Government Code § 34100 et seq. 
General powers 
Government Code § 37100 et seq. and Cal. Const. art. XI §§ 7, 9 
Conflict of interest code 
Government Code § 87100 et seq. 
Eminent Domain Law 
Code of Civil Procedure § 1230.010 et seq. 
Initiative and referendum 
Cal. Const. Art. XI § 7.5 ;h1; Administration and Personnel 
City records 
Government Code § 34090 et seq. 
Meetings 
Government Code § 54950 et seq. 
Political activities of public employees 
Government Code § 3201 et seq. 
Local planning agencies 
Government Code § 65100 et seq. 
Emergency services 
Government Code § 8550 et seq. 
Personnel system, merit system or civil service system 
Government Code § 45000 et seq. 
Peace officer standards and training 
Penal Code § 13500 et seq. 
Retirement systems 
Government Code § 45300 et seq. 
Removal from office 
Government Code § 3000 et seq. ;h1; Revenue and Finance 
Transfer of tax function to county 
Government Code § 51500 et seq. 
Property tax assessment, levy and collection 
Government Code § 43000 et seq. 
Bradley-Burns Uniform Local Sales and Use Tax Law 
Revenue and Taxation Code § 7200 et seq. 
Transient occupancy tax 
Revenue and Taxation Code § 7280 et seq. 
Documentary Transfer Tax Act 
Revenue and Taxation Code § 11901 et seq. 
Unclaimed property 
Civil Code § 2080 et seq. 
Unclaimed money 
Government Code § 50050 et seq. 
Planning and zoning fees for specific purposes 
Government Code § 66012 et seq. 
Public works and public purchases 
Government Code § 4000 et seq. 
Local Agency Public Construction Act 
Public Contract Code § 20100 et seq. 
Uniform Public Construction Cost Accounting Act 
Public Contract Code § 22000 et seq. 
Claims against public entities 
Government Code § 900 et seq. 
Development project fees 
Government Code § 66000 et seq. ;h1; Business Licenses, Taxes and Regulations 
Authority to license businesses 
Government Code § 37101, Business and Professions Code § 16000 et seq. 
Bingo 
Penal Code § 326.4 et seq. 
Community antenna TV systems. 
Government Code § 53066 et seq. 
Charitable solicitations 
Business and Professions Code § 17510 et seq. 
Commercial filming 
Government Code § 65850.1 
Private investigators 
Business and Professions Code § 7512 et seq. 
Taxicabs 
Vehicle Code §§ 16500 et seq., 21100, 21112 and Government Code § 53075.5 
Gambling Control Act 
Business and Professions Code § 19800 et seq. 
Massage parlors 
Government Code § 51030 et seq. 
Automatic checkout systems 
Civil Code § 7100 et seq. 
Telecommunications facilities 
Government Code § 50030 ;h1; Animals 
Animals generally 
Food and Agricultural Code § 16301 et seq. 
Dogs 
Government Code § 38792 and Food and Agriculture Code § 30501 et seq. 
Potentially dangerous and vicious dogs 
Food and Agricultural Code § 31601 et seq. 
Rabies control 
Health and Safety Code § 121575 et seq. 
Cruelty to animals and related offenses 
Penal Code § 596 et seq. ;h1; Health and Safety 
Garbage and refuse collection and disposal 
Public Resources Code § 49300 et seq. 
Nuisances and nuisance abatement 
Government Code § 38771 et seq. and Penal Code § 370 et seq. 
Weed and rubbish abatement 
Government Code § 39501 et seq. 
Littering 
Penal Code § 374 et seq. 
Smoking-Places of employment 
Labor Code § 6404.5 
California Indoor Clean Air Act of 1976 
Health and Safety Code § 118875 et seq. 
Graffiti abatement 
Government Code § 38772 
Fire prevention 
Health and Safety Code § 13000 et seq. 
State Fireworks Law 
Health and Safety Code § 12500 et seq. 
Noise control 
Health and Safety Code § 46000 et seq. and Government Code § 65302(f) 
Hospitals 
Government Code § 37600 et seq. ;h1; Public Peace, Morals and Welfare 
Crimes against religion and conscience, and other offenses against good morals 
Penal Code § 302 et seq. 
Obscenity 
Penal Code § 311 et seq. 
Material harmful to minors 
Penal Code § 313 et seq. 
Indecent exposure, obscene exhibitions, and bawdy and other disorderly houses 
Penal Code § 314 et seq. 
Crimes against the public peace 
Penal Code § 403 et seq. ;h1; Vehicles and Traffic 
Rules of the road 
Vehicle Code § 21000 et seq. 
Local traffic rules and regulations 
Vehicle Code § 21100 et seq. 
Traffic signs, signals and markings 
Vehicle Code § 21350 et seq. 
Driving on right side of road, overtaking and passing 
Vehicle Code § 21650 et seq. 
Right of way 
Vehicle Code § 21800 et seq. 
Pedestrians' rights and duties 
Vehicle Code § 21949 et seq. 
Turning, stopping and turning signals 
Vehicle Code § 22100 et seq. 
Vehicle speed 
Vehicle Code § 22348 et seq. 
Special stops required 
Vehicle Code § 22450 et seq. 
Stopping, standing and parking 
Vehicle Code § 22500 et seq. 
Bicycles 
Vehicle Code §§ 21200 et seq. and 39000 et seq. 
Vehicle size, weight and load 
Vehicle Code § 35000 et seq. 
Penalties 
Vehicle Code § 42000 et seq. ;h1; Streets, Sidewalks and Public Places 
Improvement Act of 1911 
Streets and Highways Code § 5000 et seq. 
Construction of sidewalks and curbs 
Streets and Highways Code § 5870 et seq. 
Underground utility districts 
Streets and Highways Code § 5896.1 et seq. 
Obstructions and encroachments on public ways 
Government Code § 38775 
Municipal parks 
Public Resources Code § 5181 et seq. 
Tree Planting Act of 1931. 
Streets and Highways Code § 22000 et seq. 
Landscaping and Lighting Act of 1972 
Streets and Highways Code § 22500 et seq. 
Charitable solicitations 
Business and Professions Code § 17510 et seq. 
Advertising displays 
Business and Professions Code § 5229 et seq. ;h1; Public Services 
Municipal water systems 
Government Code § 38730 et seq. 
Municipal sewers 
Government Code § 38900 et seq. and Health and Safety Code § 5470 et seq. 
Water wells 
Water Code § 13700 et seq. ;h1; Buildings and Construction 
Authority to regulate buildings and construction 
Government Code §§ 38601 and 38660 
State Housing Law 
Health and Safety Code § 17910 et seq. 
Adoption of construction codes 
Health and Safety Code §§ 17922 and 17958 
California Building Standards Law/State building code 
Health and Safety Code § 18901 et seq. 
Mobilehome Parks Act 
Health and Safety Code § 18200 et seq. 
Signs 
Government Code §§ 38774 and 65850; Business and Professions Code § 5200 et seq. 
Inspection warrants 
Code of Civil Procedure § 1822.50 et seq. 
Development fees 
Government Code § 66000 et seq. ;h1; Subdivisions 
Subdivision Map Act 
Government Code § 66410 et seq. ;h1; Zoning 
Planning and Zoning Law 
Government Code § 65000 et seq. 
Local authority to regulate land use 
Government Code § 65850 
Local zoning administration 
Government Code § 65900 et seq. 
Open-space zoning 
Government Code § 65910 et seq. 
Family day care homes 
Health and Safety Code § 1597.30 et seq. ;h1; Environmental Protection 
California Environmental Quality Act 
Public Resources Code § 21000 et seq. 
California Noise Control Act of 1973 
Health and Safety Code § 46000 et seq. 
PRIOR CODE TABLE 
Prior Code § Prior Ordinance History Herein Section 11-1000 (Not codified) Section 11-1001 (Not codified) Section 11-1002 (Not codified) Section 11-1003 (Not codified) Section 11-1004 (Not codified) Section 11-1005 (Not codified) Section 12-1000 1.04.010 Section 12-1001 1.04.020 Section 12-1002 1.04.030 Section 12-1003 1.04.040 Section 12-1004 (Not codified) Section 12-1005 1.04.050 Section 12-1006 1.04.060 Section 12-1007 1.04.070 Section 12-1008 1.04.080 Section 12-1009 1.04.090 Section 12-1010 1.04.100 Section 12-2000 1.04.110 Section 12-2012 1.04.110 Section 12-2014 1.04.110 Section 12-2017 1.04.110 Section 12-2020 1.04.110 Section 12-2022 1.04.110 Section 12-2024 Ord. No. 349 § 1 1.04.110 Section 12-2030 1.04.110 Section 12-2036 1.04.110 Section 12-2039 1.04.110 Section 12-2041 1.04.110 Section 12-2045 1.04.110 Section 12-2047 1.04.110 Section 12-2050 1.04.110 Section 12-2054 1.04.110 Section 12-2058 1.04.110 Section 12-2064 1.04.110 Section 12-2070 1.04.110 Section 12-2076 1.04.110 Section 12-2081 Ord. No. 349 § 1 1.04.110 Section 12-2082 1.04.110 Section 12-2092 1.04.110 Section 12-2093 1.04.110 Section 13-0000 1.12.010 Section 13-0001 1.12.020 Section 14-0000 Ord. No. 376 § 1 1.20.010 Section 14-0001 Ord. No. 376 § 1 1.20.020 Section 14-0002 Ord. No. 376 § 1 1.20.030 Section 14-0003 Ord. No. 376 § 1 1.20.040 Section 14-0004 Ord. No. 376 § 1 1.16.010 Section 14-0005 1.16.020 Section 14-0006 Ord. No. 376 § 1 1.16.030 Section 14-0007 Ord. No. 376 § 1 1.16.040 Section 14-0008 Ord. No. 376 § 1 1.16.050 Section 14-0009 Ord. No. 376 § 1 1.16.060 Section 14-0010 Ord. No. 376 § 1 1.16.070 Section 14-0011 Ord. No. 376 § 1 3.04.010 Section 21-1000 2.04.010 Section 21-1001 2.04.020 Section 21-1002 2.04.030 Section 21-1003 2.04.040 Section 21-1004 2.04.050 Section 21-1005 2.04.060 Section 21-1006 2.04.070 Section 21-1007 Repealed Section 21-1008 2.04.090 Section 21-1009 2.04.100 Section 21-1010 2.04.110 Section 21-1011 2.04.120 Section 21-1012 2.04.130 Section 21-1013 2.04.140 Section 21-1014 2.04.150 Section 21-1015 2.04.160 Section 21-1016 2.04.170 Section 21-1017 2.04.180 Section 21-1018 Repealed Section 21-1019 2.04.200 Section 21-1020 2.04.210 Section 21-1021 2.04.220 Section 21-1022 2.04.230 Section 21-1023 2.04.240 Section 21-1024 2.04.250 Section 21-1025 2.04.260 Section 21-1026 2.04.270 Section 21-2000 2.16.010 Section 21-2001 (Not codified) Section 21-2002 2.16.030 Section 21-2003 Ord. No. 405 § 2 2.16.020 Section 21-2004 Ord. No. 405 § 2 2.16.050 Section 22-1000 Ord. No. 70 § 1; Ord. No 94 § 1; Ord. No. 160 § 3 2.16.040 Section 22-2000 2.12.010 Section 22-2001 2.12.020 Section 22-2002 Ord. No. 405 § 2 2.16.030 Section 22-3000 2.16.030 Section 22-4000 (Not codified) Section 22-4001 (Not codified) Section 22-4002 (Not codified) Section 22-4003 (Not codified) Section 22-4004 (Not codified) Section 22-5000 (Not codified) Section 22-5001 (Not codified) Section 22-5002 2.16.030 Section 22-6000 (Not codified) Section 22-7000 Ord. No. 327 § 1 2.24.010 Section 22-8000 Ord. No. 360 § 1; Ord. No. 404 § 2 2.08.010 Section 22-8001 Ord. No. 360 § 1; Ord. No. 404 § 2 2.08.020 Section 22-8002 Ord. No. 360 § 1; Ord. No. 404 § 2 2.08.030 Section 22-8003 Ord. No. 360 § 1; Ord. No. 404 § 2 2.08.040 Section 22-8004 Ord. No. 360 § 1; Ord. No. 404 § 2 2.08.050 Section 22-8005 Ord. No. 360 § 1; Ord. No. 404 § 2 2.08.060 Section 22-8006 Ord. No. 360 § 1; Ord. No. 404 § 2 2.08.070 Section 22-8007 Ord. No. 360 § 1; Ord. No. 404 § 2 2.08.080 Section 22-8008 Ord. No. 360 § 1; Ord. No. 404 § 2 2.08.090 Section 22-8009 Ord. No. 360 § 1; Ord. No. 404 § 2 2.08.100 Section 22-8010 Ord. No. 360 § 1; Ord. No. 404 § 2 2.08.110 Section 22-8011 Ord. No. 360 § 1; Ord. No. 404 § 2 2.08.120 Section 22-8012 Ord. No. 360 § 1; Ord. No. 404 § 2 2.08.130 Section 22-8013 Ord. No. 360 § 1; Ord. No. 404 § 2 2.08.140 Section 22-8014 (Not codified) Section 22-8015 (Not codified) Section 22-8016 (Not codified) Section 22-8017 (Not codified) Section 22-8018 (Not codified) Section 22-8019 (Not codified) Section 22-8020 (Not codified) Section 22-8021 (Not codified) Section 22-8022 (Not codified) Section 22-8023 (Not codified) Section 22-8024 (Not codified) Section 22-8025 (Not codified) Section 22-8026 (Not codified) Section 22-8027 (Not codified) Section 22-8028 (Not codified) Section 22-8029 (Not codified) Section 22-8030 (Not codified) Section 22-8031 (Not codified) Section 23-1000 2.28.010 Section 23-1001 2.28.020 Section 23-1002 2.28.030 Section 23-1003 2.28.040 Section 23-1004 2.28.050 Section 23-1005 2.28.060 Section 23-1006 2.28.070 Section 23-1007 2.28.080 Section 23-2000 (Not codified) Section 23-2001 (Not codified) Section 23-2002 (Not codified) Section 23-2003 (Not codified) Section 23-2004 (Not codified) Section 23-2005 (Not codified) Section 23-2006 (Not codified) Section 23-3000 2.50.010 Section 23-3001 2.50.020 Section 23-3002 2.50.030 Section 23-3003 2.50.040 Section 23-3004 2.50.050 Section 23-3005 2.50.060 Section 23-3006 2.50.070 Section 23-3007 2.50.080 Section 23-3008 Repealed by Ord. 99-03 Section 23-3009 Repealed by Ord. 99-03 Section 24-1000 2.44.010 Section 24-1001 2.44.020 Section 24-1002 2.44.030 Section 24-1003 2.44.040 Section 24-1004 2.44.050 Section 24-1005 2.44.060 Section 24-1006 2.44.070 Section 24-2000 Ord. No. 391 § 2 2.36.010 Section 25-1000 Ord. No. 380 § 1 1.08.010 Section 26-1000 Ord. No. 380 § 1 2.48.010 Section 26-1001 Ord. No. 380 § 1 2.48.020 Section 26-1002 Ord. No. 380 § 1 2.48.030 Section 26-1003 Ord. No. 380 § 1 Repealed Section 26-1004 Ord. No. 380 § 1 Repealed Section 26-1005 Ord. No. 380 § 1 2.48.040 Section 26-1006 Ord. No. 380 § 1 2.48.050 Section 26-1007 Ord. No. 380 § 1 2.48.060 Section 26-1008 Ord. No. 380 § 1 2.48.070 Section 26-1009 Ord. No. 380 § 1 2.48.080 Section 26-1010 Ord. No. 380 § 1 2.48.090 Section 26-1011 Ord. No. 380 § 1 2.48.100 Section 26-1012 Ord. No. 380 § 1 2.48.110 Section 26-1013 Ord. No. 380 § 1 2.48.120 Section 26-1014 Ord. No. 380 § 1 2.48.130 Section 26-1015 Ord. No. 380 § 1 2.48.140 Section 26-1016 Ord. No. 380 § 1 2.48.150 Section 27-1000 Ord. No. 409 § 1 2.32.010 Section 27-1001 Ord. No. 409 § 2 2.32.020 Section 27-1002 Ord. No. 409 § 3 2.32.030 Section 27-1003 Ord. No. 409 § 4 2.32.040 Section 27-1004 Ord. No. 409 § 5 2.32.050 Section 32-0001 3.04.020 Section 34-0001 3.04.030 Section 35-0001 Ord. No. 269 § 1 3.12.010 Section 35-0002 3.12.020 Section 35-0003 3.12.030 Section 35-0004 Ord. No. 269 § 1; Ord. No. 287 §§ 2-4; Ord. No. 341 § 2; Ord. No. 358 § 1; Ord. No. 361 § 1 3.12.040 Section 35-0005 Ord. No. 269 § 1; Ord. No. 287 §§ 2-4; Ord. No. 341 § 2; Ord. No. 358 § 1; Ord. No. 361 § 1 3.12.050 Section 35-0006 Ord. No. 269 § 6 3.12.060 Section 35-0006.1 (Not codified) Section 35-0007 Ord. No. 269 § 7 3.12.070 Section 35-0008 (Not codified) Section 35-0009 3.12.080 Section 36-0001 (Not codified) Section 36-0002 (Not codified) Section 37-1000 5.04.010 Section 37-1001 5.04.030 Section 37-1002 5.04.150 Section 37-1003 5.04.160 Section 37-1004 5.04.170 Section 37-1005 5.04.120 Section 37-1006 (Not codified) Section 37-1007 5.04.040 Section 37-1008 5.04.110 Section 37-1009 5.04.130 Section 37-1010 5.04.250 Section 37-1011 5.04.240 Section 37-1012 5.04.060 Section 37-1013 5.04.080 Section 37-1014 5.04.140 Section 37-1015 5.04.090 Section 37-1016 5.04.100 Section 37-1017 5.04.050 Section 37-1018 5.04.070 Section 37-2000 5.08.010 Section 37-2001 Ord. No. 386 § 1 5.08.020 Section 37-2002 5.08.030 Section 37-2003 Repealed Section 37-2004 Ord. No. 386 § 2 5.08.050 Section 37-2005 Ord. No. 386 § 3 5.08.060 Section 37-2006 Ord. No. 386 § 4 5.08.070 Section 37-2007 Ord. No. 386 § 5 Repealed Section 37-2008 Ord. No. 386 § 6 5.08.090 Section 37-2009 Ord. No. 386 § 7 5.08.100 Section 37-2009.1 Ord. No. 372 § 1 5.32.010 Section 37-2010 Ord. No. 386 § 8 5.08.110 Section 37-3000 5.04.220 Section 37-3001 5.04.180 Section 37-3002 5.04.190 Section 37-3003 5.04.210 Section 37-3004 5.04.200 Section 37-3005 5.04.230 Section 37-4000 5.04.020 Section 38-0001 3.16.010 Section 38-0002 3.16.020 Section 38-0003 3.16.030 Section 38-0004 3.16.040 Section 38-0005 3.16.050 Section 38-0006 3.16.060 Section 38-0007 3.16.070 Section 38-0008 3.16.080 Section 38-0009 3.16.090 Section 38-0010 3.16.100 Section 38-0011 3.16.110 Section 38-0012 3.16.120 Section 38-0013 3.16.130 Section 38-0014 3.16.140 Section 38-0015 3.16.150 Section 38-0016 Repealed Section 38-0017 3.16.170 Section 39-0001 3.08.010 Section 39-0002 3.08.020 Section 39-0003 Ord. No. 312 § 1 3.08.030 Section 39-0004 Ord. No. 312 § 1 3.08.040 Section 39-0005 Ord. No. 312 § 1; Ord. No. 326 § 1 3.08.050 Section 39-0006 Ord. No. 312 § 1 3.08.060 Section 39-0007 3.08.070 Section 39-0008 3.08.080 Section 39-0009 3.08.090 Section 39-0010 3.08.100 Section 39-0011 3.08.110 Section 39-0012 3.08.120 Section 39-0013 (Not codified) Section 41-1000 Ord. No. 100 § 1 10.08.010 Section 41-1001 10.08.020 Section 41-1002 10.08.030 Section 41-1003 10.08.040 Section 41-1003.10 10.08.050 Section 41-1004 10.08.060 Section 41-1005 10.08.070 Section 41-1006 10.04.010 Section 41-1007 10.04.020 Section 41-1008 10.04.030 Section 41-1009 10.04.040 Section 41-1010 10.04.050 Section 41-1011 Ord. No. 251 § 2 10.04.060 Section 41-1012 Ord. No. 251 §§ 3, 4 10.04.070 Section 41-1013 Ord. No. 100 § 25 10.04.080 Section 41-1014 Ord. No. 139 §§ 1, 2 10.04.090 Section 41-1015 Ord. No. 315 § 1; Ord. No. 352 § 1; Ord. No. 401 § 1 10.04.100 Section 41-1016 Ord. No. 344 § 1 10.04.110 Section 41-1017 Ord. No. 348 § 1 10.04.120 Section 41-1018 Ord. No. 348 § 1; Ord. No. 390 § 2 10.04.130 Section 41-1019 (Not codified) Section 41-1020 Ord. No. 348 § 1 10.04.140 Section 41-1021 Ord. No. 348 § 1 10.04.150 Section 41-1022 Ord. No. 348 § 1 10.04.160 Section 41-1023 Ord. No. 362 § 1 10.04.170 Section 41-1024 Ord. No. 359 § 1 10.04.180 Section 41-2000 Ord. No. 17 § 1 10.16.010 Section 41-2001 Ord. No. 296 § 1; Ord. No. 324 § 1 10.16.020 Section 41-2002 Ord. No. 296 § 2 10.16.030 Section 41-3001 Ord. No. 2006-06 § 1 (part) 10.24.010 Section 41-3002 Ord. No. 2006-06 § 1 (part) 10.24.020 Section 41-3003 Ord. No. 2006-06 § 1 (part) 10.24.030 Section 41-3004 Ord. No. 2006-06 § 1 (part) 10.24.040 Section 41-3005 Ord. No. 2006-06 § 1 (part) 10.24.050 Section 41-3006 Ord. No. 2006-06 § 1 (part) 10.24.060 Section 41-3007 Ord. No. 2006-06 § 1 (part) 10.24.070 Section 41-3008 Ord. No. 2006-06 § 1 (part) 10.24.080 Section 41-3009 Ord. No. 2006-06 § 1 (part) 10.24.090 Section 41-3010 Ord. No. 2006-06 § 1 (part) 10.24.100 Section 41-3011 Ord. No. 2006-06 § 1 (part) 10.24.110 Section 41-3012 Ord. No. 2006-06 § 1 (part) 10.24.120 Section 41-3013 Ord. No. 2006-06 § 1 (part) 10.24.130 Section 41-3014 Ord. No. 2006-06 § 1 (part) 10.24.140 Section 41-3015 Ord. No. 2006-06 § 1 (part) 10.24.150 Section 42-1000 (Not codified) Section 42-2000 (Not codified) Section 42-2001 (Not codified) Section 42-2002 (Not codified) Section 42-2003 (Not codified) Section 42-2004 (Not codified) Section 42-2005 (Not codified) Section 42-2006 (Not codified) Section 42-2007 (Not codified) Section 42-2008 (Not codified) Section 42-2009 (Not codified) Section 42-2010 (Not codified) Section 42-3000 8.04.010 Section 42-3001 8.04.020 Section 42-3002 8.04.030 Section 42-3003 (Not codified) Section 42-4000 Ord. No. 398 § 2 (part) 8.20.010 Section 42-4001 Ord. No. 398 § 2 (part) 8.20.020 Section 42-4002 Ord. No. 398 § 2 (part) 8.20.030 Section 42-4003 Ord. No. 398 § 2 (part) 8.20.040 Section 42-4004 Ord. No. 398 § 2 (part) 8.20.050 Section 42-4005 Ord. No. 398 § 2 (part) 8.20.060 Section 42-4006 Ord. No. 398 § 2 (part) 8.20.070 Section 42-4007 Ord. No. 398 § 2 (part) 8.20.080 Section 42-4008 Ord. No. 398 § 2 (part) 8.20.090 Section 42-4009 Ord. No. 398 § 2 (part) (Not codified) Section 42-4010 (Not codified) Section 43-1000 Ord. No. 345 § 1 12.16.010 Section 43-1001 Ord. No. 345 § 1 12.16.020 Section 43-1002 Ord. No. 345 § 1 12.16.030 Section 43-1003 Ord. No. 345 § 1 12.16.040 Section 43-1004 Ord. No. 345 § 1 12.16.050 Section 43-1005 Ord. No. 345 § 1 12.16.060 Section 44-0000 Ord. No. 335 § 2 2.40.010 Section 44-0001 Ord. No. 335 § 2 2.40.020 Section 44-0002 Ord. No. 335 § 2 2.40.030 Section 44-0003 Ord. No. 335 § 2 2.40.040 Section 44-0004 Ord. No. 335 § 2 2.40.050 Section 44-0005 Ord. No. 335 § 2 2.40.060 Section 44-0006 Ord. No. 335 § 2 2.40.070 Section 44-0007 Ord. No. 335 § 2 2.40.080 Section 44-0008 Ord. No. 335 § 2 2.40.090 Section 44-0009 Ord. No. 335 § 2 2.40.100 Section 45-1000 (Not codified) Section 45-1001 (Not codified) Section 45-1002 Ord. No. 350 § 2 10.20.010 Section 45-1003 Ord. No. 350 § 2 10.20.010 Section 45-1004 Ord. No. 350 § 2 10.20.010 Section 45-1005 Ord. No. 350 § 2 10.20.010 Section 45-1006 Ord. No. 350 § 2 10.20.010 Section 45-1007 Ord. No. 350 § 2 10.20.010 Section 45-1008 Ord. No. 350 § 2 10.20.010 Section 45-1009 Ord. No. 350 § 2 10.20.010 Section 45-1010 (Not codified) Section 45-1011 Ord. No. 350 § 2 10.20.010 Section 45-2000 Ord. No. 350 § 2 10.20.010 Section 45-2001 Ord. No. 350 § 2 10.20.020 Section 45-2002 Ord. No. 350 § 2 10.20.030 Section 45-2003 Ord. No. 350 § 2 10.20.040 Section 45-2004 Ord. No. 350 § 2 10.20.050 Section 45-2005 Ord. No. 350 § 2 10.20.060 Section 45-2006 Ord. No. 350 § 2 10.20.070 Section 45-2007 Ord. No. 350 § 2 10.20.080 Section 45-2008 Ord. No. 350 § 2 10.20.090 Section 45-2009 Ord. No. 350 § 2 10.20.100 Section 45-2010 Ord. No. 350 § 2 10.20.110 Section 45-2011 Ord. No. 350 § 2 10.20.120 Section 45-2012 Ord. No. 350 § 2 10.20.130 Section 45-6000 Ord. No. 350 § 2 10.20.140 Section 45-6001 Ord. No. 350 § 2 10.20.150 Section 45-6002 Ord. No. 350 § 2 10.20.160 Section 45-6003 Ord. No. 350 § 2 10.20.170 Section 45-7000 Ord. No. 350 § 2 10.20.180 Section 46-0000 (Not codified) Section 46-0001 (Not codified) Section 46-0002 (Not codified) Section 46-0003 (Not codified) Section 46-0004 (Not codified) Section 46-0005 (Not codified) Section 46-0006 (Not codified) Section 47-1000 6.04.010 Section 47-1001 6.04.020 Section 47-1002 6.04.030 Section 47-1003 6.04.040 Section 47-1004 6.04.050 Section 47-1005 6.04.060 Section 47-1006 6.04.070 Section 47-1007 6.04.080 Section 47-1008 6.04.090 Section 47-1009 Repealed Section 47-1010 6.04.110 Section 47-1011 6.04.120 Section 47-1012 6.04.130 Section 47-1013 Repealed Section 48-0000 Ord. No. 314 § 1; Ord. No. 343 § 1 10.12.010 Section 48-0001 Ord. No. 314 § 1 10.12.020 Section 48-0002 Ord. No. 314 § 1 10.12.030 Section 48-0003 Ord. No. 314 § 1 10.12.040 Section 48-0004 Ord. No. 314 § 1 10.12.050 Section 48-0005 Ord. No. 314 § 1 10.12.060 Section 48-0006 Ord. No. 343 § 4 10.12.070 Section 48-0007 Ord. No. 343 § 4 10.12.080 Section 48-0008 Ord. No. 343 § 4 10.12.090 Section 48-0009 Ord. No. 343 § 4 10.12.100 Section 48-0010 Ord. No. 314 § 1; Ord. No. 343 § 1 10.12.110 Section 48-0011 Ord. No. 314 § 1; Ord. No. 343 § 1 10.12.120 Section 48-0012 Ord. No. 314 § 1; Ord. No. 343 § 1 10.12.130 Section 48-0013 Ord. No. 314 § 1; Ord. No. 343 § 1 10.12.140 Section 49-0000 15.40.010 Section 410-0000 Ord. No. 2006-03 § 2 8.10.010 Section 51-1000 Ord. No. 5 § 1 9.04.010 Section 51-1001 Ord. No. 5 § 2 9.04.020 Section 51-1002 Ord. No. 5 § 3 9.04.030 Section 51-1003 9.04.040 Section 51-1004 9.04.050 Section 51-2000 (Not codified) Section 51-3000 9.16.010 Section 51-3001 9.16.020 Section 51-3002 Ord. No. 275 §§ 3-6 9.16.030 Section 51-3003 Ord. No. 275 § 8 9.16.040 Section 51-3004 Ord. No. 275 § 9 9.16.050 Section 51-4000 (Not codified) Section 51-5000 Ord. No. 336 § 1 9.20.010 Section 51-6000 Ord. No. 351 § 2 9.20.020 Section 52-0000 5.24.010 Section 52-0001 5.24.020 Section 52-0002 5.24.030 Section 52-0003 5.24.040 Section 52-0004 5.24.050 Section 52-0005 5.24.060 Section 52-0006 5.24.070 Section 52-0007 5.24.080 Section 52-0008 5.24.090 Section 52-0009 5.24.100 Section 52-0010 5.24.110 Section 52-0011 5.24.120 Section 52-0012 5.24.130 Section 52-0013 5.24.140 Section 52-0014 5.24.150 Section 52-0015 5.24.160 Section 52-0016 5.24.170 Section 52-0017 (Not codified) Section 52-0018 5.24.180 Section 52-0019 (Not codified) Section 52-0020 5.24.190 Section 52-0021 Repealed Section 52-0022 Repealed Section 52-0023 Repealed Section 53-0000 9.20.030 Section 54-0000 9.12.010 Section 54-0001 9.12.020 Section 54-0002 9.12.030 Section 55-0000 12.20.010 Section 55-0001 12.20.020 Section 55-0002 Ord. No. 351 § 1 12.20.030 Section 56-0001 Ord. No. 393 § 2 (part) 5.36.010 Section 56-0002 Ord. No. 393 § 2 (part) 5.36.020 Section 56-0003 Ord. No. 393 § 2 (part) 5.36.030 Section 56-0004 Ord. No. 393 § 2 (part) 5.36.040 Section 56-0005 Ord. No. 393 § 2 (part) 5.36.050 Section 56-0006 Ord. No. 393 § 2 (part) 5.36.060 Section 56-0007 Ord. No. 393 § 2 (part) 5.36.070 Section 56-0008 Ord. No. 393 § 2 (part) 5.36.080 Section 56-0009 Ord. No. 393 § 2 (part) 5.36.090 Section 56-0010 Ord. No. 393 § 2 (part) 5.36.100 Section 56-0012 Ord. No. 393 § 2 (part) 5.36.110 Section 56-0013 Ord. No. 393 § 2 (part) 5.36.120 Section 56-0014 Ord. No. 393 § 2 (part) 5.36.130 Section 56-0015 Ord. No. 393 § 2 (part) 5.36.140 Prior Code § Prior Ordinance History Herein Section 56-0016 Ord. No. 393 § 2 (part) 5.36.150 Section 56-0017 Ord. No. 393 § 2 (part) 5.36.160 Section 56-0018 Ord. No. 393 § 2 (part) 5.36.170 Section 56-0019 Ord. No. 393 § 2 (part) 5.36.180 Section 56-0020 Ord. No. 454; Ord. No. 393 § 2 (part) 5.36.190 Section 56-0021 Ord. No. 393 § 2 (part) 5.36.200 Section 56-0022 Ord. No. 393 § 2 (part) 5.36.210 Section 56-0023 Ord. No. 393 § 2 (part) 5.36.220 Section 56-0024 Ord. No. 393 § 2 (part) 5.36.230 Section 56-0025 Ord. No. 393 § 2 (part) 5.36.240 Section 56-0026 Ord. No. 393 § 2 (part) 5.36.250 Section 57-0000 Ord. No. 384 § 1 (part) 5.12.010 Section 57-0001 Ord. No. 384 § 1 (part) 5.12.020 Section 57-0002 Ord. No. 384 § 1 (part) 5.12.030 Section 57-0003 Ord. No. 384 § 1 (part) 5.12.040 Section 57-0004 Ord. No. 384 § 1 (part) 5.12.050 Section 57-0005 Ord. No. 384 § 1 (part) 5.12.060 Section 57-0006 Ord. No. 384 § 1 (part) 5.12.070 Section 57-0007 Ord. No. 384 § 1 (part) 5.12.080 Section 57-0008 Ord. No. 384 § 1 (part) 5.12.090 Section 57-0009 Ord. No. 384 § 1 (part) 5.12.100 Section 57-0010 Ord. No. 384 § 1 (part) 5.12.110 Section 57-0011 Ord. No. 384 § 1 (part) 5.12.120 Section 57-0012 Ord. No. 384 § 1 (part) 5.12.130 Section 57-0013 Ord. No. 384 § 1 (part) 5.12.140 Section 57-0014 Ord. No. 384 § 1 (part) 5.12.150 Section 57-0015 Ord. No. 384 § 1 (part) 5.12.160 Section 58-0001 Ord. No. 396 § 2 (part) 8.16.010 Section 58-0002 Ord. No. 396 § 2 (part) 8.16.020 Section 58-0003 Ord. No. 396 § 2 (part) 8.16.030 Section 58-0004 Ord. No. 396 § 2 (part) 8.16.040 Section 58-0005 Ord. No. 396 § 2 (part) 8.16.050 Section 58-0006 Ord. No. 396 § 2 (part) 8.16.060 Section 58-0007 Ord. No. 396 § 2 (part) 8.16.070 Section 58-0009 Ord. No. 396 § 2 (part) 8.16.080 Section 59-1001 Ord. No. 379 § 1 (part) 5.16.010 Section 59-1002 Ord. No. 379 § 1 (part) 5.16.020 Section 59-1003 Ord. No. 379 § 1 (part) 5.16.030 Section 59-1004 Ord. No. 379 § 1 (part) 5.16.040 Section 59-2001 Ord. No. 379 § 1 (part) (Not codified) Section 59-2002 Ord. No. 379 § 1 (part) (Not codified) Section 59-2003 Ord. No. 379 § 1 (part) (Not codified) Section 59-3001 Ord. No. 379 § 1 (part) (Not codified) Section 59-3002 Ord. No. 379 § 1 (part) (Not codified) Section 59-3003 Ord. No. 379 § 1 (part) (Not codified) Section 59-4001 Ord. No. 379 § 1 (part) (Not codified) Section 59-4002 Ord. No. 379 § 1 (part) (Not codified) Section 59-4003 Ord. No. 379 § 1 (part) (Not codified) Section 59-4004 Ord. No. 379 § 1 (part) (Not codified) Section 59-4005 Ord. No. 379 § 1 (part) (Not codified) Section 59-4006 Ord. No. 379 § 1 (part) (Not codified) Section 59-4007 Ord. No. 379 § 1 (part) (Not codified) Section 59-5001 Ord. No. 379 § 1 (part) (Not codified) Section 59-5002 Ord. No. 379 § 1 (part) (Not codified) Section 59-5003 Ord. No. 379 § 1 (part) (Not codified) Section 59-5004 Ord. No. 379 § 1 (part) (Not codified) Section 59-5005 Ord. No. 379 § 1 (part) (Not codified) Section 59-5006 Ord. No. 379 § 1 (part) (Not codified) Section 59-5007 Ord. No. 379 § 1 (part) (Not codified) Section 59-5008 Ord. No. 379 § 1 (part) (Not codified) Section 59-5009 Ord. No. 379 § 1 (part) (Not codified) Section 59-5010 Ord. No. 379 § 1 (part) (Not codified) Section 59-5011 Ord. No. 379 § 1 (part) (Not codified) Section 59-5012 Ord. No. 379 § 1 (part) (Not codified) Section 59-6001 Ord. No. 379 § 1 (part) (Not codified) Section 59-6002 Ord. No. 379 § 1 (part) (Not codified) Section 59-6003 Ord. No. 379 § 1 (part) (Not codified) Section 59-6004 Ord. No. 379 § 1 (part) (Not codified) Section 59-6005 Ord. No. 379 § 1 (part) (Not codified) Section 59-7001 Ord. No. 379 § 1 (part) (Not codified) Section 59-7002 Ord. No. 379 § 1 (part) (Not codified) Section 59-7003 Ord. No. 379 § 1 (part) (Not codified) Section 59-7004 Ord. No. 379 § 1 (part) (Not codified) Section 59-7005 Ord. No. 379 § 1 (part) (Not codified) Section 61-1000 12.04.010 Section 61-1001 12.04.020 Section 61-1002 12.04.030 Section 61-1003 12.04.040 Section 61-1004 12.04.050 Section 61-1005 12.04.060 Section 61-1006 12.04.070 Section 61-1007 (Not codified) Section 61-1008 (Not codified) Section 61-2000 12.08.010 Section 61-2001 12.08.020 Section 61-2002 12.08.030 Section 61-2003 12.08.040 Section 61-2004 12.08.050 Section 61-2005 12.08.060 Section 61-3000 13.24.010 Section 61-3001 13.24.020 Section 61-3002 13.24.030 Section 61-3003 13.24.040 Section 61-3004 13.24.050 Section 61-3005 13.24.060 Section 61-3006 13.24.070 Section 61-3007 13.24.080 Section 61-3008 13.24.090 Section 61-3009 13.24.100 Section 61-3010 13.24.110 Section 61-4000 Ord. No. 355 § 1 12.24.010 Section 61-4001 Ord. No. 355 § 1 12.24.020 Section 61-4002 Ord. No. 355 § 1 12.24.030 Section 61-4003 Ord. No. 355 § 1 12.24.040 Section 61-4004 Ord. No. 355 § 1 12.24.050 Section 61-4005 Ord. No. 355 § 1 12.24.060 Section 61-4006 Ord. No. 355 § 1 12.24.070 Section 61-4007 Ord. No. 355 § 1 12.24.080 Section 61-4008 Ord. No. 355 § 1 12.24.090 Section 61-4009 Ord. No. 355 § 1 12.24.100 Section 61-4010 Ord. No. 355 § 1 12.24.110 Section 61-4011 Ord. No. 355 § 1 12.24.120 Section 61-4012 Ord. No. 355 § 1 12.24.130 Section 62-1000 Ord. No. 127 § 4 13.04.010 Section 62-1001 Ord. No. 141 § 1; Ord. No. 160 § 4; Ord. No. 183 § 7 13.04.020 Section 62-1002 13.04.030 Section 62-1003 Ord. No. 184-3; Ord. No. 403 § 2; Ord. No. 368 § 2 13.04.040 Section 62-1004 Ord. No. 103 § 5 13.04.050 Section 62-1005 Ord. No. 333 § 1 13.04.060 Section 62-2000 Repealed by Ord. 91-10 Section 62-2001 Repealed by Ord. 91-10 Section 62-2002 Repealed by Ord. 91-10 Section 62-2003 Repealed by Ord. 91-10 Section 62-2004 Repealed by Ord. 91-10 Section 62-2005 Repealed by Ord. 91-10 Section 63-0000 Repealed Section 63-0001 Repealed Section 63-0002 Repealed Section 63-0003 Repealed Section 63-0004 Repealed Section 63-0005 Repealed Section 63-0006 Repealed Section 63-0007 Repealed Section 63-0008 Repealed Section 63-0009 Repealed Section 63-0010 Repealed Section 63-0011 Repealed Section 63-0012 Repealed Section 63-0013 Repealed Section 63-0014 Repealed Section 63-0015 Repealed Section 63-0016 Repealed Section 63-0017 Repealed Section 63-0018 Repealed Section 64-0000 Repealed by 347 Section 64-0001 Repealed by 347 Section 64-0002 Repealed by 347 Section 64-0003 Repealed by 347 Section 64-0004 Repealed by 347 Section 64-0005 Repealed by 347 Section 64-0006 Repealed by 347 Section 64-0007 Repealed by 347 Section 64-0008 Repealed by 347 Section 64-0009 Repealed by 347 Section 64-0010 Repealed by 347 Section 64-0011 Repealed by 347 Section 64-0012 Repealed by 347 Section 64-0013 Repealed by 347 Section 64-0014 Repealed by 347 Section 64-0015 Repealed by 347 Section 65-1000 Ord. No. 2007-01 § 1 (part) 12.10.010 Section 65-1001 Ord. No. 2007-01 § 1 (part) 12.10.020 Section 65-1002 Ord. No. 2007-01 § 1 (part) 12.10.030 Section 65-1003 Ord. No. 2007-01 § 1 (part) 12.10.040 Section 65-1004 Ord. No. 2007-01 § 1 (part) 12.10.050 Section 65-1005 Ord. No. 2007-01 § 1 (part) 12.10.060 Section 65-1006 Ord. No. 2007-01 § 1 (part) 12.10.070 Section 65-1007 Ord. No. 2007-01 § 1 (part) 12.10.080 Section 65-1008 Ord. No. 2007-01 § 1 (part) 12.10.090 Section 65-1009 Ord. No. 2007-01 § 1 (part) 12.10.100 Section 65-1010 Ord. No. 2007-01 § 1 (part) 12.10.110 Section 71-0000 Ord. No. 410 § 2 15.04.010 Section 71-0001 15.04.020 Section 71-0002 15.04.030 Section 71-0003 15.04.040 Section 71-0004 15.04.050 Section 71-0005 15.04.060 Section 71-0006 15.04.070 Section 71-0007 15.04.080 Section 72-0000 15.08.010 Section 72-0001 15.08.020 Section 73-0000 15.12.010 Section 74-0000 15.16.010 Section 75-0000 Repealed Section 76-0000 Repealed Section 77-0000 Ch. 15.28 Section 77-0001 Ch. 15.28 Section 77-0002 Ch. 15.28 Section 77-0003 (Not codified) Section 77-0004 (Not codified) Section 77-0005 (Not codified) Section 77-0006 (Not codified) Section 77-0007 (Not codified) Section 77-0008 (Not codified) Section 77-0009 (Not codified) Section 77-0010 (Not codified) Section 77-0011 (Not codified) Section 77-0012 (Not codified) Section 77-0013 (Not codified) Section 77-0014 (Not codified) Section 77-1000 (Not codified) Section 77-1001 (Not codified) Section 77-1002 (Not codified) Section 77-1003 (Not codified) Section 77-1004 (Not codified) Section 77-1005 (Not codified) Section 77-1006 (Not codified) Section 77-1007 (Not codified) Section 77-1008 (Not codified) Section 77-1009 (Not codified) Section 77-1010 (Not codified) Section 77-1011 (Not codified) Section 77-1012 (Not codified) Section 77-1013 (Not codified) Section 77-1014 (Not codified) Section 77-1015 (Not codified) Section 77-2000 (Not codified) Section 77-2001 (Not codified) Section 77-2002 (Not codified) Section 77-2003 (Not codified) Section 77-2004 (Not codified) Section 77-2005 (Not codified) Section 77-2006 (Not codified) Section 78-0000 Ch. 15.32 Section 79-0000 Ch. 15.36 Section 79-0001 Ch. 15.36 Section 79-0002 Ch. 15.36 Section 79-0003 Ch. 15.36 Section 79-0004 Ch. 15.36 Section 79-0005 Ch. 15.36 Section 79-0006 Ch. 15.36 Section 79-0007 Ch. 15.36 Section 79-0008 Ch. 15.36 Section 79-0009 Ch. 15.36 Section 79-0010 Title 15 Section 710-0000 Ord. No. 410 § 2 13.20.010 Section 710-0001 Ord. No. 410 § 2; Ord. No. 339 § 1 13.20.020 Section 710-0002 Ord. No. 410 § 2; Ord. No. 339 § 1 13.20.030 Section 710-0003 Ord. No. 410 § 2; Ord. No. 339 § 1 13.20.040 Section 710-0004 Ord. No. 410 § 2; Ord. No. 339 § 1 13.20.050 Section 710-0005 Ord. No. 410 § 2; Ord. No. 339 § 1 13.20.060 Section 710-0006 Ord. No. 410 § 2; Ord. No. 339 § 1 13.20.070 Section 710-0007 Ord. No. 410 § 2; Ord. No. 339 § 1 13.20.080 Section 710-0008 Ord. No. 410 § 2; Ord. No. 339 § 1 13.20.090 Section 710-0009 Ord. No. 410 § 2; Ord. No. 339 § 1 13.20.100 Section 710-0010 Ord. No. 410 § 2; Ord. No. 339 § 1 13.20.110 Section 710-0011 Ord. No. 410 § 2; Ord. No. 339 § 1 13.20.120 Section 710-0012 Ord. No. 410 § 2; Ord. No. 339 § 1 13.20.130 Section 710-0013 Ord. No. 410 § 2; Ord. No. 339 § 1 13.20.140 Section 710-0014 Ord. No. 410 § 2; Ord. No. 339 § 1 13.20.150 Section 711-0000 Ord. No. 2007-02 § 1 (part) 15.58.010 Section 711-0001 Ord. No. 2007-02 § 1 (part) 15.58.020 Section 711-0002 Ord. No. 2007-02 § 1 (part) 15.58.030 Section 711-0003 Ord. No. 2007-02 § 1 (part) 15.58.040 Section 711-0004 Ord. No. 2007-02 § 1 (part) 15.58.050 Section 711-0005 Ord. No. 2007-02 § 1 (part) 15.58.060 Section 711-0006 Ord. No. 2007-02 § 1 (part) 15.58.070 Section 711-0007 Ord. No. 2007-02 § 1 (part) 15.58.080 Section 711-0008 Ord. No. 2007-02 § 1 (part) 15.58.090 Section 85-0001 (Not codified) Section 85-0002 (Not codified) Section 85-0003 (Not codified) Section 85-0004 (Not codified) Section 85-0005 (Not codified) Section 85-0006 (Not codified) Section 85-0007 (Not codified) Section 85-0008 (Not codified) Section 85-0008.1 (Not codified) Section 85-0009 (Not codified) Section 85-0010 (Not codified) Section 85-0011 (Not codified) Section 85-0012 (Not codified) Section 85-0013 (Not codified) Section 85-0014 (Not codified) Section 85-0015 (Not codified) Section 85-0016 (Not codified) Section 85-1000 (Not codified) Section 85-1001 (Not codified) Section 85-1002 (Not codified) Section 85-1003 (Not codified) Section 85-1004 (Not codified) Section 85-1005 (Not codified) Section 85-2000 (Not codified) Section 85-2001 (Not codified) Section 85-2002 (Not codified) Section 85-2003 (Not codified) Section 85-2004 (Not codified) Section 85-2005 (Not codified) Section 85-2006 (Not codified) Section 85-2007 (Not codified) Section 85-2008 (Not codified) Section 85-2009 (Not codified) Section 85-3000 (Not codified) Section 85-3001 (Not codified) Section 85-3002 (Not codified) Section 85-3003 (Not codified) Section 85-3004 (Not codified) Section 85-3005 (Not codified) Section 85-3006 (Not codified) Section 85-3007 (Not codified) Section 85-3008 (Not codified) Section 85-3009 (Not codified) Section 85-3010 (Not codified) Section 85-3011 (Not codified) Section 85-3012 (Not codified) Section 85-4000 (Not codified) Section 85-4001 (Not codified) Section 85-4002 (Not codified) Section 85-4003 (Not codified) Section 85-4004 (Not codified) Section 85-4005 (Not codified) Section 85-4006 (Not codified) Section 85-4007 (Not codified) Section 85-4008 (Not codified) Section 85-4009 (Not codified) Section 85-4010 (Not codified) Section 85-4011 (Not codified) Section 85-4012 (Not codified) Section 85-4013 (Not codified) Section 85-4014 (Not codified) Section 85-5000 (Not codified) Section 85-6000 (Not codified) Section 85-6001 (Not codified) Section 85-6002 (Not codified) Section 85-7000 (Not codified) Section 85-7001 (Not codified) Section 85-7002 (Not codified) Section 85-7003 (Not codified) Section 85-8000 (Not codified) Section 85-8001 (Not codified) Section 85-8002 (Not codified) Section 85-8003 (Not codified) Section 85-8004 (Not codified) Section 85-8005 (Not codified) Section 85-8006 (Not codified) Section 85-8007 (Not codified) Section 85-8008 (Not codified) Section 85-8009 (Not codified) Section 85-8010 (Not codified) Section 85-8011 (Not codified) Section 85-8012 (Not codified) Section 85-8013 (Not codified) Section 85-8014 (Not codified) Section 85-8015 (Not codified) Section 85-8016 (Not codified) Section 85-8017 (Not codified) Section 85-8018 (Not codified) Section 85-9000 (Not codified) Section 85-10000 (Not codified) Section 85-10001 (Not codified) Section 86-0001 12.12.010 Section 86-0002 12.12.020 Section 86-0003 12.12.030 Section 86-0004 12.12.040 Section 86-0005 12.12.050 Section 86-0006 12.12.060 Section 86-0007 12.12.070 Section 86-0008 12.12.080 Section 86-0009 12.12.090 Section 86-0010 12.12.100 Section 86-0011 Repealed Section 87-1000 Ord. No. 2007-05 § 1 (part) 15.56.010 Section 87-1001 Ord. No. 2007-05 § 1 (part) 15.56.020 Section 87-1002 Ord. No. 2007-05 § 1 (part) 15.56.030 Section 87-1003 Ord. No. 2007-05 § 1 (part) 15.56.040  
    As of Supplement No. 4, this table will no longer be updated. 
ORDINANCE LIST AND DISPOSITION TABLE 
    Beginning with Supplement No. 4, this table will be replaced with the "Code Comparative Table and Disposition List." 
Ordinance 
Number 408 Zoning ordinance (Title 17) 411 Need for drainage facilities by a master drainage plan (Special) 412 Regulation and placement of coin operated amusement devices (Repealed) 413 Rezoning property located at the Northwest corner of Kern and Sixth Streets (Special) 414 Providing for second unit housing (Not codified) 415 Redevelopment plan (Special) 416 Amendment to zoning ordinance-front yard set back for single family zoning district (Special) 417 Sales and use tax to be administered by the state Board of Equalization (3.04) 418 Amendment to zoning ordinance-in lieu fees for off-street parking (Not codified) 419 Regulation of professional offices zoning (Not codified) 420 New municipal election date (1.08) 421 Rezoning property located on the west side of Tenth Avenue (Special) 422 Fee schedules applicable under the California Subdivision Map Act (Not codified) 423 Amends prior code § 41-0009, truck routes (10.04) 424 Rezoning property from high density residential to central commercial (Special) 425 Planned unit development on property along the west side of Tenth Avenue (Special) 426 Planned unit development on property along the west side of Tenth Avenue (Special) 427 Storm drain master plan for drainage zone "J" (Special) 428 Apportioning of out of city business license taxes (5.04) 429 Planned unit development zone on property located on the north side of Kern Street (Special) 430 Amendment to zoning map (Special) 431 Planned unit development on property along the west side of Tenth Avenue (Special) 432 Uniform sign code-non-combustible signs (Not codified) 433 Prezoning property (Special) 434 School impact mitigation measures (Not codified) 435 Amendment to zoning map (Special) 436 Classification of offenses (Repealed by Ord. 451) 437 Notices for underground utility districts (13.24) 438 Prezoning property (Special) 439 Prohibiting parking or displaying of vehicles or other personal property for sale in or upon public streets (10.08) 440 Parking regulations for recreational vehicles in residential zoning districts (Not codified) 441 Parking regulations for trucks (Not codified) 442 Amends Ord. 408, zoning (Not codified) 443 Keeping of animals within the city (6.04) 444 Council meetings order of business (2.04) 445 Consolidating elections to provide for reimbursement of county expenses (1.08) 446 Prezoning property (Special) 447 Amendment to zoning map (Special) 448 Changing the place of regular council meetings (2.04) 449 Police canine units (6.04) 450 Vesting tentative maps for residential subdivisions and parcel maps (Not codified) 451 Classification of offenses (1.20) 452 Minimum standards for water system and storm drain facilities within the city (13.12) 453 Subdivisions regulations-imposition of easements (15.52) 454 Prezoning property (Special) 455 Riding of skate boards upon sidewalks (10.20) 456 Regulations for the dedication of land, or payment of fees, for developed park and recreation areas and facilities (Not codified) 457 Business license tax (5.08) 459 Notices, agendas and actions taken to comply with recent state law amendments (2.04) 460 Insurance requirements for encroachment permits (12.08) 461 Changing the official map of the city (Special) 462 Rezone (Special) 463 Business license tax (5.04, 5.08) 464 Regulations concerning the wasting of water (13.04) 465 Redevelopment plan and project (Special) 466 Termination of water services (13.04) 467 Minimum standards for water and drainage facilities (13.12) 468 Amendment to zoning ordinance (Not codified) 469 Cable television franchise (Special) 470 Parking on Simpson Street (10.08) 471 Penal code requirements (2.36) 472 Changing council meeting days (2.04) 473 Sprinklers (Not codified) 474 Amendment to zoning ordinance (Not codified) 475 Regulating the sale, use and/or display of fireworks (8.08) 476 Automatic fire extinguishing systems (15.44) Ordinance 
Number 477 Prezoning property (Special) 478 Amendment to zoning ordinance (Not codified) 479 Changing the place of regular council meetings (2.04) 480 Cable television franchise (Special) 481 Revision of regulations for the dedication of land, or payment of fees, for developed park and recreation areas and facilities (15.56) 482 Divisions of land other than subdivisions (Special) 91-01 Amendment to zoning map (Special) 91-02 Amendment to zoning map (Special) 91-03 Regulating water usage (13.04) 91-04 Amendment to zoning map (Special) 91-05 Amendment to zoning map (Special) 91-06 Sales and use taxes (3.12) 91-07 Cross-connection control program to protect the public water system (13.16) 91-08 Electricity (Not codified) 91-09 Improvement security under the Subdivision Map Act of the State of California (Title 16) 91-10 Repeals §§ 62-2000-62-2005 of prior code and Ord. 244, water heat transfer systems (Repealer) 91-11 Amendment to zoning map (Special) 91-12 Amendment to zoning map (Special) 92-01 Truck routes (10.04) 92-02 Sales and use taxes (3.12) 92-03 Regulating water usage (13.04) 92-04 Amendment to zone plan (Special) 92-05 City Manager form of government (2.08) 92-06 Underground wiring (16.36.130) 92-07 Capital facilities fees (15.48) 92-08 Reserve police officers power to arrest (1.16) 92-09 Prezoning property (Special) 92-10 Prezoning property (Special) 92-11 Amendment to zoning ordinance (Title 17) 93-01 Pre-zone application (17.40) 93-02 Right to farm (5.28) 93-03 Utility users tax (Repealed by Ord. 96-02) 93-04 Amendment to zoning ordinance (17.52) 93-06 Pre-zone application (Special) 93-07 Refuse disposal (8.20) 93-07A Pre-zone application (Special) 93-08 Authority to issue citations for code enforcement to the building official, fire chief, and fire lieutenant (2.20) 93-09 Adjustment to fee schedule-capital fees ordinance (15.48) 93-10 Credit for payment of sales and use taxes paid to the Kingsburg Redevelopment Agency (3.12) 94-01 Burning with the city limits of Kingsburg and abatement of weeds and rubbish (8.04) (8.28) 94-02 Graffiti, aerosol paint containers and wide tipped marker pens, and vandalism (9.08) 94-03 Regulating riding of skate boards, bicycles, roller skates and roller blades (10.20) 94-04 Sales and use taxes (3.12) 94-05 Subdivisions (16.04-16.44) 94-07 Amendment to zoning map (Special) 94-08 Adjustments to fee schedule-capital facilities fee ordinance (15.48) 94-09 Amendment to zoning map (Special) 94-10 Amendment to zoning map (Special) 94-11 Amendment to zoning map (Special) 95-01 Adding a new subdivision "J" (2.48) 95-02 Sales and use taxes (3.12) 95-03 Cable television franchises (5.16) 95-04 Waiting period before disposal of unclaimed property (2.44) 95-05 Amendment to zoning map (Special) 95-06 Amendment to zoning map (Special) 95-07 Uniform codes (13.20) (15.04-15.40) 95-08 Refuse disposal (8.20) 96-01 Sales and use taxes (3.12) 96-02 Repeal of utility users tax (Repealer) 96-03 Repeals city council salary ordinance (Repealer) 96-04 Claim procedures against the city (3.04) 96-05 Pre-zoning properties (Special) 97-01 Sales and use taxes (3.12) 97-02 Amendment to contract between the City of Kingsburg and the Board of Administration of the California Public Employees' Retirement System (Special) 97-03 Appointments to the competitive service (2.64) 97-04 Regular city council meetings (2.04) 98-01 Sales and use taxes (3.12) 98-02 Pre-zoning property (Special) 98-03 Amendment to contract between the City of Kingsburg and the Board of Ad-ministration of the California Public Employees' Retirement System (Special) 98-04 Pre-zoning property (Special) 99-01 Sales of fireworks (Expired) 99-02 Sales and use taxes (3.12) 99-03 Community services commission (Not codified) 99-04 Amendment to zoning ordinance (17.80) 99-05 Minimum standards for sewer systems within the city (13.12) 99-06 Uniform building code, uniform mechanical code, uniform housing code, uniform sign code, uniform code for the abatement of dangerous buildings, and uniform administrative code (15.04-15.40) 99-07 Amendment to zoning ordinance (17.28) 99-08 Amendment to zoning ordinance (17.28) 2000-01 Pre-zoning (Special) 2000-02 Rezoning (Special) 2000-03 Amendment to the Kingsburg Redevelopment Plan (Special) 2000-04 Moratorium on zoning approvals or service stations, convenience stores, and car washes (Expired) 2000-05 Pre-zoning (Special) 2000-06 Zoning moratorium (Expired) 2000-07 Amendment to zone district regulations (17.40, 17.96) 2000-08 Amendment to redevelopment plan (Special) 2001-01 Pre-zoning (Special) 2001-02 Amendment to capital facilities development impact study (Special) 2001-03 Redevelopment plan (Special) 2001-04 Sales and use taxes (3.12) 2001-05 Rezone (Special) 2002-01 Amends prior code §§ 42-2015 and 42-2020 (8.08) 2002-02 Adds prior code §§ 55-0003-55-0006 [12.20.040-12.20.070], park regulations (12.20) 2002-03 Adds prior code §§ 21-2000-21-2005 [Ch. 12.06], salaries (12.06) 2002-04 Amends prior code §§ 14-0004, 14-0006, 22-9001, 44-0009, 55-0018, 61-3001 [1.16.010, 1.16.030, 2.40.100, 13.24.020]; repeals prior code §§ 22-4000-22-4004, 22-5000-22-5002, 22-6000, 52-0017, 42-2000-42-2001, 42-3003, 46-0000-46-0006 and 41-1000-41-2010, technical changes (1.16, 2.40, 13.24) 2003-01 Amends § 17.56.010, home occupations (17.56) 2003-02 Adds prior code § 55-0007 [12.20.080], park use regulations (12.20) 2003-03 Amends prior code §§ 85-0003 and 85-4000, cul-de-sacs (Not codified) 2003-04 Amends § 16.36.020(H), cul-de-sac design requirements (16.36) 2003-05 Amends prior code §§ 73-0000, 77-0000, 77-0001, 78-0000, 79-0000 and 710-0000 [77-0001] [15.12.010, 15.28.010, 15.28.020, 15.32.010 and 15.36.010], uniform codes (15.12, 15.28, 15.32, 15.36) 2003-06 Interim urgency ordinance (Not codified) 2003-07 Amends Ord. 2003-06 (Not codified) 2003-08 Amends Ord. 2003-06 (Not codified) 2003-09 (Not codified) 2003-10 Rezoning property north of Kern Street (Special) 2003-11 Interim urgency ordinance (Not codified) 2003-12 Interim urgency ordinance (Not codified) 2003-13 Amends prior code Ch. 4 [8.12], solid waste collection and/or disposal (8.12) 2003-14 Clarifying Ord. 2003-12 (Not codified) 2003-15 Rezoning property at northeast corner of Kern Street (Special) 2003-16 Pre-zoning property (Special) 2003-17 Rezoning property between 10th and 12th Avenues (Special) 2004-01 Rezoning property at 1285 Marion Street (Special) 2004-02 Adds § 15.48.140; amends §§ 15.48.020, 15.48.030, 15.48.050, 15.48.080 and 15.48.090, capital facilities fee (15.48) 2004-03 Interim urgency ordinance (Not codified) 2004-04 Amends § 902 of Kingsburg subdivision ordinance [16.36.020], design standards (16.36) 2005-01 Adds § 10.08.090, parking (10.08) 2005-02 Rezoning property on the west side of 24th Avenue south of Sierra Street (Special) 2005-03 Amends § 1406 of the Kingsburg zoning ordinance [17.56.060] (17.56) 2005-04 Amends § 1202 of the Kingsburg zoning ordinance [17.48.020] (17.48) 2005-05 Adds Ch. 16.09, growth management system (16.09) 2005-06 Adds § 6.04.170; amends § 6.04.010, dogs and other animals (6.04) 2005-07 Amends § 705 of the Kingsburg zoning ordinance [17.28.050] (17.28) 2005-08 Amends prior code § 71-0005(c) [15.06.010, 15.28.010], building codes (15.06, 15.28) 2005-09 Adds prior code § 71-0005(h) [15.06.010], California Code of Regulations Title 24 (15.06) 2005-10 Adds Ch. 15.57, urban growth management development impact (15.57) 2005-11 Rezoning property at the southwest corner of Sierra and Marion Streets (Special) 2006-01 Amends § 1003 of the Kingsburg zoning ordinance [17.40.020] (17.40) 2006-02 Amends §§ 702, 703, 802 and 803 of the Kingsburg zoning ordinance [17.28.020, 17.28.030, 17.32.020 and 17.32.030] (17.28, 17.32) 2006-03 Adds prior code Ch. 10 to T. 4 [Ch. 8.10], display of products containing pseudoephedrine (8.10) 2006-04 Adds § 1203 [17.48.040] and amends title of Art. 12 [Ch. 17.48] of the Kingsburg zoning ordinance (17.48) 2006-05 Rezoning property north of Sierra Street west of the alignment of Rafer Johnson Drive (Special) 2006-06 Adds prior code §§ 41-3000-41-3015 [Ch. 10.24], business directional signs (10.24) 2006-07 Pre-zoning properties (Special) 2006-08 Pre-zoning property (Special) 2006-09 Amends Ch. 16.09, growth management system (16.09) 2006-10 Approves San Joaquin Valley Power Authority joint powers agreement and authorizing submittal of implementation plan (Special) 2006-11 Pre-zoning property (Special) 2007-01 Adds prior code Art. 5 to Ch. 1 of T. 6 [Ch. 12.10], outdoor dining areas (12.10) 2007-02 Adds prior code Ch. 11 to T. 7 [Ch. 15.58], grading permit and site improvement requirements (15.58) 2007-03 Amends prior code Art. 3 of Ch. 3 of T. 2 [adds Ch. 2.50], community services commission (2.50) 2007-04 Amends § 1105 of the Kingsburg zoning ordinance [17.44.050] (17.44) 2007-05 Amends prior code Ch. 7 to T. 8 [Ch. 15.56], dedications for parks and recreation facilities (15.56) 2007-06 Amends § 16.09.020, growth management system (16.09) 2007-07 Pre-zoning properties (Special) 2008-01 Amends § 17.28.050, zoning (17.28) 2008-02 Pre-zoning property (Special) 2008-03 Amendment to contract between the City of Kingsburg and the Board of Ad-ministration of the California Public Employees' Retirement System (Special) 2008-04 Adds [amends] § 15.48.140; amends § 15.48.090, capital facilities fee (15.48) 2008-05 Approves development agreement with Superb Hospitality, LLC (Special) 2008-06 Pre-zoning property (Special)  
    Beginning with Supplement No. 4, this table will be replaced with the "Code Comparative Table and Disposition List." 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE AND DISPOSITION LIST 
This is a chronological listing of the ordinances of Kingsburg, California, beginning with Supplement No. 4, included in this Code. 
Ordinance 
Number  Date Description Section Section 
this Code 2008-07  9- 3-2008 Amending § 3.16.030 relating to the transient occupancy tax 2 3.16.030 2008-08 12- 3-2008 Adding Ch. 8.22 requiring the registration of abandoned residential properties 1       Added 8.22.010-8.22.110 2009-01  1-21-2009 Adding §§ 15.04.090-14.04.098 regarding issuance of administrative citations 1       Added 15.04.090 
-15.04.098 2009-02  1-21-2009 Amending §§ 17.92.021, 17.92.030 and 17.92.054 regarduing code enforcement 1 17.92.021 
17.92.030 
17.92.045 2009-03  2- 4-2009 Describing the redevelopment agency's authority to acquire real property in the Kingsburg Redevelopment Plan and Project 2       Added 2.32.060 2009-04  3- 4-2009 Adding Ch. 17.86 regarding adult entertainment establishments 1       Added 17.86.010 
-17.86.120 2009-05  2-18-2009 Amending § 17.44.020 to add provisions regarding adult entertainment establishments 1       Added 17.44.020 
D.6.       Rnbd 6., 7.       as 7., 8. 2009-06  6- 3-2009 Adding Ch. 8.24 regarding stormwater quality management 1       Added 8.24.010-8.24.220 2009-07  9-16-2009 Amending provisions related to off-street parking 1 17.52.030 2009-08 11-18-2009 Imposing a moratorium on the establishment of medical marijuana dispensaries and medical marijuana cooperatives in the City of Kingsburg 1-7 Not codified 2009-09 12-16-2009 Extending a moratorium on the establishment of medical marijuana dispensaries and medical marijuana cooperatives in the City of Kingsburg 1-6 Not codified 2010-01  7- 7-2010 Amending Ch. 17.80, Architectural Design Review 1 17.80.010- 
17.80.040 2010-02  7-21-2010 Amending Title 12 to authorize enforcement procedures for certain provisions of the title 2       Added 12.08.070 3 12.10.110 4       Added 12.12.101 5       Added 12.16.070 6       Added 12.20.090 7 12.24.020 Amending certain provisions of Ch. 17.92 to authorize enforcement of certain provisions of Title 12 8 17.92.020 9 17.92.021 10 17.92.030 2010-03 12-15-2010 Adding provisions regarding medical marijuana dispensaries, cooperatives, and cultivation 2       Added 17.97.010- 
17.97.060 2010-04  1- 5-2011 Amending provisions related to the California Code of Regulations Title 24 2 15.06.010 Amending provisions related to the International Building Code 3 15.08.010 Adding Ch. 15.09, International Residential Code 4       Added 15.09.010 Amending provisions related to the Uniform Mechanical Code 5 15.12.010 Amending provisions related to the National Electrical Code 6 15.28.010 Amending provisions related to National Electrical Code Uniform Administrative Code Provisions 15.28.020 Amending provisions related to the Uniform Plumbing Code 7 15.32.010 Amending provisions related to the International Fire Code andStandards 8 15.40.010 2011-01  3-16-2011 Pertaining to the Kingsburg Redevelopment Agency approving development agreement and related documents with Three G's Land Management, LLC Not 
codified 2012-01  2- 1-2012 Amending Ch. 8.04 pertaining to trash and rubbish 2 Ch. 8.04, tit. change       Added 8.04.040 2012-02  3- 7-2012 Amending Ch. 16.20 pertaining to tentative maps 16.20.010- 
16.20.080 Amending Ch. 16.24 pertaining to final maps 16.24.010- 
16.24.190 Amending Ch. 16.28 pertaining to parcel maps 16.28.010- 
16.28.170 Deleting and Replacing Ch. 17.04 pertaining to general provisions       Dltd 17.04.010- 
17.04.80       Added 17.04.010- 
17.04.100 Deleting and Replacing Ch. 17.68 pertaining to permits for conditional use       Dltd 17.68.010- 
17.68.180       Added 17.68.010- 
17.68.140 
17.68.160- 
17.68.180 Deleting and Replacing Ch. 17.72 pertaining to site plan reviews       Dltd 17.72.010- 
17.72.140       Added 17.72.010- 
17.72.130 Deleting and Replacing Ch. 17.80 pertaining to architectural design review       Dltd 17.80.010- 
17.80.040       Added 17.80.010- 
17.80.060 Deleting and Replacing Ch. 17.84 pertaining to variances       Dltd 17.84.010- 
17.84.120       Added 17.84.010- 
17.84.110 Adding Ch. 17.90 pertaining to development agreements       Added 17.90.010- 
17.90.130 2012-03  3-21-2012 Authorizing an amendment to the contract between the city and the Board of Administration of the California Public Employees' Retirement System Not 
Codified 2012-04  9-19-2012 Pre-zoning property 1-4 Not 
codified 2012-06 10- 3-2012 Adding Ch. 3.18, Labor Code Compliance 1       Added 3.18.010-3.18.030 2012-07 11-28-2012 Repealing Ordinance No. 2006-10 which approved San Joaquin Valley Power Authority joint powers agreement and authorizing submittal of implementation plan 1-7 Not codified 2012-08 11-28-2012 Adding Ch. 13.28, Cable Video Service and Fees 1       Added 13.28.010- 
13.28.090 2012-09 12-27-2012 Authorizing amendment to contract between the City Council of Kingsburg and the Board of Ad-ministration of the California Public Employees' Retirement System 1-3 Not 
codified 2013-02 11- 6-2013 Water meter facilities reimbursement program 1-3 13.04.080 2014-01  3-19-2014 Development agreement with Kingburg Marion Villas, LP Not 
codified 2014-02  5-22-2014 Solid waste collection franchise fees 1 8.12.150 2014-03  6- 4-2014 Open dining areas 1       Rpld 12.10.010- 
12.10.110 2014-04  8- 6-2014 Water conservation 2-5 13.04.070 2014-05  8-20-2014 Water conservation 2-5 13.04.070 2014-06 10- 1-2014 Construction and demolition debris recycling 1       Added 8.14.010-8.14.120 2015-01  3- 4-2015 Forming Kingsburg Industrial Development Authority Not 
codified 2015-02  4-15-2015 Maintenance and elimination of nonconforming sites, uses and structures 1 17.60.080 F.2. 2015-03  4-15-2015 City dog park prohibited acts 1       Added 6.04.120 E., F. 2015-05  6- 3-2015 Emergency shelters 1       Added 17.44.020 B.2.q. 2, 3       Rnbd 17.44.020 B.2.q., r.       as 17.44.020 B.2.r., s. 4 17.44.030 B.1. 5 17.96.030 2015-06  6-17-2015 Truck routes 1 10.04.040 2015-07  7- 1-2015 Prezoning Not 
codified 2015-08  7- 1-2015 Rezoning Not 
codified 2015-09  7- 1-2015 Small residential rooftop solar energy systems 1       Added 8.26.010- 
8.26.060 2015-11 12-16-2015 Commission meetings-quorum 1 2.50.070 C. 2016-001  3-16-2016 Regulation of signs and outdoor advertising 1 17.56.040 2016-002  3-16-2016 Capital facilities fees/development impact fees 1-17 15.48.010- 
15.48.170 2016-004  9-21-2016 Dogs and other animals 1       Dltd 6.04.010- 
6.04.160       Added 6.04.010- 
6.04.125 2016-005 12-21-2016 Off-street parking 1 17.52.020 A., B. 2016-006 11- 2-2016 Medical and recreational marijuana regulation 1       Dltd 17.97.010- 
17.97.060       Added 17.97.010- 
17.97.090 2017-001  5-17-2017 Property development standards 2(Exh. A) 17.28.050 E., F.       Added 17.28.050 K. 2017-002  5-17-2017 Minor deviations 2(Exh. A) 
      Added 17.85.010- 
17.85.060 2017-007  9- 6-2017 Abatement of substandard buildings 1, 2       Added 17.94.010- 
17.94.110 2017-008 12-20-2017 Tobacco use in city parks 1 12.20.040 2018-002  3- 7-2018 Public safety transactions and use tax 1-15       Added 3.14.010- 
3.14.150 2018-003  5-16-2018 By-district elections for city council 1       Added 2.04.300, 
2.04.310, 
2.04.320 2018-006 12-19-2018 Short-term rentals as a home occupation 1 17.56.010  
